BOOK: Genesis

CHAPTER: 1

Genesis 1:1 In the beginnynge GOD created heauen and erth.
Genesis 1:2 The erth was voyde and empty, and darcknesse was vpon the depe, and the spirite of God moued vpon the water.
Genesis 1:3 Than God sayd: let there be light: & there was lyght.
Genesis 1:4 And God sawe the lyght that it was good: & deuyded the lyght from the darcknesse,
Genesis 1:5 & called the lyght the daye, & the darcknesse the nyght: and so of the euenyng & mornyng was made the fyrst daye.
Genesis 1:6 And God sayde: let there be a fyrmament betwene the waters, & let it deuyde the waters a sonder.
Genesis 1:7 Than God made the fyrmament, and parted the waters whyche were vnder the fyrmament, from the waters that were aboue the fyrmament: And it was so.
Genesis 1:8 And God called the fyrmament Heauen. And so of the euenynge and mornyng was made the seconde daye.
Genesis 1:9 And God sayde: let the waters that are vnder heauen gather them selues vnto one place, that the drye lande may appere. And it came so to passe.
Genesis 1:10 And GOD called the drye lande the erth, and the gatheryng together of waters called he the sea. And God sawe that it was good.
Genesis 1:11 And God sayde: let the erth brynge forth herbe and grasse that sowe seed, and fruteful trees, that bere frute euery one in his kynde, hauyng their seed in them selues vpon the erth. And it came so to passe.
Genesis 1:12 And the erth brought forth herbe and grasse sowing seed euery one in hys kynde, and trees berynge frute, and hauynge theyr seed in themselues, euery one in hys kynde. And God sawe that it was good,
Genesis 1:13 and then of the euenyng and mornyng was made the thyrde daye.
Genesis 1:14 Than sayde God: let there be lightes in the fyrmament of heauen, to deuyde the day from the nyght, that they may be vnto sygnes, seasons, dayes and yeares.
Genesis 1:15 And let them be lyghtes in the fyrmament of heauen, to shyne vpon the erth: And so it was.
Genesis 1:16 And God made two greate lyghtes: A greater lyght to rule the daye, and a lesse lyght to rule the nyght: and he made sterres also.
Genesis 1:17 And God put them in the fyrmament of heauen to shyne vpon the erth,
Genesis 1:18 and to rule the daye and the nyght: and to deuyde the lyght from darcknesse. And God sawe that it was good:
Genesis 1:19 & so of the euenyng & mornyng was made the fourth day.
Genesis 1:20 And God said: let the water bryng forth creatures that moue and haue lyfe, & foules for to flye ouer the erth vnder the fyrmament of heauen.
Genesis 1:21 And God created greate whalles and al maner of creatures that lyue & moue, whych the waters brought forth in their kyndes, & all maner of fethered foules in theyr kyndes. And God sawe that it was good:
Genesis 1:22 & God blessed them sayinge: Growe and multyplie and fyll the waters of the seas: and let the foules multyplye vpon the erth.
Genesis 1:23 And so of the euening & morning was made the fyfth day.
Genesis 1:24 And God sayd: let the erth brynge forth lyuynge creatures in their kyndes: catell and wormes & beastes of the erth in their kyndes, & so it came to passe.
Genesis 1:25 And God made the beastes of the erth in their kyndes, and catell in their kyndes, & al maner wormes of the erth in their kyndes: & God saw that it was good.
Genesis 1:26 And God sayde: let vs make man in oure similitude & after our lycknesse: that he may haue rule ouer the fysh of the sea, and ouer the foules of the ayre, & ouer catell, and ouer all the erth, and ouer all wormes that crepe on the erth.
Genesis 1:27 And God created man after hys likenes, after the lycknesse of god created he hym: male & female created he them.
Genesis 1:28 And God blessed them, & God sayde vnto them: Growe and multiplye & fyl the erth, & subdue it, & haue dominion ouer the fyshes of the sea, and ouer the foules of the ayre, and ouer al the beastes that moue on the erth.
Genesis 1:29 And God sayde: see, I haue geuen you al herbes that sowe seed, whyche are on all the erth, & all maner trees that haue frute in them and sowe seed: to be meate for you
Genesis 1:30 and for al beastes of the erth, and vnto all foules of the ayre, and vnto all that crepeth on the erth, where in is lyfe, that they maye haue all maner herbes and grasse for to eate, and euen so it was.
Genesis 1:31 And God behelde all that he had made, and loo, they were exceadinge good: & so of the euenynge and mornyng was made the syxte daye.

CHAPTER: 2

Genesis 2:1 Thus was heauen and erth fynyshed with all their apparel,
Genesis 2:2 and in the seuenth day God ended hys worke whiche he had made, & rested in the seuenth day from al his workes which he had made.
Genesis 2:3 And God blessed the seuenth daye, & sanctified it, for in it he rested from al his workes which he had created and made.
Genesis 2:4 These are the generacions of heauen and erth when they were created, in the tyme when the Lord God created heauen & erth
Genesis 2:5 and all the shrubbes of the felde before they were in the erth. And al the herbes of the felde before they sprange, for the Lord God had yet sent no rayne vpon the erth, nether was there yet any man to tylle the erth.
Genesis 2:6 But there arose a myste out of the ground, & watered all the face of the erth:
Genesis 2:7 Then the Lord God shope man, euen of the mould of the erth, & brethed into his face the breth of lyfe. So man was made a lyuyng soule.
Genesis 2:8 The Lorde God also planted a garden in Eden from the beginning, and there he sette man whom he had formed.
Genesis 2:9 And the Lord god made to sprynge out of the erth, all maner trees bewtyfull to the syght and pleasant to eate, and the tree of lyfe in the myddes of the garden: and also the tree of knowledge of good and euell.
Genesis 2:10 And there sprange a ryuer out of Eden to water the garden, & thence deuyded it self, & grewe in to foure pryncypall waters.
Genesis 2:11 The name of the one is Phison, he it is that compasseth all the lande of Heuyla,
Genesis 2:12 where golde groweth. And the golde of that contre is precyous, ther is found Bedellyon, and a stone called Onix.
Genesis 2:13 The name of the second ryuer is Gihon, whych compasseth al the lande of Iude.
Genesis 2:14 And the name of the thyrde ryuer is Hydekell, whyche runneth on the easte syde of the Assyrians. And the fourth ryuer is Euphrates.
Genesis 2:15 And the Lord God toke Adam, & put him in the garden of Eden, to dresse it & to kepe it.
Genesis 2:16 And the Lord God commaunded Adam saying: Of all the trees of the garden se thou eate:
Genesis 2:17 But of the tree of knowledge of good & bad se that thou eate not: For euen the same daye thou eatest of it thou shalt dye the dethe.
Genesis 2:18 And the Lorde God sayde: It is not good that man should be alone, I wyll make hym an helper to beare hym company.
Genesis 2:19 And after that the Lorde God had made of the erth al maner beastes of the felde, and all maner foules of the ayre, he brought them vnto Adam to se what he wolde call them. And as Adam called al maner lyuyng beastes, euen so are their names.
Genesis 2:20 And Adam gaue names vnto al maner catell, and vnto the foules of the ayre and vnto all maner beastes of the felde. But ther was no helpe founde vnto Adam to beare hym company.
Genesis 2:21 Then the Lord god cast a slomber on Adam, and he slepte. And then he toke out one of his ribbes, & in stede ther of he filled vp the place wt flesh.
Genesis 2:22 And the lord God made of the ribbe whych he toke out of Adam a woman: and brought her vnto Adam.
Genesis 2:23 Then sayde Adam: This is once bone of my bones, & flesh of my flesh. This shal be called woman: because she was take of the man.
Genesis 2:24 For this cause shal a man leue father & mother, & cleue vnto hys wyfe, & they shal be one flesh.
Genesis 2:25 And they were ether of them naked, bothe Adam & his wyfe, and were not ashamed.

CHAPTER: 3

Genesis 3:1 Bvt the serpent was sutyller than al the beastes of the felde, whych the Lord God had made: & sayd vnto the woman: yea hath God sayd in dede, ye shall not eate of al maner trees in the garden?
Genesis 3:2 And the woman sayd vnto the serpent, of the frute of the trees in the garden we may eate,
Genesis 3:3 but of the frute of the tree that is in the myddes of the garden (sayd God) se that ye eate not, & se that ye touch it not, lest ye dye.
Genesis 3:4 Then sayd the serpent vnto the woman: tush ye shal not dye:
Genesis 3:5 but god doth know that when so euer ye should eate of it, your eyes should be opened, & ye should be as god, & know both good & euel.
Genesis 3:6 And the woman saw that it was a good tree to eate of, and lusty vnto the eies, & a pleasant tree forto geue vnderstandynge. And toke of the frute of it & ate, & gaue vnto her husband also wt her, & he ate.
Genesis 3:7 And the eyes of bothe them were opened, that they vnderstode howe that they were naked. Than they sowed figge leues together and made them apurns.
Genesis 3:8 And they herd the voyce of the Lord God as he walked in the garden in the coole of the daye. And Adam hyd hym self and his wyfe also from the face of the Lorde God, among the trees of the garden.
Genesis 3:9 And the Lorde God called Adam, and sayd vnto hym: where art thou?
Genesis 3:10 And he answered: Thy voyce I heard in the garden, but I was afrayed, because I was naked, and therfore hyd my selfe.
Genesis 3:11 And he sayde: Who tolde the that thou wast naked? hast thou eaten of the tree, of whyche I bade the that thou shuldest not eate?
Genesis 3:12 And Adam answered: The woman whych thou gauest to bere me company she toke me of the tree, and I ate.
Genesis 3:13 And the Lorde God sayd vnto the woman: Wherfore dydest thou so? And the woman answered: The serpent deceyued me and I ate.
Genesis 3:14 And the Lord God sayd vnto the serpent: because thou haste so done moste curssed be thou of all catell and of al beastes of the felde: vpon thy beely shalt thou go: and erth shalt thou eate all dayes of thy lyfe.
Genesis 3:15 Moreouer, I wyll put hatred betwene the & the woman, & betwene thy seed and her seed. And that seed shall tread the on thy heed, and thou shalt treade it on the hele.
Genesis 3:16 And vnto the woman he said: I wyl suerly encrease thy sorow, and make the oft with chylde, & with payne shalt thou be deliuered: And thy lustes shall pertayne vnto thy husband, and he shal rule the.
Genesis 3:17 And vnto Adam he sayd: For as moch as thou hast obeyed the voyce of thy wyfe, and hast eaten of the tree of which I commaunded the, sayinge: Se thou eate not therof: curssed be the erth for thy sake. In sorow shalt thou eate therof all dayes of thy lyfe:
Genesis 3:18 And it shall beare thornes & thystels vnto the. And thou shalt eate the herbes of the feld.
Genesis 3:19 In the swete of thy face shalt thou eate brede, vntyll thou returne vnto the erth whence thou wast taken: for erth thou art, & vnto erth shalt thou returne.
Genesis 3:20 And Adam called his wyfe Heua, because she was the mother of al that liueth.
Genesis 3:21 And the Lord God made Adam & his wyfe garmentes of skynnes, and put them on them.
Genesis 3:22 And the Lorde God sayd: Loo, Adam is become as it were one of vs, in knowledge of good and euell. But now lest he strech forth hys hande and take also of the tree of lyfe, & eate & lyue euer.
Genesis 3:23 And the Lord God cast hym out of the garden of Eden, to tylle the erth whence he was taken.
Genesis 3:24 And he cast Adam out, & sette at the enterynge of the garden Eden, Cherubin with a naked swerde mouynge in and out, to kepe the way to the tree of lyfe.

CHAPTER: 4

Genesis 4:1 And Adam laye wt Heua his wyfe, whiche conceyued & bare Cayn, & sayde: I haue goten a man of the Lord.
Genesis 4:2 And she proceded forth and bare hys brother Abell: and Abell became a shepherde, and Cayn became a plowman.
Genesis 4:3 And it fortuned in processe of tyme, that Cayn brought of the fruite of the erth, an offerynge vnto the Lorde.
Genesis 4:4 And Abell he brought also of the fyrstlynges of hys shepe, & of the fatt of them. And the Lord loked vnto Abel and to hys offrynge,
Genesis 4:5 but vnto Cayn & vnto hys offrynge loked he not. And Cayn was wroth exceadyngly, & loured.
Genesis 4:6 And the Lorde sayd vnto Cayn: why art thou angry, & why lourest thou? Wotest thou not yf thou dost well thou shalt receyue it?
Genesis 4:7 But and yf thou dost euell, by & by thy synne lyeth open in the dore. Notwithstandyng let it be subdued vnto the, and sea thou rule it.
Genesis 4:8 And Cayn talked with Abel hys brother. And as soone as they were in the feldes, Cayn fell vpon Abell hys brother, & slewe hym.
Genesis 4:9 And the Lorde sayd vnto Cayn: where is Abel thy brother? And he sayde: I can not tell, am I my brothers keper?
Genesis 4:10 And he sayde: What hast thou done? The voyce of thy brothers bloude cryeth vnto me oute of the erth.
Genesis 4:11 And now curssed be thou as pertaining to the erth, whyche opened her mouth to receyue thy brothers bloude of thyne hande.
Genesis 4:12 For when thou tyllest the grounde she shall henceforth not geue her power vnto the. A vagabunde and a rennagate shalt thou be vpon the erth.
Genesis 4:13 And Cayn sayd vnto the Lorde: my synne is greater, then that it may be forgeuen.
Genesis 4:14 Beholde thou castest me out thys daye from the face of the erth, & from thy syghte must I hyde myself, & I must be wandrynge and a vagabunde vpon the erth: Moreouer whosoeuer fyndeth me, wyl kyl me.
Genesis 4:15 And the Lorde sayd vnto him: Not so, but whosoeuer sleith Cayn shalbe punisshed .vij. folde. And the Lord put a marke vpon Cayn that no man that founde hym should kyl him.
Genesis 4:16 And Cayn went out from the face of the Lorde, and dwelt in the lande Nod, on the east syde of Eden.
Genesis 4:17 And Cayn laye wyth his wyf, which conceyued & bare Henoch. And he was buylding a cyte, & called the name of it after the name of hys sonne, Henoch.
Genesis 4:18 And Henoch begat Irad. And Irad begat Mahuiael. And Mahuiael begat Mathusael. And Mathusael begat Lamech.
Genesis 4:19 And Lamech toke him two wyues: the one is called Ada, & the other Zilla.
Genesis 4:20 And Ada bare Iaball, of whome came they that dwell in tentes, & possesse catell.
Genesis 4:21 And his brothers name was Iubal, of hym came all that exercyse them selues on the harpe & on the organs.
Genesis 4:22 And Zilla she also bare Tubalcayn a worker in metal & a father of all that graue in brasse & yeron. And Tubalcayns syster was called Naema.
Genesis 4:23 Then sayde Lamech vnto his wyues Ada & Zilla: heare my voice ye wiues of Lamech & herken vnto my wordes, for I haue slayne a man & wounded my self, & haue slayn a yong man, & gotte my self strypes:
Genesis 4:24 for Cayn shall be auenged seuenfolde, but Lamech seuentye tymes seuenfolde.
Genesis 4:25 Adam also laye wyth hys wyfe yet agayne, & she bare a sonne & called his name Seth. For God (sayd she) hath geuen me another sonne for Abel whom Cayn slewe.
Genesis 4:26 And Seth begat a sonne, & called hys name Enos. And in that tyme began men to cal on the name of the Lord.

CHAPTER: 5

Genesis 5:1 This is the boke of the generacion of man. In the daye when God created man & made hym after the similitude of God.
Genesis 5:2 Male & female made he them, & called their names man, in the day when they were created.
Genesis 5:3 And when Adam was an hundred & thyrty yere olde, he begat a sonne after hys sycknesse and similitude: & called his name Seth.
Genesis 5:4 And the dayes of Adam after he begat Seth, were eyght hundred yere, and begat sonnes & daughters.
Genesis 5:5 And al the dayes of Adam which he lyued, were .ix. hundred & .xxx. yere, and then he dyed.
Genesis 5:6 And Seth lyued an hundred & .v. yeres, & begat Enos.
Genesis 5:7 And after he had begat Enos he liued .viij. hundred & .vij. yere, & begat sonnes & daughters.
Genesis 5:8 And all the dayes of Seth were .ix. hundred & .xij. yere, and dyed.
Genesis 5:9 And Enos lyued .lxxx. yere, & begat Kenan.
Genesis 5:10 And Enos after he begat Kenan, liued .viij. hundred & .xv. yere, and begat sonnes & daughters:
Genesis 5:11 & al the dayes of Enos were .ix. hundred & .v. yere, & than he dyed.
Genesis 5:12 And Kenan lyued .lxx. yere, & begat Mahalaliel.
Genesis 5:13 And Kenan after he had begat Mahalaliel, lyued .viij. hundred and .xl. yere, & begat sonnes and daughters:
Genesis 5:14 & al the dayes of Kenan were .ix. hundred & .x. yere, and than he dyed.
Genesis 5:15 And Mahalaliel liued .lxv. yere,
Genesis 5:16 & begat Iared. And Mahalaliel after he had begat Iared lyued .viij. hundred & .xxx. yeres, & begat sonnes and daughters:
Genesis 5:17 and al the dayes of Mahalaliel were .viij. hundred nynetye and .v. yere, and than he dyed.
Genesis 5:18 And Iared liued an hundred & .lxij. yere, & begat Henoch:
Genesis 5:19 & Iared lyued after he begat Henoch .viij. hundred yere, & begat sonnes & daughters.
Genesis 5:20 And all the dayes of Iared were .ix. hundred & .lxij. yere, and than he dyed.
Genesis 5:21 And Henoch lyued .lxv. yere, & begat Mathusala.
Genesis 5:22 And Henoch walked wyth God after he had begat Mathusala .iij. hundred yere, & begat sonnes & daughters,
Genesis 5:23 And al the dayes of Henoch were .iij. hundred & .lxv. yere,
Genesis 5:24 & than Henoch liued a godly lyfe, and was no more sene, for God toke hym awaye.
Genesis 5:25 And Mathusala lyued an hundred and .lxxxvij. yere & begat Lamech:
Genesis 5:26 & Mathusala after he had begat Lamech, lyued .vij. hundred & .lxxxij. yere, & begat sonnes and daughters.
Genesis 5:27 And all the dayes of Mathusala were .ix. hundred .lxix. yere, and than he dyed.
Genesis 5:28 And Lamech lyued an hundred .lxxxij. yere & begat a sonne,
Genesis 5:29 & called hym Noe, sayinge: Thys same shal comforte vs: as concerning our worke & sorowe of oure handes whyche we haue about the erth that the Lorde hath curssed:
Genesis 5:30 and Lamech liued after he had begat Noe .v. hundred, nynetye & .v. yere, and begat sonnes & daughters.
Genesis 5:31 And al the dayes of Lamech were .vij. hundred .lxxvij. yere, & than he dyed.
Genesis 5:32 And when Noe was fyue hundred yere old, he begat Sem, Ham, & Iapheth.

CHAPTER: 6

Genesis 6:1 And it came to passe, whan men began to multyply vpon the erth, & had begat them daughters,
Genesis 6:2 that sonnes of god saw the daughters of men that they were fayre, and toke vnto them wyues, which they best lyked among them all.
Genesis 6:3 And the Lorde sayde: My spirite shall not alway striue wyth man, for they are flesh. Neuerthelesse I wyl geue them yet space, an .C. & .xx. yeres.
Genesis 6:4 There were tyrantes in the world in those dayes. For after that the chyldren of god had gone in, vnto the daughters of men, & had begotten them chyldren, the same chyldren were the mightiest of the world, & men of renowne.
Genesis 6:5 And whan the Lord saw that the wekednesse of man was encreased vpon the erth, & that al the ymaginacion & thoughtes of his hert was only euell contynually,
Genesis 6:6 he repented that he had made man vpon the erth, and sorowed in his hert.
Genesis 6:7 And sayd: I wyl destroy mankynde whych I haue made, from of the face of the erth: both man, beast, worme and foule of the ayre, for it repenteth me that I haue made them.
Genesis 6:8 But yet Noe founde grace in the syght of the Lord.
Genesis 6:9 These are the generacions of Noe. Noe was a ryghteous man & vncorrupte in hys tyme, & walked wt God.
Genesis 6:10 And Noe begat .iij. sonnes: Sem, Ham, & Iapheth.
Genesis 6:11 And the erth was corrupt in the syght of God, & was full of mischefe.
Genesis 6:12 And God loked vpon the erth, & lo it was corrupte: for all flesh had corrupte hys way vpon the erth.
Genesis 6:13 Than sayde God to Noe: the ende of all flesh is come before me, for the erth is full of their myschefe. And lo, I wyl destroye them with the erth.
Genesis 6:14 Make the an arcke of pyne tree, and make chaumbers in the arcke, and pitch it wythin & without wyth pytch.
Genesis 6:15 And of this facyon shalt thou make it. The length of the arcke shall be .iij. hundred cubytes, & the bredth of it .l. cubytes, & the hyeth of it .xxx. cubytes.
Genesis 6:16 A wyndow shalt thou make aboue in the arcke. And within a cubyte compasse shalt thou fynysh it. And the dore of the arcke shalt thou sette in the syde of it: & thou shalt make it with .iij. loftes one aboue another.
Genesis 6:17 For behold, I wyll bryng in a floud of water vpon the erth to destroye al flesh from vnder heauen, wherin breth of lyf is: so that all that is in the erth shal perysh.
Genesis 6:18 But I wyl make myne apoyntement wt the, that both thou shalt come into the arcke and thy sonnes, thy wyfe & thy sonnes wyues wt the.
Genesis 6:19 And of all that lyueth what so euer flesh it be, shalt thou brynge into the arcke, of euery thyng a payre, to kepe them a lyue wyth the. And male & female se that they be,
Genesis 6:20 of byrdes in their kynde, & of beastes in theyr kynde, & of all maner of wormes of the erth in theyr kynde: a payre of euery thynge shal come vnto the to kepe them a lyue.
Genesis 6:21 And take vnto the of all maner of meate that may be eaten and laye it vp in stoore by the, that it maye be meate bothe for the and for them:
Genesis 6:22 and Noe dyd acordyng to all that God commaunded him.

CHAPTER: 7

Genesis 7:1 And the Lorde said vnto Noe: Go in to the arcke bothe thou and all thy houshold. For the haue I sene ryghteous before me in this generacyon.
Genesis 7:2 Of all clene beastes take vnto the seuen of euery kynde, the male and female, & of vnclene beastes a payre, the male & his female:
Genesis 7:3 lykewyse of the byrdes of the ayre seuen of euery kynde, male and female to saue seed vpon all the erth.
Genesis 7:4 For seuen dayes hence wil I sende rayne vpon the erth .xl. dayes and .xl. nyghtes, and wyll destroy al maner of thynges that I haue made, from of the face of the erth.
Genesis 7:5 And Noe dyd accordynge to all that the Lorde commaunded hym:
Genesis 7:6 and Noe was .vi. hundred yere olde, when the floud of water came vpon the erth:
Genesis 7:7 and Noe went and hys sonnes and his wyfe & his sonnes wyues wt him, into the arcke from the water of the floud.
Genesis 7:8 And of clene beastes & of the beastes that ware vnclene, & of byrdes and of al that crepeth vpon the erth,
Genesis 7:9 came in by cooples of euery kynde vnto Noe into the arcke, a male & a female: euen as god commaunded Noe.
Genesis 7:10 And the seuenth day the waters of the floude came vpon the erth.
Genesis 7:11 In the .vi. hundred yere of Noes lyfe, in the seconde moneth, in the .xvij. daye of the moneth, that same day were al the founteynes of the great depe broken vp, & the wyndowes of heauen were opened,
Genesis 7:12 & there fel a rayne vpon the erth .xl. dayes & .xl. nyghtes.
Genesis 7:13 And the selfe same daye went Noe, Sem, Ham & Iapheth, Noes sonnes, & Noes wyf & the .iij. wyues of hys sonnes with them in to the arcke:
Genesis 7:14 bothe they & al maner of beastes in theyr kynde, and all maner of catell in their kynd, & al maner of wormes that crepe vpon the erth in their kynde, & al maner of byrdes in there kynde, & all maner of foules what soeuer had feders.
Genesis 7:15 And they came vnto Noe into the arcke by couples, of al flesh that had breth of lyfe in it.
Genesis 7:16 And they that came, came male & female of euery flesh acordyng as God commaunded him: & the Lorde shut the dore vpon hym.
Genesis 7:17 And the floud came .xl. dayes and .xl. nyghtes vpon the erth, & the water increased & bare vp the arcke, & it was lyfte vp from of the erth.
Genesis 7:18 And the water preuayled & increased exceadingly vpon the erth: & the arcke went vpon the toppe of the waters.
Genesis 7:19 And the waters preuailed excedingly aboue mesure vpon the erth, so that all the hye hylles whych are vnder all the partes of heauen were couered
Genesis 7:20 euen .xv. cubytes hye preuayled the waters, so that the hylles were couered.
Genesis 7:21 And all flesh that moued on the erth, both birdes, catell and beastes perysshed, with al that crepte on the erth and al men:
Genesis 7:22 so that al that had the breth of lyfe in the nostrels of it thorow out all that was on drye lande, dyed.
Genesis 7:23 Thus was destroyed al that was vpon the erth, both man, beastes, wormes and foules of the ayre, so that they were destroyed from the erth: saue Noe was reserued onlye and they that were with him in the arck.
Genesis 7:24 And the waters preuayled vpon the erth an hundred and .l. dayes.

CHAPTER: 8

Genesis 8:1 And God remembred Noe & al the beastes & al the catel that were with him in the arck. And God made a wynde to blowe vpon the erth, & the waters ceased:
Genesis 8:2 & the fountaynes of the depe & the wyndowes of heauen were stopte, & the rayne of heauen was forbydden,
Genesis 8:3 & the waters returned from of the erth, & abated after the end of an hundred and .l. dayes.
Genesis 8:4 And the arcke rested vpon the mountains of Ararat, the .xvij. daye of the .vij. moneth.
Genesis 8:5 And the waters went awaye, & decreased vntyll the .x. moneth. And the fyrst day of the .x. moneth, the toppes of the mounteyns appered.
Genesis 8:6 And after the ende of .xl. dayes Noe opened the window of the arck which he had made,
Genesis 8:7 and sent forth a rauen, which went out, euer goynge & commynge agayne, vntyl the waters were dryed vp vpon the earth.
Genesis 8:8 Then sent he forth a doue from him, to wete whether the waters were fallen from of the earth.
Genesis 8:9 And when the doue could finde no restyng place for hyr fote, she returned to him agayne vnto the arcke, for the waters were vpon the face of al the earth. And he put out hys hande, and toke hyr, and pulled hyr to hym into the Arcke.
Genesis 8:10 And he abode yet seuen daies more, & sent out the doue agayne oute of the arcke,
Genesis 8:11 & the doue came to him agayne about euentyde, & beholde, there was in hyr mouth a lefe of an olyue tre whyche she had plucked: whereby Noe perceiued that the waters were abated vpon the earth.
Genesis 8:12 And he taried yet seuen other dayes, and sent forth the doue, whyche from thence forth came no more agayne to hym.
Genesis 8:13 And it came to passe, the sixe hundred and one yere & the fyrst day of the fyrste moneth, that the waters were dried vp vpon the earth. And Noe toke of the hatches of the arcke, & loked: and beholde, the face of the earth was drye.
Genesis 8:14 So by the .xxvij. day of the second moneth the earth was drye.
Genesis 8:15 And God spake vnto Noe, saying.
Genesis 8:16 Come out of the arcke, boeth thou & thy wyfe & thy sons & thy sonnes wyues with the.
Genesis 8:17 And al the beastes that are wt the whatsoeuer fleshe it be, both foule & catel, & all maner wormes that crepe on the earth bringe oute wyth the & let them moue, grow & multiply vpon the erth.
Genesis 8:18 And Noe came out, & hys sonnes, & his wyfe, and hys sonnes wiues wyth him.
Genesis 8:19 And all the beastes, and all the wormes, and all the foules and all that moued vpon the erth, came also out of the arcke, all of one kynde togyther.
Genesis 8:20 And Noe made an aulter vnto the Lord, & toke of all maner of cleane beastes, & all maner of clene foules, & offred sacrifice vpon the aultare.
Genesis 8:21 And the Lorde smelled a swete sauour, & sayd in his hert: I wyll henceforth no more cursse the earthe for mans sake, for the imagination of mans herte is euyll, euen from the very youth of him. Moreouer I wyl not destroy from henceforthe all that lyueth as I haue done.
Genesis 8:22 Neyther shal sowynge time and heruest, cold and hete, somer, and wynter, daye and nyghte ceasse, as longe as the earth endureth.

CHAPTER: 9

Genesis 9:1 And God blessed Noe & hys sonnes, and said vnto them: Encreace & multiply and fyll the earth.
Genesis 9:2 The feare also & dreade of you be vpon all beastes of the earthe, and vppon all foules of the ayre, & vpon al that crepeth on the earth, and vpon all fyshes of the sea, whych are geuen vnto your handes.
Genesis 9:3 And all that moueth vpon the earth hauynge lyfe, shall be your meat: Euen as the grene herbes so giue I you al thinge.
Genesis 9:4 Onely the flesh with his lyfe whych is his bloude se that you eate not.
Genesis 9:5 For verily the bloude of you wherin youre lyues are wyl I require: Euen of the hand of all beastes wyll I requyre it, and of the hande of man and of the hand of euerye mannes brother wyll I requyre the lyfe of man:
Genesis 9:6 so that he whych sheadeth mans bloud shal haue his bloud shed by man againe: for God made man after hys owne lykenesse.
Genesis 9:7 Se that ye encrease, and waxe, and be occupied vpon the earth, & multiply therin.
Genesis 9:8 Furthermore God spake vnto Noe & to hys sonnes with him, sayinge:
Genesis 9:9 See, I make my bond with you & your seed after you,
Genesis 9:10 & wyth all lyuynge thynge that is wyth you: both foule & cattel, & al maner beastes of the earth that is with you, of al that commeth out of the arcke, whatsoeuer beast of the earth it be.
Genesis 9:11 I make my bonde wyth you, that hence forth all fleshe shal not be destroied with the waters of any floud, & that hence forth there shall not be a floud to destroy the earth.
Genesis 9:12 And God sayd: This is the token of my bond which I make betwene me and you, & betwene all lyuyng thyng that is wyth you foreuer:
Genesis 9:13 I wyll set my bowe in the cloudes, & it shall be a sygne of the appointment made betwene me & the earth:
Genesis 9:14 so that when I bring in cloudes vpon the earth, the bowe shal appere in the cloudes.
Genesis 9:15 And then wyll I thinke vpon my testament whych I haue made betwene me and you, and all that lyueth whatsoeuer fleshe it be. So that henceforth there shall be no more waters to make a floude to destroy all fleshe.
Genesis 9:16 The bowe shal be in the cloudes, & I wil loke vpon it, to remembre the euerlastynge testament betwene God & all that lyueth vpon the earth, whatsoeuer fleshe it be.
Genesis 9:17 And God sayed vnto Noe: Thys is the sygne of the testament which I haue made betwene me and all fleshe that is on the earth.
Genesis 9:18 The sonnes of Noe that came oute of the arcke were: Sem, Ham and Iapheth. And Ham he is the father of Canaan.
Genesis 9:19 These are the thre sonnes of Noe, and of these was all the world ouerspreade.
Genesis 9:20 And Noe beynge an husband man, went forth & planted a vineyarde,
Genesis 9:21 & dranke of the wyne & was droncke, and lay vncouered in the middest of hys tent.
Genesis 9:22 And Ham the father of Canaan sawe hys fathers priueties, and told hys .ij. brethren that were without.
Genesis 9:23 And Sem and Iapheth toke a mantyll, & put it on boeth theyr shoulders and went bacward, & couered theyr fathers secretes, but theyr faces were backewarde, so that they sawe not theyr fathers nakednes.
Genesis 9:24 As sone as Noe was awaked frome hys wyne, & wyste what hys yongest sonne had done vnto him,
Genesis 9:25 he said: Cursed be Canaan, & a seruant of al seruantes be he to hys brethren.
Genesis 9:26 And he sayed: Blessed be the Lorde God of Sem, & Canaan be his seruant.
Genesis 9:27 God encrease Iapheth, that he maye dwel in the tentes of Sem. And Canan be theyr seruant.
Genesis 9:28 And Noe lyued after the floud thre hundred and fyfty yere:
Genesis 9:29 so that all the dayes of Noe were .ix. hundred & fyfty yere & then he died.

CHAPTER: 10

Genesis 10:1 These are the generations, of the sonnes of Noe: of Sem Ham, and Iapheth, which begat them children after the floude.
Genesis 10:2 The sonnes of Iapheth were: Gomyr, Magog, Madai, Iauan, Tuball, Mesech, & Thyras.
Genesis 10:3 And the sonnes of Gomyr were Ascenas, Riphat and Togarma.
Genesis 10:4 And the sonnes of Iauan were: Elisa Tharsis, Cithim, and Dodanim.
Genesis 10:5 Of these came the Isles of the Gentils in theyr countryes, euery man in hys speach kynred, & nation.
Genesis 10:6 The sonnes of Ham were: Chus, Misraim, Phut, & Canaan.
Genesis 10:7 The sonns of Chus were Seba, Heuyla, Sabta, Rayma, and Sabtema. And the sonnes of Rayma were: Sheba, & Dedan.
Genesis 10:8 Thus also begat Nemrod which began to be myghty in the earth.
Genesis 10:9 He was a myghty hunter in the syghte of the Lorde: Wherof came the prouerbe: he is as Nemrod that myghty hunter in the syght of the Lord.
Genesis 10:10 And the begynnyng of hys kyngdome was Babell, Erech, Achad, & Chalne in the lande of Synear:
Genesis 10:11 Oute of that land came Assur, & builded Niniue, & the citye Rehoboth, & Calah,
Genesis 10:12 and Ressen betwene Niniue & Calah. That is a greate cytye.
Genesis 10:13 And Mizrim begat Ludim, Enamim, Leabim, Naphtuhim,
Genesis 10:14 Pathrusim, & Casluhim: from whence came the Philystyns, and the Capththerynes.
Genesis 10:15 Canaan also begat Zidon hys eldest sonne & Heth,
Genesis 10:16 Iebusi, Emori, Girgosi,
Genesis 10:17 Him, Arki. Sini,
Genesis 10:18 Aruadi, Zemari, & Harmati. And afterward sprange the kinreds of the Cananites.
Genesis 10:19 And the costes of the Cananites were from Sydon tyll thou come to Gerara & to Asa, & tyl thou come to Sodoma, Gomorra, Adama, Zeboim, euen vnto Lasa.
Genesis 10:20 These were the chyldren of Ham in theyr kynredes, tonges, Landes, and nations.
Genesis 10:21 And Sem the father of all the chyldren of Eber, & the eldeste brother of Iapheth begat children also.
Genesis 10:22 And his sonnes were Elam, Assur, Arphachsad, Lud & Aram.
Genesis 10:23 And the children of Aram were: Vr, Hul, Gether & Mas.
Genesis 10:24 And Arphachsad begat Sala, & Sala begat Eber.
Genesis 10:25 And Eber begat two sonnes. The name of the one was Peleg, for in his time the earth was deuided. And the name of his brother was Iaketan.
Genesis 10:26 Iaketan begat Almodad, Saleph, Hyzarmoneth, Iarah,
Genesis 10:27 Hadoram, Vsall, Dikela,
Genesis 10:28 Obal, Abimael, Seba,
Genesis 10:29 Ophir, Henila & Iobab. Al these are tho sonnes of Iaketan.
Genesis 10:30 And the dwellynge of them was from Mesa vntyl thou come vnto Sephara a mountayne of the east lande.
Genesis 10:31 These are the sonnes of Sem in their kinredes, languages, contryes, and nations.
Genesis 10:32 These are the kinredes of the sonnes of Noe, in their generations & nations. And of these came the People that were in the worlde after the floude.

CHAPTER: 11

Genesis 11:1 And all the worlde was of one tonge and one language.
Genesis 11:2 And as they came from the Easte, they found a playne in the lande of Sinear, and ther they dwelled,
Genesis 11:3 and they sayed one to an other: come on, lette vs make brycke and burne it with fire. So brycke was theyr stone, and slyme was theyr morter.
Genesis 11:4 And they sayed come on, let vs builde a citye & a tower, that the toppe may reach vnto heuen. And let vs make vs a name for peraduenture we shall be scatered abrod ouer al the erth.
Genesis 11:5 And the Lord came downe to se the city and the tower which the children of Adam had builded.
Genesis 11:6 And the Lorde sayed: See, the people is one, and haue one tonge amonge them all. And thys haue they begon to do, and wyll not leaue of frome all that they haue purposed to do.
Genesis 11:7 Come on, let vs descende, and myngle theyr tonge euen there, that one vnderstande not what another sayeth.
Genesis 11:8 Thus the Lorde skattered them from thence vpon all the earth. And they left of to builde the city.
Genesis 11:9 Wherefore the name of it is called Babell, bycause that the Lorde there confounded the tonge of al the world. And bicause that the Lorde from thence scatered them abrode vpon all the earth.
Genesis 11:10 These are the generations of Sem: Sem was an hundred yere old, & begat Arphachsad .ij. yere after the flode.
Genesis 11:11 And Sem lyued after he hadde begat Arphachsad .v. hundred yere and begat sonnes and doughters.
Genesis 11:12 And Arphachsad lyued .xxxv. yere & begat Sala,
Genesis 11:13 & lyued after he hadde begat Sala .iiij. hundred yere & .iij. & begat sonnes & daughters.
Genesis 11:14 And Sala was thirty yere olde & begat Eber,
Genesis 11:15 and lyued after he had begot Eber .iiij. hundred & .iij. yere, & begat sonnes & daughters.
Genesis 11:16 When Eber was .xxxiiij. yere old, he begat Peleg,
Genesis 11:17 & lyued after he had begat Peleg foure hundred and .xxx. yere, & begat sonnes and doughters.
Genesis 11:18 And Peleg when he was .xxx. yere old begat Regu,
Genesis 11:19 & lyued after he had begot Regu .ij. hundred & .ix. yere, & begat sonnes & daughters.
Genesis 11:20 And Regu when he had liued .xxxij. yere begat Serug,
Genesis 11:21 and lyued after he had begot Serug .ii. hundred and .vij. yeare, and begat sonnes and daughters.
Genesis 11:22 And when Serug was .xxx. yere olde, he begat Nahor,
Genesis 11:23 & liued after he had begat Nahor .ij. hundred yere, & begat sonnes & daughters.
Genesis 11:24 And Nahor when he was .xxix. yere old, begat Terah,
Genesis 11:25 and lyued after he had begat Terah, an hundred and .xix. yeare and begat sonnes and doughters.
Genesis 11:26 And when Terah was .lxx. yere old, he begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
Genesis 11:27 And these are the generations of Terah. Terah begatte Abram, Nahor, and Haran. And Haran begat Lot.
Genesis 11:28 And Haran dyed before Terah hys father in the Land where he was borne, at Or in Chaldea.
Genesis 11:29 And Abram and Nahor toke them wyues. Abrams wyfe was called Sarai. And Nahors wyfe Mylca, the doughter of Haran whyche was father of Milca, & of Iesca.
Genesis 11:30 But Sarai was baren, and had no chylde.
Genesis 11:31 Then toke Terah Abram hys sonne, & Lot hys sonne, Harans sonne, & Sarai hys daughter in lawe, hys sonne Abrams wyfe. And they went wyth him from Or in Chaldea, to goo into the Lande of Canaan. And they came to Haran and dwelled there.
Genesis 11:32 And when Terah was two hundred yere olde and fyue, he dyed in Haran.

CHAPTER: 12

Genesis 12:1 Then the Lorde sayed vnto Abram. Get the out of thy contrye and frome thy kyndred, and oute of thy fathers house, into a Lande whyche I wyll shewe the.
Genesis 12:2 And I wyll make of the a myghty people, and wyll blesse the, and make thy name greate, that thou maiste be a blessynge.
Genesis 12:3 And I wyl blesse them that blesse the and cursse them that cursse the. And in the shal be blessed al the generations of the earth.
Genesis 12:4 And Abram went as the lord badde hym, and Lot wente wyth hym. Abram was .lxxv. yere olde when he went out of Haran.
Genesis 12:5 And Abram toke Sarai hys wyfe, and Lot hys brothers son, wt al their goodes which they had gotten, and soules whiche they had begotten in Haran. And they departed in goo into the Lande of Canaan.
Genesis 12:6 And when they were come into the Lande of Canaan, Abram went forthe into the Lande tyl he came vnto a place called Sichem, & vnto the oke of More. And the Kananytes dwelled then in the lande.
Genesis 12:7 Then the Lorde appeared vnto Abram & sayd: vnto thy seed wyll I gyue this lande. And he builded an aulter ther vnto the Lord whyche appeared vnto hym.
Genesis 12:8 Then departed he thence vnto a mountayne that lyeth on the east syde of Bethell & pitched hys tente: Bethel beynge on the west syde, and Ay on the east: and he builded there an aulter vnto the Lord, & called on the name of the Lorde.
Genesis 12:9 And then Abram departed and toke hys iourney southwarde.
Genesis 12:10 After thys ther came a derth in the lande. And Abram went downe into Egypte, to soiourne ther, for the derth was sore in the land.
Genesis 12:11 And when he was come nye for to enter into Egypte, he sayed vnto Sarai hys wyfe. Behold, I knowe that thou art a fayre woman to loke vpon.
Genesis 12:12 It wyll come to passe therfore when the Egyptyans se the, that they wyll saye: she is hys wyfe. And so shall they sley me and saue the.
Genesis 12:13 Saye I pray the therfore that thou arte my sister that I maye fare the better by reason of the, and that my soule may lyue for thy sake.
Genesis 12:14 As soone as he came into Egypte, the Egypsians saw the woman that she was very fayre.
Genesis 12:15 And Pharaos Lodres sawe hir also, & praysed hyr vnto Pharao: So that she was taken into Pharaos house,
Genesis 12:16 which entreated Abram wel for hir sake, so that he had shepe oxen, & he Asses, men seruauntes, mayd seruantes, she asses, and camels.
Genesis 12:17 But God plaged Pharao, and his house wt greate plages, bycause of Sarai Abrams wyfe.
Genesis 12:18 Then Pharao called Abram & sayed: Whi hast thou thus dealt wt me? Wherfore toldest thou me not that she was thy wyfe?
Genesis 12:19 Why saydest thou, that she was thy sister, & causedeste me to take hyr to my wyfe? But nowe loo, there is thy wyfe, take hyr and be walkynge.
Genesis 12:20 Pharao also gaue a charge vnto his menne ouer Abram, to leade hym oute, with hys wyfe, and all that he had.

CHAPTER: 13

Genesis 13:1 Then Abram departed out of Egypt, both he and his wife, & al that he had, and Lot with hym vnto the Southe.
Genesis 13:2 Abram was verye ryche in cattell, syluer, & golde.
Genesis 13:3 And he wente on hys iorney, from the South euen vnto Bethel, & to the place wher hys tent was at the fyrst tyme, betwene Bethel and Ap,
Genesis 13:4 and vnto the place of the aulter which he made before. And ther called Abram vpon the name of the Lorde.
Genesis 13:5 Lot also which went with him, had shepe, cattell, and tentes:
Genesis 13:6 so that the Land was not able to receyue them, that they myght dwell togither, for the substaunce of theyr riches was so greate, that they coulde not dwel togyther.
Genesis 13:7 And there fell a stryfe betwene the herdmen of Abrams cattell, and the herdmen of Lots cattell. Moreouer the Cananites & the Pheresytes dwelled at that tyme in the land.
Genesis 13:8 Then sayd Abram vnto Lot: Let there be no strife (I pray the) betwene the and me, and betwene my herdmen and thine, for we be brethren.
Genesis 13:9 Is not al the whole land before the? Departe I praye the fro me. If thou wilte take the lyfte hande, I wyll take the ryght: or if thou take the ryght hand I wyll take the lyfte.
Genesis 13:10 And Lot lyft vp hys eyes, and beheld al the contry about Iordane, whych was a plentuous contry of water euery wher, before the Lorde destroyed Sodome & Gomorha, euen as the garden of the Lorde, & as the Land of Egypt tyll thou come to Zoar.
Genesis 13:11 Then Lot chose al the costes of Iordane, and toke his iorney from the east. And so departed the one brother from the other.
Genesis 13:12 Abram dwelled in the lande of Canaan: & Lot in the cities of the playne, & tented tyll he came to Sodome.
Genesis 13:13 But the men of Sodome were wicked, & sinned exceadyngly against the Lord.
Genesis 13:14 And the Lorde sayd vnto Abraham, after that Lot was departed from hym: Lyfte vp thyne eyes, & loke from the place wher thou art, northward, southward, estward, & westward,
Genesis 13:15 for all the Lande whyche thou seest, wyl I gyue vnto the, & to thy sede for euer.
Genesis 13:16 And I wyll make thy sede, as the dust of the earth: so that if a man can numbre the duste of the earth, then shall thy sede also be numbred.
Genesis 13:17 Aryse, and walke about all the Lande, in the length of it, and in the bredth, for I wil giue it vnto them.
Genesis 13:18 Then Abram toke downe his tent & went & dwelled in the okegroue of Mamre which is in Hebron, and buylded there an aulter vnto the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 14

Genesis 14:1 And it chaunsed within a while that Amraphel king of Sinear Arioch king of Ellasar, Kedorlaomor king of Elam, & Thideal king of the nations,
Genesis 14:2 made warre wyth the kynge of Bera, kyng of Sodome, and wyth Girsa kynge of Gomorra, and wt Sineab, king of Adama, & wyth Semeabar kyng of Zeboim, & wyth the kyng of Bela, whych Bela is called Zoar.
Genesis 14:3 All these came togyther to the vale of Siddim, which is nowe the salt sea.
Genesis 14:4 Twelue yere were they subiecte to Kynge Kedorlaomor, and in the .xiij. yere rebelled.
Genesis 14:5 Therefore in the .xiiij. yere came Kedorlaomor, and the kynges that were wyth hym, and smote the Raphims in Astaroth Karnaim, and the Susims in Ham, and the Emims in Sabe Kariathaim,
Genesis 14:6 & the Horims in theyr owne mounte Seir, vnto the playne of Pharan, whyche bordereth vpon the wildernes.
Genesis 14:7 And then turned they & came to the well of Iudgemente whyche is Cades, and smot all the countrye of Amalechites, and also the Amorites that dwell in Hazezon Thamer.
Genesis 14:8 Then wente out the Kyng of Sodome, & the kynge of Gomorha, & the kynge of Adama, and the kyng of Zeboim, and the king of Bela, nowe called Zoar. And set their men in aray to fyght wyth them in the vale of Siddym,
Genesis 14:9 that is to saye, wyth Kedorlaomor the kynge of Elam, and wyth Thideall kyng of the Nacions, and wyth Amraphel kinge of Synear. And wyth Arioch kyng uf Ellazar: foure kynges agaynst fiue.
Genesis 14:10 And that vale of Siddim was full of slyme pyttes. And the kynges of Sodome & Gomorha fled, and fel there. And the rasidue fled to the mountaynes.
Genesis 14:11 And they toke al the goodes of Sodome & Gomorhe, and al theyr vitailles, and went theyr waye.
Genesis 14:12 And they toke Lot also Abrams brothers sonne and his good (for he dwelled at Sodome) and departed.
Genesis 14:13 Then came one that had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew whych dwelled in the okegroue of Mamre the Amoritie, brother of Eschol & Aner: which were confederate with Abram
Genesis 14:14 When Abram heard that hys brother was taken, he harnesed hys seruantes borne in his owne house, thre hundred & eyghtene, and folowed tyll they came at Dan.
Genesis 14:15 And set hym selfe & hys seruantes in aray, & fel vpon them by nyght, & smote them, & chased them awaye vnto Hobba: which lyeth on the lyft hand of Damascos,
Genesis 14:16 & brought agayn al the goodes, and also hys brother Lot, and hys goodes the women also and the people.
Genesis 14:17 And as he returned againe from the slaughter of Kedorlaomor & of the kings that were with hym, then came the kynge of Sodome to mete him in the vale of Saue, which now is called kinges dale.
Genesis 14:18 Then Melchisedech kynge of Salem brought forth breade & wine. And he beynge the prieste of the moste hyghest God,
Genesis 14:19 blessed him saying: Blessed be Abram vnto the most highest God, possessor of heauen & earth.
Genesis 14:20 And blessed be God the most highest, which hath deliuered thyne enemies into thy handes. And Abram gaue hym tythes of all.
Genesis 14:21 Then sayed the kynge of Sodome vnto Abram: Giue me the solles, & take the goods to thy selfe,
Genesis 14:22 And Abram answered the kinge of Sodome: I lyfte vp my hande vnto the Lord God moste high possessor of heauen & earth,
Genesis 14:23 that I wil not take of al that is thyne so moche as a thred or shoolachet, least thou shouldest saye, I haue made Abram ryche.
Genesis 14:24 Saue onely that which the yonge men haue eaten, and the partes of the men which went with me, Aner, Eschol, and Mamre. Let them take theyr partes.

CHAPTER: 15

Genesis 15:1 After these dedes, the worde of God, came vnto Abram in a vision sayinge: Feare not Abram, I am thy shyld, and thy rewarde shall be exceadynge greate.
Genesis 15:2 And Abram answered: Lorde Iehouah, what wylte thou gyue me: I go childeles, and the cater of myne house, thys Eleasar of Damasco hath a sonne.
Genesis 15:3 And Abram sayed: Se, to me hast thou geuen no sede: lo, a lad borne in my house shall be mine heyre?
Genesis 15:4 And behold, the worde of the Lord spake vnto Abram, sayinge: He shall not be thyne heyre, but one that shal come out of thyne own body shalbe thine heire.
Genesis 15:5 And he brought him out of the dores, & sayd: loke vp vnto heauen, & tel the stars, if thou be able to numbre them. And said vnto hym: Euen so shal thy sede be.
Genesis 15:6 And Abram beleued the Lord, & it was counted to him for ryghtuousnes.
Genesis 15:7 And he sayd vnto hym: I am the Lord that brought the oute of Or in Chaldea to geue the thys lande to possesse it.
Genesis 15:8 And he sayed: Lord God, wherby shall I knowe that I shall possesse it?
Genesis 15:9 And he sayed vnto hym: Take an heyfer of thre yere olde, & a she gote of thre yere old, & a thre yere old ram, a turtyll doue, & a yong pigion.
Genesis 15:10 And he toke all these & deuided them in the middes, and layed euery pece one agaynst an other. But the foules deuided he not.
Genesis 15:11 And the birdes fell one the carcases, but Abram droue them away.
Genesis 15:12 And when the sunne was downe, ther fell a slumbre vpon Abram. And loo, feare and greate darckenes came vpon him.
Genesis 15:13 And he sayd vnto Abram: know this of a surety that thy sede shall be a stranger in a lande that perteyneth not vnto them. And they shall make bondmen of them & entreate them euell .iiij. hundred yeares.
Genesis 15:14 But the nacion whom they shal serue, wyll I iudge. And after warde shall they come out wyth great substance.
Genesis 15:15 Neuerthelesse, thou shalt go vnto thy fathers in peace, & shalt be buryed when thou arte of a good age:
Genesis 15:16 and in the fourth generation they shall come hyther agayne, for the wickednesse of the Amorites is not yet full.
Genesis 15:17 When the sonne was downe and it was waxed darcke: beholde, ther was a smokyng furnesse, and a fyrebrand that went betwene the sayde peces.
Genesis 15:18 And that same daye the Lorde made a couenaunte with Abram sayinge: vnto thy seed wyl I geue this land, from the riuer of Egypt, euen vnto the greate ryuer Euphrates,
Genesis 15:19 the Kenytes, the Kenizites, the Cadmonites,
Genesis 15:20 the Hethites, the Pherezites, the Raphayms,
Genesis 15:21 the Amorytes, the Canaanites, the Gergesytes and the Iebusytes.

CHAPTER: 16

Genesis 16:1 Sarai Abrams wyfe bare hym no chyldren. But she had an hand mayd an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.
Genesis 16:2 Wherfore she sayd vnto Abram: Beholde the Lord hath closed me, that I can not bere. I praye the go in vnto my mayde, peraduenture I shal be multiplyed by meanes of her. And Abram heard the voyce of Sarai.
Genesis 16:3 Than Sarai Abrams wyfe toke Hagar her mayd the Egyptian (after Abram had dwelled .x. yere in the land of Canaan) & gaue her to hyr husbond Abram to be his wyfe.
Genesis 16:4 And he went in vnto Agar, & she conceyued. And when she sawe that she had conceyued: her mastresse was despysed in her syght.
Genesis 16:5 Than sayde Sarai vnto Abram: Thou dost me vnryghte, for I haue geuen my mayd into thy bosome: and nowe because she seeth that she hath conceyned, I am despysed in her syghte: the Lorde iudge betwene the and me.
Genesis 16:6 Than sayde Abram to Sarai: beholde, thy mayde is in thy hande, do wyth her as it pleaseth the. And because Sarai fared foule with her, she fled from her.
Genesis 16:7 And the Angell of the lord found her besyde a fountayn of water in the wildernes: euen by a well in the way to Sur.
Genesis 16:8 And he sayde: Hagar Sarais mayde, whence comest thou & whether wylt thou goo? And she answered: I flee from my mastresse Sarai.
Genesis 16:9 And the Angell of the Lorde sayde vnto her: returne to thy mastresse agayne, & submytte thy self vnder her handes.
Genesis 16:10 And the angell of the lorde sayd vnto hir: I wyll so encrease thy seed, that it shall not be nombred for multitude.
Genesis 16:11 And the Lordes angell sayde further vnto her: se, thou art wt chylde & shalt bere a sonne, & shalt call hys name Ismael: because the Lord hath herde thy trybulacion.
Genesis 16:12 He wyll be a wylde man, & hys hande wyl be agaynst euery man, & euery mans hande agaynst hym. And yet shall he dwel faste by al hys brethren.
Genesis 16:13 And she called the name of the Lorde that spake vnto her: thou art the God that lokest on me, for she sayd: I haue of a suertie sene here the backe partes of hym that seeth me.
Genesis 16:14 Wherfore she called the well, the well of the lyuynge that seyth me whych well is betwene Cades and Bared.
Genesis 16:15 And Hagar bare Abram a sonne, and Abram called his sons name whyche Hagar bare Ismael.
Genesis 16:16 And Abram was .lxxxvi. yere olde, when Hagar bare him Ismael.

CHAPTER: 17

Genesis 17:1 When Abram was nynetye yere olde and .ix. the Lorde apeared to hym sayinge: I am the almyghtye God: walke before me and be vncorrupte.
Genesis 17:2 And I wyl make my bonde betwene the and me, & wyll mutyplye the excedyngly.
Genesis 17:3 And Abram fell on hys face. And God talked moreouer wyth hym sayinge:
Genesis 17:4 I am, beholde my testament is wt the, that thou shalt be a father of many nacions.
Genesis 17:5 Therfore, shalt thou no more be called Abram, but thy name shalbe Abraham: for a father of many nacions haue I made the,
Genesis 17:6 and I wyll multyplye the excedyngly, and wyll make nacions of the: yea & kynges shal sprynge out of the.
Genesis 17:7 Moreouer I wyl make my bonde betwene me & the, and thy seed after the, in their times to be an euerlastyng testament, So that I wyl be god vnto the & to thy seed after the.
Genesis 17:8 And I wyl geue vnto the and to thy seed after the, the lande where in thou arte a straunger: Euen all the lande of Canaan, for an euerlastynge possession & wyl be their God.
Genesis 17:9 And god sayd vnto Abraham: Se thou kepe my testament, both thou & thy seed after the in their tymes:
Genesis 17:10 This is my testament which ye shal kepe betwene me & you and thy seed after the, that ye cyrcumcyse all youre men chyldren.
Genesis 17:11 Ye shall circumcyse the foreskynne of youre flesh, & it shall be a token of the bond betwyxte me and you.
Genesis 17:12 And euery man chylde when it is .viij. daies olde, shal be circumcysed among you in your generacions, and all seruauntes also borne at home or bought wt money though they be straungers and not of thy seed. The seruaunte borne in thy house, & he also that is bought with money, must needes be circumcysed,
Genesis 17:13 that my testament maye be in your flesh, for an euerlastyng bonde.
Genesis 17:14 If there be any vncircumcysed manchyld, that hath not the forskynne of his flesh cut of, his soule shal perish from his people: because he hath broken my testament.
Genesis 17:15 And God sayde vnto Abraham. Sarai thy wyfe shal no more be called Sarai: but Sara shall her name be.
Genesis 17:16 For I wyl blesse her and geue the a sonne of her & wyl blesse her: so that people, yea & kynges of people shal sprynge of her.
Genesis 17:17 And Abraham fel vpon his face & laught, & sayd in his harte: shal a chylde be borne vnto hym that is an hundred yere olde, and shal Sara that is nynetie yere olde, bere:
Genesis 17:18 And Abraham sayde vnto God. O that Ismael myghte lyue in thy syghte.
Genesis 17:19 Then sayd God: Sara thy wyfe shal bere the a sonne in dede & thou shalt cal his name Isaac. And I wyll make my bond with him, that it shalbe an euerlasting bond vnto hys seed after him.
Genesis 17:20 And as concernynge Ismaell also, I haue herde thy request: loo, I wyll blesse hym and encrease hym, and multiplye hym excedyngly. Twelue princes shall he begette and I wyl make a greate nacion of hym.
Genesis 17:21 But my bond wyl I make with Isaac, whych Sara shal bere vnto the: euen this tyme twelue moneth.
Genesis 17:22 And God left of talkynge with him, & departed vp from Abraham.
Genesis 17:23 And Abraham toke Ismael his sonne and al the seruauntes borne in hys house and all that was bought wt money as many as were men children among the men of Abrahams house, and circumcysed the foreskynne of their fleshe, euen the selfe same daye, as God had sayde vnto hym.
Genesis 17:24 Abraham was nynetie yere old and nyne, when he cut of the foreskynne of hys flesh.
Genesis 17:25 And Ismaell hys sonne was .xiij. yere olde, when the foreskinne of hys flesh was circumcised.
Genesis 17:26 The selfe same daye was Abraham cyrcumcysed and Ismael hys soune.
Genesis 17:27 And all the men in hys house, whether they were borne in hys house or bought wyth money (though they were straungers) were circumcysed wyth hym.

CHAPTER: 18

Genesis 18:1 And the Lorde apeared vnto hym in the okegroue of Mamre as he sat in hys tent dore in the heate of the daye.
Genesis 18:2 And he lyfte vp hys eyes and looked: & lo, thre men stode not farre from him. And when he sawe them, he ran to mete them from the tent dore, & fel to the ground
Genesis 18:3 and sayde: Lord yf I haue founde fauoure in thy syght: go not by thy seruaunte.
Genesis 18:4 Let a lytle water be fet, and wash youre fete, and rest youre selues vnder the tree:
Genesis 18:5 And I wyll fet a morsell of breed, to comforte youre hartes withal. And than go your wayes, for euen therfore are ye come to youre seruaunt. And they answered: Do euen so as thou hast said.
Genesis 18:6 And Abraham went a pace in to hys tent vnto Sara and sayd: make redy attonce thre peckes of fyne meale, kneade it and make cakes.
Genesis 18:7 And Abraham ran vnto his beastes & fet a calfe that was tendre and good, & gaue it vnto a yonge man which made it redy attonce.
Genesis 18:8 And he toke butter and mylcke and the calf whyche he had prepared, and set it before them, and stode hym selfe by them vnder the tree: and they ate.
Genesis 18:9 And they sayd vnto hym: Where is Sara thy wyfe? And he sayde: in the tent.
Genesis 18:10 And he sayde: I wyll come agayne vnto the as sone as the frute can lyue. And loo: Sara thy wife shall haue a sonne. That hearde Sara, oute of the tent doore whyche was behynde hys backe.
Genesis 18:11 Abraham and Sara were both olde and well stryken in age, and it ceased to be wyth Sara after the maner as it is with wyues.
Genesis 18:12 And Sara laughed in her selfe sayinge: Now I am waxed olde, shall I geue my self to lust, and my Lorde olde also?
Genesis 18:13 Than sayd the Lord vnto Abraham: wherfore doth Sara laughte sayinge: shall I of a suertie bere a chylde, now when I am olde?
Genesis 18:14 is the thyng to harde for the Lorde to do? In the tyme appoynted wyll I returne vnto the, as sone as the frute can haue lyfe, and Sara shall haue a sonne.
Genesis 18:15 Than Sara denyed it sayinge: I laughed not, for she was afrayde. But he sayde: yes thou laughtest.
Genesis 18:16 Than the men stode vp from thence and loked toward Sodome. And Abraham went with them to brynge them on the way.
Genesis 18:17 And the Lord sayd: Can I hyde from Abraham that thyng whyche I am about to do,
Genesis 18:18 seynge that Abraham shal be a great & a myghtie people, & all the nacions of the erth shalbe blessed in him?
Genesis 18:19 For I know him that he wyl commaunde his chyldren & his houshold after him, that they kepe the way of the Lord, to do after ryght & conscience that the Lord may brynge vpon Abraham that he hath promysed hym.
Genesis 18:20 And the Lord sayd? The crye of Sodome and Gomorra is great, and their synne is excedynge greuous.
Genesis 18:21 I wyll go doune and sea whether they haue done all to gether acordynge to that crye which is come vnto me or not, that I may knowe.
Genesis 18:22 And the men departed thence & went to Sodome ward. But Abraham stode yet before the Lorde,
Genesis 18:23 & drewe nere and sayde. Wylt thou destroy the rightwes wt the wyked?
Genesis 18:24 If there be .l. ryghtwes wyth in the cyte, wylt thou destroy it & not spare the place for the sake of .l. rightwes that are therin?
Genesis 18:25 That be farre from the, that thou shuldest do after this maner, to sley the rightwes wt the wicked, & that the rightwes shuld be as the wicked: that be farre from the. Shulde not the iudge of all the worlde do acordynge to ryghte?
Genesis 18:26 And the Lorde sayde: If I fynde in Sodome .l. ryghtwes wythin the cytie, I wyll spare all the place for their sakes.
Genesis 18:27 And Abraham answered & sayd: behold I haue taken vpon me to speake vnto the Lord, & yet am but dust and asshes.
Genesis 18:28 What though there lacke .v. of .l. ryghtwes, wylt thou destroy al the cyte for lacke of .v.? And he sayde: If I fynde there .xl. and .v. I wil not destroy them.
Genesis 18:29 And he spake vnto hym yet agayn and sayd: what yf there be .xl. founde there. And he sayde: I wyll not do it for fourtyes sake.
Genesis 18:30 And he sayde: O let not my Lorde be angry, that I speake. What yf there be founde .xxx. there? And he sayde: I wyll not do it, yf I fynde .xxx. there.
Genesis 18:31 And he sayd: Oh, se, I haue begonne to speake vnto my Lorde, what yf there be .xx. found there? And he sayd: I wyll not destroye them for twenties sake.
Genesis 18:32 And he sayde: O let not my Lorde be angrye, that I speake yet, but euen once more oulye. What yf ten be found there? And he sayde: I wyll not destroy them for .x. sake.
Genesis 18:33 And the Lorde went hys waye as soone as he had left commimyng wyth Abraham. And Abraham returned vnto hys place.

CHAPTER: 19

Genesis 19:1 And there came .ij. angels to Sodome at euen. And Lot sat at the gate of the cyte. And Lot sawe them, & rose vp to mete them, & he bowed hym self to the ground with hys face.
Genesis 19:2 And he sayde: Se Lordes, turne in I praye you in to youre seruauntes house and tary all nyghte and wash youre fete and ryse vp earlye and go on your wayes. And they sayde: nay, but we wyll byde in the streates all nyghte.
Genesis 19:3 And he compelled them excedingly. And they turned in vnto him & entred in to hys house, and he made them a feaste & dyd bake swete cakes, and they ate.
Genesis 19:4 But before they went to rest, the men of the cyte of Sodome compassed the house rounde about both olde and yonge, al the people from all quarters.
Genesis 19:5 And they called vnto Lot & sayd vnto him: where are the men which came in to thy house to nyght? brynge them oute vnto vs that we maye do our lust with them.
Genesis 19:6 And Lot went out at doores vnto them and shut the dore after hym
Genesis 19:7 & sayd: nay for goddes sake brethren, do not so wickedly.
Genesis 19:8 Behold I haue two doughters whych haue knowne no man, them wyll I brynge out vnto you: do wyth them as it semeth you good: Onlye vnto these men do nothyng, for therfore cam thei vnder the shadowe of my rose.
Genesis 19:9 And they sayde: come hyther. And they sayde: camest thou not into soiourne, and wylt thou be nowe a iudge? we wyl suerly deale worse with the than wyth them. And as they preased sore vpon Lot and beganne to breake vp the doore,
Genesis 19:10 the men put forth their handes and pulled Lot in to the house to them & shut to the doore.
Genesis 19:11 And the men that were at the doore of the house, they smotte wyth blyndnesse both small and greate: so that they coulde not fynde the doore.
Genesis 19:12 And the men sayde moreouer vnto Lot: If thou haue yet here any sonne in law or sonnes or doughters or what so euer thou haste in the cytie, brynge it out of thys place:
Genesis 19:13 for we must destroy thys place, because the crye of them is great before the Lorde. Wherfore he hath sent vs to destroy it.
Genesis 19:14 And Lot went out & spake vnto hys sonnes in lawe which shuld haue maryed his doughters, & sayde: stonde vp & get you out of thys place, for the Lord wyl destroy the cyte. But he semed as though he had mocked, vnto his sonnes in lawe.
Genesis 19:15 And as the mornynge arose the angels caused Lot to spede him sayinge: Stonde vp, take thy wyfe & thy two doughters & that that is at hande, lest thou peryshe in the synne of the cyte.
Genesis 19:16 And as he prolonged the tyme, the men caught both him, his wyfe & his two doughters by the handes, because the Lord was mercyfull vnto him, and they brought hym forth & sette hym wythout the cyte.
Genesis 19:17 When they had brought them out, they sayde: Saue thy lyfe & loke not behynde the nether tary thou in any place of the countre, but saue thy selfe in the mountayn, lest thou perysshe.
Genesis 19:18 Than sayde Lot vnto them: Oh naye my Lord:
Genesis 19:19 behold, in as moch as thy seruaunt hath founde grace in thy syghte, nowe make thy mercy great, whyche thou shewest vnto me in sauing my lyfe. For I can not saue my selfe in the mountayns, lest some misfortune fall vpon me and I dye.
Genesis 19:20 Beholde, here is a cite by, to flee vnto, and it is a lytle one: let me saue my selfe therin: is it not a lytle one, that my soule may lyue?
Genesis 19:21 And he sayd to him: se, I haue receiued thy request as concerning thys thyng, that I wyl not ouerthrowe thys cytie for the which thou hast spoken.
Genesis 19:22 Haste the, and saue thy selfe there, for I can do nothyng tyl thou be come in thyther. And therfore the name of the cyte is called Zoar.
Genesis 19:23 And the sunne was vpon the erth when Lot was entred in to Zoar.
Genesis 19:24 Than the Lorde rayned vpon Sodome and Gomorra, brymstone and fyre from the Lord out of heauen,
Genesis 19:25 & ouerthrewe those cites and al the region, and all that dwelled in the cytes, and that that grewe vpon the erth.
Genesis 19:26 And Lots wyfe loked behynde her, and was turned into a pyllar of salte.
Genesis 19:27 Abraham rose vp early and got hym to the place where he stode before the Lorde,
Genesis 19:28 and loked toward Sodome and Gomorra and towarde all the lande of that contre. And as he loked: behold the smoke of the countre arose as it had bene the smoke of a fornace.
Genesis 19:29 But yet when God destroyed the cyties of the region, he thought vpon Abraham: & sent Lot out from the danger of the ouerthrowinge, when he ouerthrewe the cyties where Lot dwelled.
Genesis 19:30 And Lot departed out of Zoar & dwelled in the mountayns & his .ij. doughters wt hym for he feared to tary in Zoar: he dwelled therfore in a caue, bothe he & his two doughters also.
Genesis 19:31 Than sayd the elder vnto the yonger: our father is olde, and there are no moo men in the erth to come in vnto vs after the maner of al the worlde.
Genesis 19:32 Come therfore, let vs geue our father wyne to dryncke, and let vs lye wt hym that we maye saue seed of oure father.
Genesis 19:33 And they gaue their father wyne to drynke that same nyghte. And the elder doughter went and laye with her father. And he perceyued it not, nether when she lay doune, nether when she rose vp.
Genesis 19:34 And on the morowe the elder sayd vnto the yonger: beholde yesternyght laye I with my father. Let vs geue him wyne to drynke this nyght also, and go thou and lye wyth hym, & let vs saue seed of oure father.
Genesis 19:35 And they gaue their father wyne to dryncke that nyght also. And the yonger arose & laye with hym: and he perceyued it not: nether when she lay doune, nether when she rose vp.
Genesis 19:36 Thus were both the doughters of Lot with chylde by their father.
Genesis 19:37 And the elder bare a sonne, and called hym Moab, whych is the father of the Moabytes vnto thys daye.
Genesis 19:38 And the yonger bare a sonne, & called hym Ben Ammi, whyche is the father of the chyldren of Ammon vnto thys daye.

CHAPTER: 20

Genesis 20:1 And Abraham departed thence toward the southcontrie & dwelled betwene Cades and Sur and soiourned in Gerar.
Genesis 20:2 And Abraham sayde of Sara hys wyfe that she was hys syster. Than Abimelech kyng of Gerar sent and set Sara away.
Genesis 20:3 And God came to Abimelech by nyght in a dreame & sayd vnto him: Se, thou art but a dead man for the womans sake whych thou haste taken awaye, for she is a mans wyfe.
Genesis 20:4 But Abimelech had not yet come nye her, & therfore sayde: Lorde wylt thou sley ryghtewes people?
Genesis 20:5 sayde not he vnto me, that she was hys syster? yea and sayde not she herself that he was her brother? wyth a pure herte and innocent handes haue I done thys.
Genesis 20:6 And God sayde vnto hym in a dreame. I wot it wel that thou dyddest it in the purenesse of thy herte. And therfore I kepte the that thou shouldest not synne agaynst me, nether suffred I the to come nygh her.
Genesis 20:7 Nowe therfore delyuer the man his wyfe agayne, for he is a Prophete. And let him pray for the that thou mayst lyue. But and yf thou delyuer her not agayn, be sure that thou shalt dye the deth, wyth al that thou hast.
Genesis 20:8 Than Abimelech rose vp be tymes in the mornyng and called al his seruauntes, & told all these thynges in their eares, and the men were sore afrayde.
Genesis 20:9 And Abimelech called Abraham and sayd vnto him: What hast thou done vnto us, & what haue I offended the, that thou shouldest brynge on me and on my kingdome so great a synne? thou hast done dedes vnto me that ought not to be done.
Genesis 20:10 And Abimelech sayde moreouer vnto Abraham: What sawest thou that moued the to do thys thynge?
Genesis 20:11 And Abraham answered: I thought that peraduenture the feare of God was not in thys place, & that they shulde sley me for my wyfes sake:
Genesis 20:12 yet in very dede she is my syster, the doughter of my father, but not of my mother: and became my wife.
Genesis 20:13 And after god caused me to wandre out of my fathers house, I sayd vnto her: This kyndnesse shalt thou shewe vnto me in all places where we come, that thou saye of me, howe that I am thy brother.
Genesis 20:14 Than toke Abimelech shepe and oxen, men seruauntes & wemen seruauntes & gaue them vnto Abraham, & delyuered hym Sara hys wyfe agayn.
Genesis 20:15 And Abimelech sayde: beholde the land lyeth before the, dwel where it pleaseth the best.
Genesis 20:16 And vnto Sara he sayde: Se I haue geuen thy brother a thousand peeces of siluer, behold this thing shal be a couering to thyne eyes & vnto al that are wyth the and vnto all men an excuse.
Genesis 20:17 And so Abraham prayd vnto God, & god healed Abimelech and his wyfe and his maydens, so that they bare chyldren.
Genesis 20:18 For the lord had closed to, all the matryces of the house of Abimelech, because of Sara Abrahams wyfe.

CHAPTER: 21

Genesis 21:1 The Lorde vysyted Sara as he had sayd & dyd vnto her acordyng as he had promysed.
Genesis 21:2 And Sara was with chyld and bare Abraham a sonne in hys olde age euen the same season which the Lord had appoynted.
Genesis 21:3 And Abraham called hys sonnes name that was borne vnto hym which Sara bare hym Isaac,
Genesis 21:4 and Abraham circumcysed Isaac hys sonne when he was .viij. dayes olde, as God commaunded hym.
Genesis 21:5 And Abraham was an hundred yere old, when his sonne Isaac was borne vnto him.
Genesis 21:6 And Sara sayd: God hath made me a laughynge stocke: for al that heare, wyl laugh at me.
Genesis 21:7 She sayde all so: who wold haue sayd vnto Abraham, that Sara shulde haue geuen children sucke, or that I shulde haue borne hym a sonne in his olde age:
Genesis 21:8 The child grewe & was weaned, & Abraham made a great feast, the same daye that Isaac was weaned.
Genesis 21:9 Sara sawe the sonne of Hagar the Egyptian whyche she had borne vnto Abraham, a mockynge.
Genesis 21:10 Then she sayde vnto Abraham: put away this bondemaide & her sonne: for the sonne of this bondwoman shall not be heyre with my sonne Isaac:
Genesis 21:11 But the wordes semed verey greauous in Abrahams syghte, because of his sonne.
Genesis 21:12 Than the Lord sayd vnto Abraham: let it not be greauous vnto the, because of the ladd and of thy bondmayde: But in all that Sara hath sayde vnto the, heare her voyce, for in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
Genesis 21:13 Moreouer of the sonne of the bondwoman wyll I make a nacion, because he is thy seed.
Genesis 21:14 And Abraham rose vp early in the mornyng and toke brede & a bottel with water, & gaue it vnto Hagar, puttynge it on her shoulders wyth the lad also, and sent her awaye. And she departed and wandred vp and doune in the wyldernes of Berseba.
Genesis 21:15 When the water was spent that was in the bottel, she cast the lad vnder a bush
Genesis 21:16 and went & sat her out of syghte a great waye, as it were a bow shote of: for she said: I wyl not se the lad dye. And she sat doune out of syghte, and lyfte vp her voyce and wepte.
Genesis 21:17 And God herde the voice of the chyld. And the angel of god called Hagar out of heauen and sayd vnto her: What ayleth the Hagar? Feare not, for god hath herde the voyce of the chyld where he lyeth.
Genesis 21:18 Aryse and lyfte vp the lad, & take him in thy hande, for I wyl make of hym a greate people.
Genesis 21:19 And God opened her eyes and she sawe a well of water. And she went & fylled the bottel wyth water, and gaue the boye drynke.
Genesis 21:20 And God was wyth the lad, & he grewe and dwelt in the wildernesse, and became an archer.
Genesis 21:21 And he dwelt in the wyldernesse of Pharan. And his mother got him a wyfe out of the land of Egypte.
Genesis 21:22 And it chaunced the same season, that Abimelech and Phicol his chefe captaine spake vnto Abraham sayinge: God is with the in al that thou doyst.
Genesis 21:23 Now therfore swere vnto me euen here by god, that thou wylt not hurt me nor my chyldren, nor my chyldrens chyldren. But that thou shalt deale wyth me & the contre where thou art a straunger, acordynge vnto the kyndnesse that I haue sheweth the.
Genesis 21:24 Then sayd Abraham: I wyl swere.
Genesis 21:25 And Abraham rebuked Abimelech for a well of water, whych Abimelechs seruauntes had taken awaye.
Genesis 21:26 And Abimelech answered I wyst not who dyd it: Also thou toldest me not, nether herde I of it, but thys daye.
Genesis 21:27 And Abraham toke shepe and oxen & gaue them vnto Abimelech. And they made both of them a bonde together.
Genesis 21:28 And Abraham set .vij. lambes by them selues.
Genesis 21:29 And Abimelech sayd vnto Abraham: what meane these .vij. lambes which thou hast set by them selues.
Genesis 21:30 And he auswered .vij. lambes shalt thou take of my hand, that it maye be a wytnesse vnto me, that I haue dygged thys well:
Genesis 21:31 Wherfore the place is called Berseba, because they sware both of them.
Genesis 21:32 Thus made they a bonde to gether at Berseba. Than Abimelech & Phicol his chefe Captayne rose vp & turned agayne vnto the lande of the Philistines.
Genesis 21:33 And Abraham planted a wood in Berseba, and called there on the name of the Lorde, the euerlastyng god:
Genesis 21:34 and dwelt in the Philistins land a long season.

CHAPTER: 22

Genesis 22:1 After these dedes, GOD dyd proue Abraham and sayde vnto hym: Abraham. And he answered here am I.
Genesis 22:2 And he sayde: take thy only sonne Isaac whome thou louest, and get the vnto the lande Moria, & sacrifice him there for a sacrifice vpon one of the mountayns whych I wyl shewe the.
Genesis 22:3 Than Abraham rose vp early in the morning and sadled his asse, & toke two of hys meyny with him, & Isaac his sonne: & cloue wod for the sacryfice, and rose vp & got him to the place whyche God had appoynted hym.
Genesis 22:4 The thyrd day Abraham lyfte vp his eyes and sawe the place a farre of,
Genesis 22:5 and sayd vnto hys yong men: byde here with the asse. I and the lad wyll goo yonder and worshyppe and come agayne vnto you.
Genesis 22:6 And Abraham toke the wood of the sacrifyce and layde it vpon Isaac his sonne, and toke fyre in hys hande and a knyfe. And they went both of them together.
Genesis 22:7 Than spake Isaac vnto Abraham his father & sayde: My father? And he answered here am I my sonne. And he sayde: Se here is fyre and wood, but where is the shepe for sacryfice?
Genesis 22:8 And Abraham sayd: my sonne, god wyll prouyde hym a shepe for sacrifice. So went they both together.
Genesis 22:9 And when they came vnto the place whych God shewed hym, Abraham made an aulter there & dressed the wood, & bounde Isaac his sonne & layde him on the aulter, aboue vpon the wood.
Genesis 22:10 And Abraham stretched forth hys hande, and toke the knyfe to haue kylled hys sonne.
Genesis 22:11 Than the angell of the Lorde called vnto him from heauen sayinge: Abraham Abraham? And he answered: here am I.
Genesis 22:12 And he sayde: laye not thy handes vpon the chylde, nether do any thyng at all vnto him, for now I know that thou fearest God, in that thou hast not kepte thyne only sonne from me.
Genesis 22:13 And Abraham lyfted vp hys eyes & loked aboute: and beholde, there was a ram caught by the hornes in a thykette. And he went & toke the ram and offred hym vp for a sacryfyce in the steade of his soune.
Genesis 22:14 And Abraham called the name of the place, the Lorde wyll sea: wherfore it is a comen sayinge thys daye: in the mounte wyl the Lord be sene.
Genesis 22:15 And the Angell of the Lorde cryed vnto Abraham from heauen the second tyme saying:
Genesis 22:16 by my selfe haue I sworne (sayth the Lord) because thou hast done this thynge and hast not spared thy only sonne,
Genesis 22:17 that I wyll blesse the & multiplie thy seed as the starres of heauen and as the sande vpon the sea syde. And thy seed shall possesse the gates of hys enymies.
Genesis 22:18 And in thy seed shal al the nacions of the erth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voyce.
Genesis 22:19 So turned Abraham agayn vnto hys yonge men, and they rose vp and went to gether to Berseba. And Abraham dwelt at Berseba.
Genesis 22:20 And it chaunsed after these thynges, that one tolde Abraham sayng: Behold, Milcha she hath also borne chyldren vnto thy brother Nachor:
Genesis 22:21 Hus hys eldest sonne and Bus hys brother, and Kemuell the father of the Syrians,
Genesis 22:22 and Cesed, and Haso, and Pyldas, and Iedlaph, and Bethuel.
Genesis 22:23 And Bethuel begat Rebecca. These .viij. dyd Milcha bere to Nachor Abrahams brother.
Genesis 22:24 And his concubyne called Rheuma she bare also Tebah, Gaham, Thaas & Maacha.

CHAPTER: 23

Genesis 23:1 Sara was an hundred and .xxvij. yere old (for so long lyued she)
Genesis 23:2 and than dyed in a heade cytye called Hebron in the lande of Canaan. Than Abraham cam to morne Sara, and to wepe for her.
Genesis 23:3 And Abraham stode vp from the coorse, and talked wt the sonnes of Heth saying:
Genesis 23:4 I am a straunger and a foryner among you, geue me a possessyon to burye in with you, that I may bury my dead out of my syght.
Genesis 23:5 And the chyldren of Heth auswered Abraham sayinge vnto hym:
Genesis 23:6 Heare vs lord, thou art a prynce of god amonge vs. In the chefest of our sepulchres bury the dead: None of vs shall forbyd the hys sepulchre, that thou shouldest not burye thy dead therin.
Genesis 23:7 Abraham stode vp, & bowed him selfe before the people of the lande the chyldren of Heth.
Genesis 23:8 And he comond with them sayinge: If it be youre myndes that I shall bury my dead out of my syght, heare me and speke for me to Ephron the sonne of Zoar:
Genesis 23:9 & let hym geue me the dubbyll caue whych he hath in the ende of hys felde, for as moche money as it is worth, let hym geue it me in the presence of you, for a possessyon to burye in.
Genesis 23:10 For Ephron dwelled among the chyldren of Heth. Than Ephron the Hethite answered Abraham in the audience of the chyldren of Heth & of all that went in at the gates of hys cyte, saying:
Genesis 23:11 Not so my Lorde, but heare me: The felde geue I the, & the caue that therin is geue I the also: & euen in the presence of the sonnes of my people geue I it the to bury thy deede in.
Genesis 23:12 Than Abraham bowed hym selfe before the people of the lande,
Genesis 23:13 & spake vnto Ephron in the audience of the people of the contre saying: I pray the heare me, I wyll geue syluer for the felde, take it of me, & so wyl I bury my deed there.
Genesis 23:14 Ephron answered Abraham sayinge vnto hym:
Genesis 23:15 My Lorde, harken vnto me. The lande is worth .iiij. hundred sycles of syluer: but what is that betwyxte the and me? bury thy deed.
Genesis 23:16 And Abraham harkened vnto Ephron & weyde him the syluer which he had sayde in the audience of the sonnes of Heth. Euen .iiij. hundred siluer sycles of currant money among marchauntes.
Genesis 23:17 Thus was the felde of Ephron where in the dubbyl caue is before Mamre: euen the felde and the caue that is therin and al the trees of the feld which growe in al the borders round about, made sur
Genesis 23:18 vnto Abraham for a possessyon, in the syght of the chyldren of Beth, and of all that went in at the gates of the cite.
Genesis 23:19 And then Abraham buryed Sara hys wyfe in the double caue of the felde that lyeth before Mamre, otherwyse called Ebron in the land of Canaan.
Genesis 23:20 And so both the felde and the caue that is therin, was made vnto Abraham a sure possessyon to bury in, of the sonnes of Beth.

CHAPTER: 24

Genesis 24:1 Abraham was old and stryken in dayes, & the Lorde had blessed him in all thynges.
Genesis 24:2 And he sayd vnto his eldest seruaunte of hys house whyche had the rule ouer al that he had Put thy hand vnder my they
Genesis 24:3 that I may make the swere by the Lord that is God of heauen & God of the erth, that thou shalt not take a wyfe vnto my sonne, of the daughters of the Canaanytes, among whych I dwel.
Genesis 24:4 But shalt go vnto my contre and to my kynred, and there take a wyfe vnto my sonne Isaac.
Genesis 24:5 Than sayd the seruaunte vnto him: what & yf the woman wyl not agree to come wyth me vnto thys lande, shal I brynge thy sonne agayn vnto the lande which thou camest out of?
Genesis 24:6 And Abraham sayde vnto him: beware of that, that thou bryng not my sonne thyther.
Genesis 24:7 The Lorde God of heauen whyche toke me from my fathers house and from the lande where I was borne, & whych spake vnto me and sware vnto me sayinge: vnto thy seed wyl I geue thys lande, he shal sende hys angell before the that thou mayste take a wyfe vnto my sonne from thence.
Genesis 24:8 Neuerthelesse yf the woman wyl not agree to come wyth the than shalt thou be with out daunger of thys ooth. But aboue all thinge brynge not my sonne thyther agayne.
Genesis 24:9 And the seruaunt put his hand vnder the thye of Abraham & sware to hym as concernyng that matter.
Genesis 24:10 And the seruaunt toke .x. camels of the camels of his mayster & departed, & had of all maner goodes of his master with him, & stode vp & went to Mesopotamia, vnto the cytie of Nahor.
Genesis 24:11 And made his camels to lye doune wythout the cytie by a wels syde of water, at euen: about the tyme that women come out to drawe water,
Genesis 24:12 and he sayde. Lord God of my master Abraham, sende me good spede thys daye, and shewe mercye vnto my master Abraham.
Genesis 24:13 Lo I stonde here by the well of water and the doughters of the men of thys cytie wyll come out to draw water:
Genesis 24:14 Nowe the damsell to whome I saye, stoupe doune thy pytcher, and let me drinck. If she saye: Dryncke, and I wyll geue thy camels dryncke also, the same is she that thou hast ordened for thy seruaunte Isaac: yea and therby shall I knowe that thou hast shewed mercy on my master.
Genesis 24:15 And it came to passe yer he had left speakynge, that Rebecca cam out, the daughter of Bethuell, sonne to Milca the wyfe of Nahor Abrahams brother, and her pytcher vpon her shoulder:
Genesis 24:16 The damsel was very fayre to loke vpon, and yet a mayd and vnknowen of man. And she went doune to the well and fylled her pytcher and came vp agayne.
Genesis 24:17 Then the seruaunte ranne vnto her and sayde: let me suppe a lytle water of thy pytcher.
Genesis 24:18 And she sayd: dryncke my Lorde. And she hasted and late doune her pytcher vpon her arme & gaue him drincke.
Genesis 24:19 And when she had geuen him drincke, she sayde: I wyll drawe water for thy camels also, vntyll they haue dronck ynough.
Genesis 24:20 And she poured out her pitcher in to the tough hastely, & runne agayn vnto the well, to fet water: and drewe for all hys camels.
Genesis 24:21 And the felowe wondred at her. But helde hys peace, to wete whether the Lorde had made hys iourney prosperous or not.
Genesis 24:22 And as the camels had left drincking, he toke a golden earing of half a sicle weyght, & two bracelettes for her handes, of .x. sycles weyght of gold,
Genesis 24:23 and sayde vnto her: Whose doughter art thou? tell me: is there rowme in thy fathers house for vs to lodge in?
Genesis 24:24 And she sayd vnto him: I am the doughter of Bathuel the sonne of Milcha whyche she bare vnto Nahor:
Genesis 24:25 and sayde moreouer vnto hym: we haue litter and prauonder ynough, and also roume to lodge in.
Genesis 24:26 And the man bowed him self, & worship shypped the Lord,
Genesis 24:27 & sayd: blessed be the lorde God of my master Abraham whych ceasseth not to deale mercyfully & truly wyth my master, & hath brought me the waye to my masters brothers house.
Genesis 24:28 And the damsel ranne & tolde them of her mothers house these thynges.
Genesis 24:29 And Rebecca had a brother called Laban. And Laban ranne out vnto the man, to the wel:
Genesis 24:30 for as sonne as he had sene the earinges and the bracelettes vpon hys systers handes, and hearde the wordes of Rebecca hys syster sayinge thus sayde the man vnto me, then he wente out vnto the man. And loo, he stode yet wyth the camels by the wel syde.
Genesis 24:31 And Laban sayd come in thou blessed of the Lord. Wherefore standest thou wythout? I haue dressed the house, & made rowme for the camels.
Genesis 24:32 And then the man came into the house: & he vnbrideled the camels: & brought litter & prauender for the camels, & water to washe hys fete & their fete that were wt hym,
Genesis 24:33 & ther was meate sette before hym to eate. But he sayed: I wyll not eate, vntyll I haue sayed myne earande. And he sayd: saye on.
Genesis 24:34 And he sayed: I am Abrahams seruant,
Genesis 24:35 and the Lorde hath blessed my master out of measure, that he is become greate, & hath geuen hym shepe oxen, siluer & golde, men seruantes maydeseruantes, camels and asses.
Genesis 24:36 And Sara my masters wife bare him a sonne, when she was olde: & vnto hym hath he geuen al that he hath.
Genesis 24:37 And my master made me swere saying: thou shalt not take a wife to my sonne amonge the doughters of the Cananites in whose lande I dwell.
Genesis 24:38 But thou shalt go vnto my fathers house: & to my kynred, and ther take a wyfe vnto my sonne.
Genesis 24:39 And I said vnto my master: what if the wyfe wyll not folow me?
Genesis 24:40 And he sayed vnto me: The Lorde before whome I walke wyll send hys angell wyth the, and prospere thy iorney that thou shalte take a wife for my sonne, of my kinred, & of my fathers house.
Genesis 24:41 But & if (when thou commest vnto my kynred) they wyl not giue the one, then shalt thou bear no peryll of myne oth.
Genesis 24:42 And I came this day vnto the wel & said: O Lorde, the God of my master Abraham, if it be so that thou makest my iorney which I go, prosperous:
Genesis 24:43 beholde I stand by thys wel of water, and when a virgin commeth forth to drawe water, & I say to hyr: geue me a lyttle water of thy pytcher to dryncke,
Genesis 24:44 and she say agayne to me: dryncke thou, and I wyll also draw water for thy camels: that same is the wyfe whom the Lord hath prepared for my maisters sonne.
Genesis 24:45 And before I had made an ende of speakinge in myne herte: beholde Rebecca came forth, & hir pitcher on hir shoulder, & she went downe vnto the wel & drew. And I sayd vnto hir: giue me drincke.
Genesis 24:46 And she made hast, & toke downe hir pytcher from of hyr & sayed: drincke, & I wyll giue thy camels drinke also.
Genesis 24:47 And I dranke, & she gaue the camels drynke also. And I asked hyr saying: whose daughter art thou? And she answered: the doughter of Bathuel Nahors sonne, whom Milca bare vnto him. And I put the earing vpon hir face & the bracelets vpon hir handes.
Genesis 24:48 And I bowed my selfe. & worshypped the Lorde, & blessed the Lorde God of my master Abraham which had brought me the ryght waye, to take my masters brothers doughter vnto hys sonne.
Genesis 24:49 Now therfore if ye wyll deale mercifully and truly wyth my master, tel me, and if not tell me also: that I maye turne me to the, right hand or to the lyft,
Genesis 24:50 Then answered Laban & Bethuel saying: The thing is proceaded euen out of the Lord, we can not therfore say vnto the, either good or bad:
Genesis 24:51 behold Rebecca before thy face, take hyr & go, and let hyr be thy maisters sonnes wyfe, euen as the Lord hath sayed.
Genesis 24:52 And when Abrahams seruaunt hearde theyr wordes, he bowed him selfe vnto the Lorde, flatte vpon the earth.
Genesis 24:53 And the seruaunt toke forthe iewels of siluer, & iewels of golde, & rayment, & gaue them to Rebecca: but vnto hyr brother, & to hir mother he gaue spyces.
Genesis 24:54 And then they ate and dranke both he & the men that were wt him, and taried al nyght and rose vp in the mornyng. And he sayed: let me depart vnto my master.
Genesis 24:55 But hir brother and hir mother sayed: let the damsel abyde with vs a whyle, & it be but euen ten dayes, and then go the wayes.
Genesis 24:56 And he sayed vnto them: hinder me not for the Lord hath prospered my iorney. Sende me awaye that I may go vnto my master.
Genesis 24:57 And they sayd: let vs call the damsell, & witt what she saith to the matter.
Genesis 24:58 And they called forth Rebecca, and said vnto hyr: wilte thou go wyth this man? And she sayed: yea.
Genesis 24:59 So they let Rebecca theyr syster go wyth hir nurse & Abrahams seruaunte, & the men that were wyth him.
Genesis 24:60 And they blessed Rebecca, & sayd vnto hyr: Thou art oure syster growe into thousande thousandes, and thy seed possesse the gates of theyr enemies.
Genesis 24:61 And Rebecca arose & hir damsels, & sat them vp vpon the camels, & went theyr way after the man. And the seruaunt toke Rebecca, & went his way.
Genesis 24:62 And Isaac was a commynge from the wel of the lyuynge & seynge, for he dwelt in the south contrey,
Genesis 24:63 & was gone out to walke in his meditations before the euen tide. And he lift vp his eyes & loked, and beholde the camels were comming.
Genesis 24:64 And Rebecca lyft vp hir eyes & when she sawe Isaac, she lighted of the camel,
Genesis 24:65 & sayd vnto the seruaunt: what man is this that cometh against vs in the feld? And the seruaunt sayd: it is my master. And then she toke hyr mantil, & put it about hyr.
Genesis 24:66 And the seruaunt tolde Isaac all that he had done.
Genesis 24:67 Then Isaac broughte hir into hys mother Saras tente, and toke Rebecca, and she became hys wyfe. & he loued hir: & so was Isaac comforted ouer hys mother.

CHAPTER: 25

Genesis 25:1 Abraham toke hym an other wife called Ketura,
Genesis 25:2 whyche bare hym Simran, Iecksan, Medan Midian, Iesback and Suah.
Genesis 25:3 And Iecksan begat Seba & Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Assurim, Letusim & Leumim.
Genesis 25:4 And the sonns of Midian were Epha, Epher, Hanoch, Abida & Clda. All these were the children of Ketura.
Genesis 25:5 But Abraham gaue all that he had vnto Isaac.
Genesis 25:6 And vnto the sonnes of hys concubynes he gaue gyftes, and sent them away from Isaac hys sonne (whyle he yet lyued) eastwarde vnto the east contrye.
Genesis 25:7 These are the dayes of the life of Abraham which he liued: an hundred & .lxxv. yere,
Genesis 25:8 and then fell sycke & dyed in a lusty age (when he had liued inough) & was put vnto his people.
Genesis 25:9 And hys sonnes Isaac & Ismael buried hym in the double caue in the felde of Ephron sonne of Zoar the Hethite before Mamre.
Genesis 25:10 Which field Abraham bought of the sonnes of Heth: There was Abraham buried & Sara hys wyfe.
Genesis 25:11 And after the death of Abraham God blessed Isaac hys sonne, whych dwelled by the well of lyuynge and seynge.
Genesis 25:12 These are the generations of Ismael Abrahams sonne, whych Hagar the Egyptian Saras handmaide bare vnto Abraham.
Genesis 25:13 And these are the names of the sonnes of Ismael, with theyr names in theyr kynreddes. The eldest sonne of Ismael Neuaioth, then Cedar, Adbeel, Mibsam,
Genesis 25:14 Misma, Duma, Masa,
Genesis 25:15 Hadar, Thema Ietur Naphis & Kedma:
Genesis 25:16 These are the sonnes of Ismael, & these are their names, in their townes & castels .xij. princes of nations.
Genesis 25:17 And these are the yeres of the life of Ismael, an hundred & .xxxvij. yere, & then he fel sycke & died, & was laied vnto his people.
Genesis 25:18 And he dwelte from Euila to Sur that is before Egypte, as men go towarde the Assirians. And he dyed in the presence of all hys brethren.
Genesis 25:19 And these are the generations of Isaac, Abrahams sonne: Abraham begat Isaac.
Genesis 25:20 And Isaac was .xl. yere old when he toke Rebecca to wyfe, the doughter of Bethuel the Sirian of Mesopotamia & sister to Laban the Sirien.
Genesis 25:21 And Isaac made intercession vnto the Lord for his wife, bicause she was barren: and the Lord was entreated of hym, & Rebecca hys wyfe conceyued:
Genesis 25:22 & the chyldren stroue togyther wythin hir. Then she sayed: if it should go so to pas, what helpeth it that I am with chylde? And she went & axed the Lorde.
Genesis 25:23 And the Lorde sayed vnto hyr: there are two maner of people in thy wombe, & two nations shall spryng out of thy bowels, and the one nation shal be mightyer then the other, & the eldest shalbe seruant vnto the yonger.
Genesis 25:24 And when hir tyme was come to be deliuered: behold there were two twynes in hir wombe.
Genesis 25:25 And he that came out fyrst was redde & rough ouer al as it were an hyde: and they called hys name Esau.
Genesis 25:26 And afterward hys brother came out, & his hand holding Esau by the hele. Wherefore his name was called Iacob. And Isaac was .lx. yere old when she bare them:
Genesis 25:27 & the boyes grewe, & Esau became a conynge hunter, and a tyl man. But Iacob was a simple man, & dwelled in the tentes
Genesis 25:28 Isaac loued Esau bicause he dyd eate of his venison, but Rebecca loued Iacob.
Genesis 25:29 Iacob sod potage, & Esau came from the feld and was fainety,
Genesis 25:30 & sayd to Iacob: let me sup of the redde potage, for I am faynty. And therfore was his name called Edom.
Genesis 25:31 And Iacob sayd: sell me thys day thy byrthryght.
Genesis 25:32 And Esau answered: Lo, I am at the poynte to dye, & what profit shall this byrthryghte do me?
Genesis 25:33 And Iacob said swere to to me then this day. And he swore to him, & solde hys byrthryght vnto Iacob.
Genesis 25:34 Then Iacob gaue Esau bread & potage of redde ryse. And he eat and dronke & rose vp, & wente hys waye. And so Esau regarded not hys byrthryght.

CHAPTER: 26

Genesis 26:1 And there fel a derth in the land passyng the fyrst derth that fell in the dayes of Abraham. Wherfore Isaac wente vnto Abimelech kynge of the Phylystyans vnto Gerar.
Genesis 26:2 Then the Lord appeared vnto hym and sayed: Go not downe into Egypte but hyde in the lande whych I say vnto the:
Genesis 26:3 soiourne in thys lande, and I wyll be wyth the, and wyll blesse the: for vnto the, and vnto thy seed, I wil giue al these contryes. And I wyl perfourme the oth which I sware vnto Abraham thy father,
Genesis 26:4 & wyl multiply thy sede as the stars of heauen, & will gyue vnto thy sede al these contries. And thorow thi sede shal all the nacions of the earth be blessed,
Genesis 26:5 because that Abraham herkened vnto my voyce, & kepe myne ordinaunces, commaundementes, statutes and lawes.
Genesis 26:6 And Isaac dwelled in Gerar.
Genesis 26:7 And the men of the place asked him of his wife, & he said that she was hys sister: for he feared to call hyr his wyfe, lest the men of the place shold haue killed him for hir sake, bicause she was beutiful to the eye.
Genesis 26:8 And it happened after he had bene there long tyme, that Abimelech kynge of the Philistians loked out at a wyndow, & sawe Isaac sportyng wt Rebecca hys wife.
Genesis 26:9 And Abimelech sente for Isaac, & sayed: see, she is of a suretye thy wyfe, & why saydest thou that she was thy sister? And Isaac said vnto hym: I thought that I myght peraduenture haue dyed for her sake.
Genesis 26:10 Then sayd Abimelech: why haste thou done this vnto vs? one of the people myghte lyghtlye haue lyne by thy wife, and so shuldest thou haue brought synne vpon vs.
Genesis 26:11 Than Abimelech charged all his people, saying: he that toucheth this man or his wyfe, shall suerlie dye for it.
Genesis 26:12 And Isaac sowed in that lande, & found in that same yere an .C. bushels: for the Lorde blessed hym,
Genesis 26:13 & the man waxed myghty, and went forth and grewe tyll he was exceading greate,
Genesis 26:14 that he had possession of shepe, of oxen, and a mighty housholde: so that the Philistians had enuye at hym:
Genesis 26:15 in so muche that they stopped and filled vp wyth earth al the welles whyche hys fathers seruantes digged in hys father Abrahams tyme.
Genesis 26:16 Then sayed Abimelech vnto Isaac: gett the from me, for thou art myghtier then we a great deale.
Genesis 26:17 Then Isaac departed thence, & pitched his tente in the valey Gerar, & dwelt there.
Genesis 26:18 And Isaac digged againe the welles of water which they digged in the dayes of Abraham his father, which the Philistians had stopped after the death of Abraham, & gaue them the same nams which his father gaue them.
Genesis 26:19 As Isaacs seruauntes digged in the valay, they found a wel of liuing water,
Genesis 26:20 And the herdmen of Gerar did stryue with Isaacs herdmen, saying: the water is ours. Then called he the well Eseck, bicause they stroue with him.
Genesis 26:21 Then digged they an other well, & they stroue for that also. Therfore called he it Sitena.
Genesis 26:22 And then he departed thence, & digged another wel for that which they stroue not: therfore called he it Rehoboth, saying: the Lorde hath now made vs rowme, & we ar encreased vpon the earth.
Genesis 26:23 Afterwarde departed he thence and came to Bersaba.
Genesis 26:24 And the Lorde appeared vnto hym the same nyght, & sayd: I am the God of Abraham thy father, feare not for I am wyth the, and wyll blesse the, and multiply thy sede for my seruaunt Abrahams sake.
Genesis 26:25 And then he builded an aultare there, and called vpon the name of the Lord, and there pitched hys tent. And ther Isaacs seruauntes digged a well.
Genesis 26:26 Then came Abimelech to hym from Gerar & Ahusath his frende and Phitol hys chyefe captayne.
Genesis 26:27 And Isaac sayd vnto them: wherfore come ye to me, seyng ye hate me & haue put me away from you?
Genesis 26:28 Then sayed they: we sawe that the Lorde was wyth the, & therfore we sayed that there should be an oothe betwexte vs & the, & that we woulde make a bond wyth the,
Genesis 26:29 that thou shouldest do vs no hurt, as we haue not touched the, and haue done vnto the nothynge but good, & sent the away in peace: for thou art nowe the blessed of the Lorde.
Genesis 26:30 And he made them a feast, and they ate & dronke.
Genesis 26:31 And they rose vp by tymes in the morninge, and sware one to an other, And Isaac sent them away. And they departed from hym in peace.
Genesis 26:32 And that same daye came Isaacs seruauntes, & told hym of a well whych they had dygged: and said vnto him, that they had found water.
Genesis 26:33 And he called it Seba, wherfore the name of the cyty is called Berseba vnto thys daye.
Genesis 26:34 When Esau was .xl. yere old, he toke to wyfe Iudith the doughter of Bery an Hethyte, & Basmath the doughter of Elou an Hethite,
Genesis 26:35 also whyche were disobedient vnto Isaac and Rebecca.

CHAPTER: 27

Genesis 27:1 And it came to passe that Isaac wexed olde and hys eyes were dymme, so that he coulde not see. Then called he Esau his eldest sonne & sayed vnto him: my sonne. And he sayd vnto hym: here am I.
Genesis 27:2 And he sayed: beholde, I am old, & know not the day of my death:
Genesis 27:3 now therfore take thy weapens, thy quiuer & thy bowe, & gette the to the fyeldes, and take me some venison,
Genesis 27:4 and make me meate suche as I loue, and brynge it me, and let me eat that my soule may blesse the before that I dye.
Genesis 27:5 But Rebecca hearde when Isaac spake to Esau hys sonne. And as sone as Esau was gone to the fielde to catche venyson, and to bryng it,
Genesis 27:6 she spake to Iacob hir sonne saying? Beholde I haue heard thy father talking with Esau thy brother & saying:
Genesis 27:7 bringe me venyson & make me meate that I may eate and blesse the before the Lord yer I dye.
Genesis 27:8 Now therfore my sonne heare my voice in that whiche I commaunde the:
Genesis 27:9 gette the to the flocke, & bryng me thence two good kyddes, and I wyll make meate of them for thy father, such as he loueth.
Genesis 27:10 And thou shalt brynge it to thy father, & he shall eate, that he may blesse the before hys death.
Genesis 27:11 Then said Iacob to Rebecca his mother: beholde, Esau my brother is rough, & I am smooth.
Genesis 27:12 My father shall peraduenture fele me, & I shal seme vnto him as though I went about to begyle hym, & so shall he brynge a cursse vpon me, & not a blessing:
Genesis 27:13 & his mother sayd vnto hym: Vpon me be thy cursse my sonne, onely heare my voyce, & go & fetch me them.
Genesis 27:14 And Iacob went & fet them, & brought them to his mother. And his mother made meat of them, accordyng as hys father loued.
Genesis 27:15 And she went and fet goodlye raymente of hir eldest sonne Esau, which she had in the house with hir, and put theym vpon Iacob hir yongest sonne,
Genesis 27:16 and she putte the skynnes vpon hys handes, and vpon the smooth of hys necke.
Genesis 27:17 And she putt the meate and breade whyche she had made in the handes of hyr son Iacob.
Genesis 27:18 And he went in to his father saying: my father. And he answered: here am I: who arte thou my sonne?
Genesis 27:19 And Iacob said vnto his father: I am Esau thi eldest sonne, I haue done according as thou baddest me: vp & sit, & eat of my venison, that thy soule may blesse me.
Genesis 27:20 But Isaac sayd vnto his sonne: how commeth it that thou hast found it so quickely my sonne? He answered. The Lord thi God brought it to my hande.
Genesis 27:21 Then sayd Isaac vnto Iacob: come nere and let me fele the mi sonne, whether thou be my sonne Esau or not.
Genesis 27:22 Then went Iacob to Isaac his father, and he felt him & said: the voice is Iacobs voice, but the handes are the handes of Esau.
Genesis 27:23 And he knewe hym not, bicause hys handes were rough as his brother Esaus handes: & so he blessed hym.
Genesis 27:24 And he axed him: art thou my sonne Esau? And he said that I am.
Genesis 27:25 Then said he: brynge me & let me eate of my sonnes venison, that my soule mai blesse the. And he brought him & he ate. And he brought him wine also, & he dranke.
Genesis 27:26 And his father Isaac saied vnto hym: come nere, & kisse me my sonne.
Genesis 27:27 And he wente vnto him and kissed him. And he smelled the sauour of hys rayment, & blessed hym, and sayd: Se, the smel of my sonne is as the smell of a fyld which the Lorde hath blessed.
Genesis 27:28 God giue the he dewe of heauen, & of the fatnes of the earth, & plenty of corne & wine.
Genesis 27:29 People be thy seruauntes, & nations bowe vnto the. Be Lord ouer thy brethren, & thy mothers chyldren stoupe vnto the. Curssed be he that curseth the, & blessed be he that blesseth the.
Genesis 27:30 As sone as Isaac had made an ende of blesinge, Iacob was scace gone out from the presence of Isaac his father: then came Esau his brother from his huntynge,
Genesis 27:31 & had made also meate, & brought it vnto hys father, & sayed vnto hym. Aryse my father, and eate of thy sonnes venison, that thy soule may blesse me.
Genesis 27:32 Then his father Isaac saied vnto him: who art thou? he answered: I am thy eldest sonne Esau.
Genesis 27:33 And Isaac was greatly astonied oute of measure, & sayed. Where is he then that hath hunted venison and brought it me, & I haue eaten of all before thou camest, & haue blessed hym, & he shall be blessed styll.
Genesis 27:34 When Esau herd the wordes of hys father, he cryed out greatly & bytterly aboue measure, & said vnto his father: blesse me also mi father.
Genesis 27:35 And he sayd: thy brother came wyth subtilty, & hath taken away thy blessinge.
Genesis 27:36 Then sayed he: He maye well be called Iacob, for he hath vndermined me now two tymes, fyrste he toke away my byrthryght: & se, nowe hathe he taken away my blessynge also. And he sayed, hast thou kept neuer a blessyng for me?
Genesis 27:37 Isaac answered and saied vnto Esau: behold I haue made hym thy Lord, and al his mothers children haue I made his seruantes. Moreouer with corne & wyne haue I stablyshed him, what can I do vnto the now my sonne?
Genesis 27:38 And Esau sayd vnto his father: haste thou but the one blessing my father? blesse me also my father: so lifted vp Esau hys voyce and wept.
Genesis 27:39 Then Isaac his father answered & sayd vnto him: behold thy dwellyng place shall haue of the fatnes of the earth, and of the dewe of heauen from aboue.
Genesis 27:40 And with thy swerd shalt thou liue, & shalt be thy brothers seruaunt. But the time wil come, when thou shalt get the mastry, & louse hys yocke from of thy necke.
Genesis 27:41 And Esau hated Iacob, bicause of the blessyng that hys father blessed hym with all, & sayed in hys hert. The dayes of my fathers sorowes are at hand, for I wyll slea my brother Iacob.
Genesis 27:42 And these wordes of Esau hyr eldest sonne were tolde to Rebecca. And she sent & called Iacob hyr yongest sonne, & said vnto him: beholde thy brother Esau threateneth to kyll the:
Genesis 27:43 now therfore my sonne hear my voyce, make the redy, & fle to Laban my brother at Haran:
Genesis 27:44 & tary wyth hym a whyle vntil thy brothers fearcnes be swaged,
Genesis 27:45 & vntyl thy brothers wrath turne away from the and he forget that whiche thou hast done to hym. Then wyl I send & fet the away from thence. Why should I losse you boeth in one daye.
Genesis 27:46 And Rebecca spake to Isaac: I am werye of my life, for feare of the doughters of Heth. If Iacob take a wife of the doughters of Heth, such one as these are, or of the daughters of the land, what lust shold I haue to lyue.

CHAPTER: 28

Genesis 28:1 Then Isaac called Iacob hys sonne and blessed hym, and charged hym, and sayed vnto hym: se thou take not a wyfe of the daughters of Canaan,
Genesis 28:2 but aryse and gette the to Mesapotamia to the house of Bethuel thy mothers father: & ther take the a wyfe of the daughters of Laban thy mothers brother.
Genesis 28:3 And God almyghty blesse the, encrease the, and multiply the that thou mayst be a numbre of people,
Genesis 28:4 and giue the the blessing of Abraham: both to the, and to thy sede with the, that thou mayst possesse the Lande (wherein thou arte a straunger) whych God gaue vnto Abraham
Genesis 28:5 Thus Isaac sent forth Iacob, to go to Messapotamia vnto Laban, sonne of Bethuell the Sirien, and brother to Rebecca Iacobs and Esaus mother.
Genesis 28:6 When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Iacob, & sent him to Mesopotamia, to fet him a wyfe thence, & that as he blessed him he gaue him a charge, saying: se thou take not a wife of the daughters of Canaan:
Genesis 28:7 and that Iacob had obeyed hys father and mother, & was gone vnto Mesopotamia:
Genesis 28:8 and seynge also that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac hys father:
Genesis 28:9 then went he vnto Ismael, and toke vnto the wyues whyche he had Mahala the daughter of Ismaell Abrahams sonne, the sister of Nabaioth to be hys wyf
Genesis 28:10 Iacob departed from Berseba, and wente towarde Haran,
Genesis 28:11 and came vnto a place, and taried there al nyght, bycause the sunne was downe. And toke a stone of the place, & put it vnder hys head, and layed hym downe in the same place to slepe.
Genesis 28:12 And he dreamed: and behold there stode a ladder vpon the earth, & the toppe reached vp to heauen. And see, the angels of God went vp and downe vpon it,
Genesis 28:13 yea, & the Lord stod vpon it, and sayed. I am the Lorde God of Abraham thy father, & the God of Isaac. The land whiche thou sleapest vpon wyl I gyue the & thy sede.
Genesis 28:14 And thy sede shal be as the dust of the earth: and thou shalt spreade abrode: weste, easte, north, and south. And thorowe the and thy sede shal al the kynreds of the earth be blessed.
Genesis 28:15 And se I am wyth the, and wyll be thy keper in all places whyther thou goest, and wyll brynge the agayne into thys land: neither wyll I leaue the vntyll I haue made good all that I haue promised the.
Genesis 28:16 When Iacob was awaked out of his slepe he sayd: surely the Lord is in this place, & I was not aware.
Genesis 28:17 And he was afrayed & said: howe fearfull is this place? it is none other: but euen the house of god, & the gate of heauen.
Genesis 28:18 And Iacob stode vp early in the morning, & toke the stone that he hadde laied vnder his head, and pitched it vpon the ende, and poured oyle vpon the top of it:
Genesis 28:19 And he called the name of the place Bethell, for in dede the name of the city was called Lus
Genesis 28:20 before time And Iacob vowed a vowe sayinge: If God wyll be wyth me, and wyll kepe me in thys iourney whyche I goo, and wyll gyue me breade to eate, and clothes to put on,
Genesis 28:21 so that I come againe vnto mi fathers house in saftye, then shall the Lorde be my God,
Genesis 28:22 & thys stone whyche I haue sette vp an ende, shall be Goddes house: and of all that thou shalte gyue me, wyll I gyue the tenth vnto the.

CHAPTER: 29

Genesis 29:1 Then Iacob lyfte vp hys fete, and wente towarde the east coutrye.
Genesis 29:2 And as he loked aboute, beholde there was a well in the fylde, and thre flockes of shepe laye thereby (for at that well were the flockes watered) and ther lay a greate stone at the well mouth.
Genesis 29:3 And the maner was to bryng the flocke thethers, and to roull the stone frome the welles mouthe, and to water the shepe, and to put the stone agayne vppon the welles mouthe vnto his place.
Genesis 29:4 And Iacob sayed vnto them: brethren whence be ye? And they sayed: of Haran are we.
Genesis 29:5 And he sayed vnto theym: knowe ye Laban the sonne of Nahor? And they sayed: we know hym.
Genesis 29:6 And he sayed vnto theim: is he in good healthe. And they sayed he is in good healthe: and beholde hys Daughter Rachell cometh wyth the shepe.
Genesis 29:7 And he sayed: lo, it is a greate whyle to nyght, neyther is it tyme that the catell shoulde be gathered togyther: water the shepe, and go & fede them.
Genesis 29:8 And they sayed: we may not, vntyll all the flockes be brought togyther, and the stone be rolled from the welles mouthe, and so we water our shepe.
Genesis 29:9 While he yet talked with them, Rahel came wyth hyr fathers shepe, for she kepte them.
Genesis 29:10 As sone as Iacob sawe Rahell, the doughter of Laban hys mothers brother, & the shepe of Laban hys mothers brother, he went & rolled the stone from the wels mouth, & watered the shepe of Laban his mothers brother.
Genesis 29:11 And Iacob kissed Rahell, & lyfte vp hys voyce & wepte:
Genesis 29:12 and told hir also that he was hyr fathers brother & Rebeccas sonne. Then Rahell ranne and told hir father.
Genesis 29:13 When Laban heard tell of Iacab hys sisters sonne, he ran to mete hym, & embraced him & kissed him, & brought him to his house And then Iacob tolde Laban all the matter.
Genesis 29:14 And then Laban said: wel, thou art my bone & my flesh. Abide with me the space of a moneth.
Genesis 29:15 And afterward Laban sayed vnto Iacob: Though thou be my brother shouldest thou therfore serue me for nought? Tell me what shal thy wages be?
Genesis 29:16 And Laban had .ij. daughters, the eldest called Lea & the yongest Rahel.
Genesis 29:17 Lea was tender eyed, but Rahell was beutifull & well fauoured.
Genesis 29:18 And Iacob loued hyr well, and sayd: I wyl serue the seuen yere for Rahel thy yongest doughter.
Genesis 29:19 And Laban answered, it is better that I gyue hyr the then to to an other manne: byde therefore wyth me.
Genesis 29:20 And Iacob serued .vij. yere for Rahell, and they semed vnto hym but a fewe dayes, for the loue he had to hyr.
Genesis 29:21 And Iacob sayed vnto Laban: gyue me my wyfe that I maye lye wyth hyr. For the tyme appoynted me is come.
Genesis 29:22 Then Laban bade al men of that place, & made a feast.
Genesis 29:23 And when euen was come, he toke Lea hys doughter & brought hir to him & he went in vnto hyr.
Genesis 29:24 And Laban gaue vnto hys doughter Lea, Zilpha hys mayd, to be hyr seruaunt.
Genesis 29:25 And when the morning was come, behold it was Lea. Then saied he to Laban: wherefore hast thou played thus wt me? did not I serue the for Rahell, wherfore then hast thou begyled me?
Genesis 29:26 Laban answered: it is not the maner of thys place to mary the yongest before the eldest.
Genesis 29:27 Passe out this weke & then shal thys also be geuen the for the seruice which thou shalt serue me yet .vij. yeres more.
Genesis 29:28 And Iacob did euen so, & passed out that weke, & then he gaue him Rahel his doughter to wyfe also.
Genesis 29:29 And Laban gaue to Rahell hys doughter, Bilha hys handmayd to be hir seruaunte.
Genesis 29:30 So lay he by Rahell also, & loued Rahell more then Lea, and serued hym yet .vij. yere more.
Genesis 29:31 When the Lord sawe that Lea was despised he made hyr fruitful: but Rahel was baren.
Genesis 29:32 And Lea conceaued & bare a sonne, & called eys name Ruben, for she sayd: the Lorde hath loked vpon my tribulation. And nowe my husband wyll loue me.
Genesis 29:33 And she conceaued agayne & bare a sonne, and sayd: the Lorde hath hearde that I am despysed, & hath therfore geuen me thys Sonne also, & she called hym Simeon.
Genesis 29:34 And she conceaued yet, and bare a sonne and sayed: now thys once wyll my husbande kepe me companye, bycause I haue borne him thre sonnes: and therfore she called hys name Leui.
Genesis 29:35 And she conceyued yet agayne, and bare a sonne sayinge: nowe wyll I prayse the Lorde: therfore she called hys name Iuda, and left bearyng.

CHAPTER: 30

Genesis 30:1 When Rahel sawe that she bare Iacab no chyldren, she enuied hyr sister, and sayd vnto Iacob Geue me children, or els I am but dead.
Genesis 30:2 Then was Iacob wroth wyth Rahel saying. Am I in Godds stede whyche kepeth from the, the fruite of thy wombe?
Genesis 30:3 Then she said: here is my maid Bylha: go in vnto hyr, that she maye beare vpon my lappe, that I may be encreased by hyr.
Genesis 30:4 And she gaue hym Bilha hyr handmaid to wyfe. And Iacob wente in vnto hyr:
Genesis 30:5 and Bylha conceaued and bare Iacob a sonne.
Genesis 30:6 Then said Rahel. God hath gyuen sentence on my syde, & hath also heard my voyce, and hath geuen me a sonne. Therefore called she him Dan.
Genesis 30:7 And Bylha Rahels mayd conceaued agayne, and bare Iacob an other sonne.
Genesis 30:8 And Rahel sayd: God is turned, and I haue made a chaunge wyth my syster, and haue gotten the vpper hande. And she called hys name: Nepthaly.
Genesis 30:9 When Lea sawe that she had left bearing she toke Silpha hyr mayd, and gaue hyr Iacob to wyfe.
Genesis 30:10 And Silpha Leas mayed bare Iacob a sonne.
Genesis 30:11 Then sayed Lea: Good luck: & called his name Gad.
Genesis 30:12 And Silpha Leas mayd bare Iacob an other sonne.
Genesis 30:13 Then sayd Lea: happy am I, for the doughters wil call me blessed. And called his name Asser.
Genesis 30:14 And Ruben wente out in the wheate haruest, and founde mandragoras in the fyldes, and brought them vnto his mother Lea Then sayd Rahel to Lea giue me of thy sonnes mandragoras.
Genesis 30:15 And Lea answered. Is it not inoughe that thou haste taken away my husband, but wouldest take away my sons mandragoras also. Then sayed Rahel: wel, let hym slepe wyth the thys nyghte, for thy sonnes mandragoras.
Genesis 30:16 And when Iacob came from the fyeldes at euen, Lea wente oute to mete hym, and sayed: come in to me, for I haue bought the wyth my sonnes mandragoras. And he slept wyth hyr that nyght.
Genesis 30:17 And God hearde Lea, that shee conceaued and bare vnto Iacob the fyft sonne.
Genesis 30:18 Then sayed Lea. God hath geuen me my rewarde, bycause I gaue my mayden to my husbande, and she called hym Isachar.
Genesis 30:19 And Lea conceaued yet agayne, and bare Iacob the syxt sonne.
Genesis 30:20 Then sayed she. God hath endewed me wyth a good dowrye. Nowe wyll my husbande dwell wyth me, bycause I haue borne him syxe sonnes: and called hys name Zabulon.
Genesis 30:21 After that she bare a daughter, & called hyr Dina.
Genesis 30:22 And God remembred Rahel, heard hir, & made hyr fruitefull:
Genesis 30:23 so that she conceaued & bare a sonne & said: God hath taken away my rebuke.
Genesis 30:24 And she called hys name Ioseph, saying. The Lord giue me yet an other sonne.
Genesis 30:25 As sone as Rahel had borne Ioseph, Iacob said to Laban. Send me awaye that I may go vnto myne own place & contrey,
Genesis 30:26 gyue me my wiues & my children for whom I haue serued the, and let me goo: for thou knowest what seruice I haue done the.
Genesis 30:27 Then sayd Laban vnto hym: If I haue founde fauoure in thy syght (for I suppose that the Lorde hath blessed me for thy sake)
Genesis 30:28 apoint what thy rewarde shall be, and I will geue it the.
Genesis 30:29 But he sayde vnto hym: thou knoweste what seruyce I haue done the, and in what takyng the catell haue bene vnder me:
Genesis 30:30 For it was but lytle that thou haddest before I came, & now it is increased into a multytude, & the Lord hath blessed the for my sake. But now when shal I make prouision for myne owne house also.
Genesis 30:31 And he sayd: what shall I then geue the? And Iacob answered: thou shalt geue me nothyng at al, if thou wylt do thys one thynge for me: and then wyll I turne agayne, and fede thy shepe and kepe them.
Genesis 30:32 I will go aboute all thy shepe thys day, & seperate from them all the shepe that are spotted & of diuers colours, & all blacke sheepe among the lambes, & the party, and the spotted among the kyddes: & the same shall be my reward.
Genesis 30:33 So shall my ryghtuousnes answere for me: when the tyme cometh that I shal receiue mi reward of the: so that whatsoeuer is not speckled & party amonge the gotes & blacke among the lambes, let that be theft with me.
Genesis 30:34 Then sayd Laban: Loo, I am content, that it be accordyng as thou hast sayed.
Genesis 30:35 And he toke out that same daye the he gootes that were party & of diuers colours, and all the she gootes that were spotted, & party coloured, & all that had whyte in them, & all the blacke amonge the Lambes: & put theim in the kepynge of hys Sonnes,
Genesis 30:36 and sette three dayes iourney betwyxte hym selfe and Iacob. Ind so Iacob kepte the reste of Labans shepe.
Genesis 30:37 Iacob toke roddes of grene popular, hasel & of chestnottrees, & pylled white strakes in them, & made the white apeare in the staues:
Genesis 30:38 And he put the staues whiche he had pilled, euen before the shepe in the gutters & watring troughes, when the shepe came to dryncke: that they shold conceyue when they came to drynke.
Genesis 30:39 And the shepe conceyued before the staues, & brought forth straked, spotted, and party.
Genesis 30:40 Then Iacob parted the lambes and turned the faces of the shepe toward the spotted things, & toward al maner of blake thinges thorow out the flockes of Laban. And he made him flockes of his own by them selfe, whiche he put not vnto the flockes of Laban.
Genesis 30:41 And alwaye in firste buckinge tyme of the shepe, Iacob put the staues before the shepe in the gutters, that they might conceyue before the staues:
Genesis 30:42 but in the later bucking time he put them not ther: so the laste brode was Labans, & the fyrst Iacobs.
Genesis 30:43 And the manne became exceading rich and had many shepe, mayedseruauntes, menseruauntes, camels and asses.

CHAPTER: 31

Genesis 31:1 And Iacob hearde the wordes of Labans sonnes howe they sayed: Iacob hathe taken awaye all that was our fathers & of our fathers goods hath he gotten all hys honour.
Genesis 31:2 And Iacob beheld the countenaunce of Laban, that it was not toward hym as it was in tymes paste.
Genesis 31:3 And the Lorde sayed vnto Iacob: turne agayne into the Land of thy fathers & to thy kynred, & I wyll be wyth the.
Genesis 31:4 Then Iacob sent & called Rahell & Lea to the fyelde vnto hys shepe,
Genesis 31:5 & sayd vnto them: I se your fathers countenaunce, that it is not towarde me as in tymes past. Moreouer the god of my father hath bene wyth me.
Genesis 31:6 And ye know how that I haue serued your father with al mi might.
Genesis 31:7 And your father hath deceyued me, & chaunged mi wages .x. times: but God suffred him not to hurt me.
Genesis 31:8 When he sayed the spotted shall be thy wages, then all the sheepe were spotted. If he sayd the straked shall be thy reward, then were all the shepe straked:
Genesis 31:9 thus hath God taken away your fathers cattel & geuen them me.
Genesis 31:10 For in bucking tyme I lifted vp myne eyes, & sawe in a dreame, & beholde the rammes that bucked the shepe were straked spotted, & party.
Genesis 31:11 And the angel of god spake vnto me in a dreame, saiyng: Iacob? And I answered: here am I.
Genesis 31:12 And he sayed lyft vp thine eyes & se, howe al the rammes that leape vpon the shepe are straked, spotted & party: for I haue sene al that Laban doth vnto th
Genesis 31:13 I am the god of Bethel wher thou anointedst the stone, & wher thou vowedst a vow vnto me. Now arise & get the out of this country, & return vnto the land wher thou was borne.
Genesis 31:14 Then answered Rahell & Lea, & sayed vnto him: we haue no parte nor enheritaunce in oure fathers house,
Genesis 31:15 he counteth vs euen vs straungers, for he hath solde vs, & hath euen eaten vp the price of vs.
Genesis 31:16 Moreouer al the riches which God hath taken from our father, that is ours & our children. Nowe therfore whatsoeuer God hath sayd vnto the that do.
Genesis 31:17 Then Iacob rose vp, & sett his sonnes & wyues vp vpon camels,
Genesis 31:18 & caried away al his cattel & al his substaunce which he had gotten in Mesopotamia, for to go to Isaac his father vnto the land of Canaan.
Genesis 31:19 Laban was gone to shere his shepe, & Rahel had stolen hir fathers images.
Genesis 31:20 And Iacob stale away the herte of Laban the Syrien, in that he tolde hym not that he fledde.
Genesis 31:21 So fled he and all that he had, and made hym selfe readye, and passed ouer the ryuers, and sette hys face strayght ouer the mounte Gilead.
Genesis 31:22 Vpon the third day after, was it told Laban that Iacob fled.
Genesis 31:23 Then he toke his brethren wt him & folowed after hym .vij. dayes iourney, & ouertoke him at the mount Gilead.
Genesis 31:24 And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dreame by nyght, & sayd vnto him: take hede to thy selfe, that thou speake not to Iacob ought saue good.
Genesis 31:25 And Laban ouertoke Iacob: & Iacob had pitched his tent in the mount. And Laban wt hys brethren pytched their tent also vpon the mounte Giliad.
Genesis 31:26 Then sayd Laban to Iacob: Why hast thou thys done to steale awaye my herte, and carye awaye my daughters as though thei had bene take captyue wt the swerde?
Genesis 31:27 Wherfore wentest thou away secreatly vnknowne to me, and didest not tel me, that I might haue brought the on the way wt myrth, singyng, timrels and harpes,
Genesis 31:28 & haste not suffered me to kisse my chyldren & my daughters? Thou wast a fole to do it,
Genesis 31:29 for I am able to do you euyl. But the God of youre father spake vnto me yesterday saying: take hede that thou speake not to Iacob ought saue good.
Genesis 31:30 And now thoughe thou wentest away, bicause thou longest after thi fathers house, yet wherfore hast thou stolen my Goddes.
Genesis 31:31 Iacob answered & sayed to Laban: bicause I was afraied, & thought that thou woldest haue taken away thy daughters fro me.
Genesis 31:32 But with whomesoeuer thou findest thy Gods, let hym dye here before our brethren. Seke that thyne is by me, & take it to the: for Iacob wist not that Rahel had stolen them.
Genesis 31:33 Then went Laban into Iacobs tente, & into Leas tente, & into .ii. maddens tentes: but founde them not. Then went he out of Leas tent, & entred into Rahels tente.
Genesis 31:34 And Rahel toke the Images & put them in the camels strawe & sate downe vpon them. And Laban searched all the tente but found them not.
Genesis 31:35 Then sayd she to hir father, my Lorde, be not angrye that I can not ryse vp before the, for the disease of women is come vpon me. So searched he but found them not.
Genesis 31:36 Iacob was wrooth & chode with Laban. Iacob also answered and sayd to him: what haue I trespaced or what haue I offended, that thou folowest after me?
Genesis 31:37 Thou hast searched all my stuffe, and what hast thou founde of al thy houshold stuffe? put it here before thy brethren & myne, & let them Iudge betwexte vs both.
Genesis 31:38 Thys .xx. yere that I haue bene wt the thy shepe, & thy gotes haue not bene barren, & the rammes of thy flocke haue I not eaten.
Genesis 31:39 Whatsoeuer was torne of beastes I brought it not vnto the, but made it good mi selfe of my hande dyddest thou requyre it, whether it was stollen by day or nyght.
Genesis 31:40 Moreouer by daye the heate consumed me, and the colde by nyghte, and my slepe departed fro myne eyes.
Genesis 31:41 Thus haue I bene .xx. yere in thy house, & serued the .xiiij. yeres for thy .ij. daughters and .vi. yere for thy shepe, & thou hast chaunged my rewarde .x. tymes.
Genesis 31:42 And excepte the God of my father, the God of Abraham, & the God whome Isaac feareth, had bene wyth me: surely thou haddest sent me away now al empty. But God beheld my tribulation, and the labour of my handes: and rebuked the yesterdaye.
Genesis 31:43 Laban answered & sayed vnto Iacob: the daughters are my daughters, & the children are my chyldren, & the shepe are my shepe, & al that thou seest is myne. And what can I do thys day vnto these my doughters, or vnto their children which thei haue borne?
Genesis 31:44 Now therfore come on: let vs make a bond, I and thou togyther, & let it be a wytnes betwene the & me.
Genesis 31:45 Then toke Iacob a stone and set it vp an ende,
Genesis 31:46 and sayed vnto his brethren, gather stones. And they toke stones, & made an heape, and they ate ther vpon the heape.
Genesis 31:47 And Laban called it Iegar Sahadutha, but Iacob called it Gilead.
Genesis 31:48 Then sayed Laban: thys heape be wytnes betwene the & me this day (therfore is it called Gilead)
Genesis 31:49 & this totehil which the Lord seeth (sayd he) be wytnesse betwene me and the when we are departed one from another
Genesis 31:50 that thou shalt not vexe my daughters neyther shalt take other wyues vnto them. Here is no man wyth vs: behold God is wytnes betwyxt the and me.
Genesis 31:51 And Laban sayd more ouer to Iacob: beholde, this heape and thys marke whych I had set here, betwyxte me, & the:
Genesis 31:52 this heape be wytnesse & also this marke that I wyll not come ouer this heape to the, & thou shalte not come ouer thys heape and marke to do any harme.
Genesis 31:53 The God of Abraham, the God of Nahor, & the God of their fathers be Iudge betwyxt vs. And Iacob sware by him that his father Isaac feared.
Genesis 31:54 Then Iacob did sacrifice vpon the mounte, and called hys brethren to eate bread. And they ate breade & taried al nyght in the hyll.
Genesis 31:55 And early in the morning Laban rose vp & kyssed hys chyldren and his daughters, & blessed them & departed and went vnto hys place agayne.

CHAPTER: 32

Genesis 32:1 But Iacob went forth on his iourney. And the angels of God came & met hym.
Genesis 32:2 And when Iacob sawe them, he said, thys is Gods hoost: & called the name of that same place, Mahanaim.
Genesis 32:3 Iacob sent messengers before him to Esau hys brother, vnto the land of Seir, and the fyeld of Edom
Genesis 32:4 And he commaunded theym sayinge: see that ye speake after thys maner to my Lord Esau: thy seruaunte Iacob sayeth thus. I haue soiourned and bene a straunger wyth Laban vnto thys time,
Genesis 32:5 and haue gotten oxen, asses, and shepe, menseruauntes & womenseruauntes, & haue sent to shew it my Lord, that I may finde grace in thy sight.
Genesis 32:6 And the messengers came againe to Iacob sayinge: we came vnto thi brother Esau, & he commeth agaynst the & .iiij. hundred men wyth him.
Genesis 32:7 Then was Iacob greatly afrayed, & wyste not whych way to turne him selfe, and deuided the people that was wyth hym, and the shepe, oxen, & camels, into .ij. companyes,
Genesis 32:8 & sayd: If Esau come to the one part & smite it the other maye saue it selfe.
Genesis 32:9 And Iacob said: O god of mi father Abraham, & God of my father Isaac: Lord whiche saydest vnto me, returne vnto thy countrye & to thy kynred, & I wyll do all well with the.
Genesis 32:10 I am not worthy of the leaste of all the mercies & trueth whyche thou hast shewed vnto thy seruaunt. For wyth my stafe came I ouer thys Iordane, & now haue I goten two droues.
Genesis 32:11 Deliuer me from the handes of my brother Esau: for I feare hym: least he wyll come and smyte the mother wyth the chyldren.
Genesis 32:12 Thou saydest that thou wouldest surely do me good, and wouldest make my sede as the sande of the sea, whyche canne not be numbred for multitude.
Genesis 32:13 And he taried ther that same nyghte, and toke of that which came to hand a present, vnto Esau hys brother
Genesis 32:14 .ij. hundred she gootes, and .xx. he gootes: .ij. hundred shepe, and .xx. rammes:
Genesis 32:15 thyrtye mylch camels wyth their coltes .xl. kyne, and .x. bulles .xx. she asses, & .x. foles,
Genesis 32:16 and deliuered theym vnto hys seruauntes, euery droue by them selues, & said vnto theim, go forth before me & put a space betwyxte euerye droue.
Genesis 32:17 And he commaunded the formest sayinge. When Esau mi brother meteth the & axeth the sayinge: whose seruaunte arte thou and whither goest thou, and whose are these that go before the:
Genesis 32:18 thou shalte say they be thy seruaunt Iacobs, and are a present sent vnto my Lorde Esau, and beholde he him selfe commeth after vs.
Genesis 32:19 And so commaunded he the second, & euen so the thyrd, & likewise al that folowed the droues sayinge, of this maner se that ye speake vnto Esau saying when ye mete hym,
Genesis 32:20 & said moreouer. Behold thy seruaunt Iacob cometh after vs, for he said. I wyl pease his wrath wt the present that goth before me, and afterward I wil se hym my selfe, so peraduenture he wil receiue me to grace.
Genesis 32:21 So wente the present before hym and he taried all that nyght in the tent,
Genesis 32:22 and rose vp the same night and toke hys two wyues, and his two maydens and hys .xi. sonnes, and went ouer the fourd Iabok.
Genesis 32:23 And he toke them and sent them ouer the ryuer, and sente ouer that he had,
Genesis 32:24 & taried behind hym selfe alone. And ther wresteled a man wyth him vnto the breaking of the day.
Genesis 32:25 And when he sawe that he could not preuayle agaynste hym, he smote hym vnder the thye, & the senowe of Iacobs thye shranke as he wrestled with him
Genesis 32:26 And he said: let me goo, for the day breaketh. And he said: I wyll not lette the go, excepte thou blesse me.
Genesis 32:27 And he sayd vnto hym: what is thy name? He answered: Iacob.
Genesis 32:28 And he said: thou shalt be called Iacob no more, but Israel. For thou hast wresteled with God and hast preuayled.
Genesis 32:29 And Iacob asked hym sayinge, tell me thy name. And he said, wherfore doest thou aske after my name? & he blessed hym there.
Genesis 32:30 And Iacob called the name of that place Pheniel for I haue sene God face to face, & yet is my life reserued.
Genesis 32:31 And as he went ouer Pheniel the sonne rose vpon him, & he halted vpon his thye:
Genesis 32:32 wherfore the children of Israell eate not of the senow that shranke vnder the thye, vnto thys daye: bicause that he smote Iacob vnder the thye in the senowe that shroncke.

CHAPTER: 33

Genesis 33:1 Iacob lift vp hys eyes & sawe hys brother Esau come, & wyth hym .iiij. hundred men. And he deuided the chyldren vnto Lea and vnto Rahell, and vnto the two maydens.
Genesis 33:2 And he put the maydens and theyr chyldren formost, & Lea & hir children after, & Rahell & Iosephe hindermost.
Genesis 33:3 And he went before them & fell on the ground .vij. times, vntyll he came vnto hys brother.
Genesis 33:4 Esau ranne to mete hym & enbraced hym and fell on his necke & kissed hym, and they wepte.
Genesis 33:5 And he lyfte vp hys eyes & sawe the wyues & theyr chyldren, & said: what are these which thou there hast? And he sayd they are the children which god hath geuen thy seruaunt
Genesis 33:6 Then came the maydens forthe, & dyd theyr obeysaunce.
Genesis 33:7 Lea also & hir chyldren came and dyd theyr obeysaunce. And laste of all came Ioseph & Rahel and dyd theyr obeysaunce.
Genesis 33:8 And he sayed: what meanest thou wt all the drooues which I mette. And he answered: to fynd grace in the syghte of my Lorde.
Genesis 33:9 And Esau saied: I haue inough my brother, kepe that thou hast vnto thy selfe.
Genesis 33:10 Iacob answered: Oh naye, but if I haue founde grace in thy syght, receyue my presente of my hande: for I haue sene thy face as though I had sene the face of god:
Genesis 33:11 wherfore receiue me to grace & take my blessinge that I haue brought the, for god hath geuen it me. And I haue inough of al thinges. And so he compelled him to take it.
Genesis 33:12 And he sayd: let vs take our iourney, and goo, and I wyll go in thy company.
Genesis 33:13 And he said vnto him: my lord knoweth that I haue tender children, ewes, & kine with yong, vnder myne hand, whych if men shoulde ouerdriue but euen one day, the whole flocke wold dye.
Genesis 33:14 Let my Lord therfore go before his seruaunte, and I wyl dryue fayre and softly, accordyng as the cattell that goth before me, & the chyldren, be able to endure: vntyll I come to my Lord vnto Seir.
Genesis 33:15 And Esau said: let me yet leaue some of my folke with the. And he sayed: what neadeth it? let me find grace in the syght of my Lord.
Genesis 33:16 So Esau wente his waye agayne that same daye vnto Seyr.
Genesis 33:17 And Iacob toke hys iourney toward Sucoth, and built him a house, and made boothes for hys catell: wherof the name of the place is called Sucoth.
Genesis 33:18 And Iacob came peasably into the cytye of Sichem in the Lande of Canaan, after that he was come from Messopotamia, & pytched before the citye,
Genesis 33:19 & bought a percel of ground wher he pytched hys tent, of the chyldren of Hemor Sichems father, for an hundred lambes.
Genesis 33:20 And he made ther an aulter, & there called vpon the myghty God of Israel.

CHAPTER: 34

Genesis 34:1 Dina the doughter of Lea whiche she bare to Iacob, went out to se the doughters of the land.
Genesis 34:2 And Sichem the sonne of Hemor the Heuite Lorde of the countrey, saw hyr, and toke hyr, and lay with hyr, and forced hir:
Genesis 34:3 and his herte lay vnto Dina the daughter of Iacob. And he loued that damsell, & spake kyndly vnto hyr,
Genesis 34:4 and spake vnto hys father Hemor saying, get me thys mayden vnto my wyfe.
Genesis 34:5 And Iacob hearde that he had defiled Dina hys daughter, but hys sonnes were wyth the cattel in the felde, and therfore he helde hys peace, vntyl they were come.
Genesis 34:6 Then Hemor the father of Sichem went out vnto Iacob, to comen with hym.
Genesis 34:7 And the sonnes of Iacob came out of the field as sone as they heard it, for it greued them, & thei were not a little wroth bycause he had wroughte folly in Israel, in that he had lyed wt Iacobs doughter, whyche thynge oughte not to be done.
Genesis 34:8 And Hemor comened with them saying? The soule of my sonne Sichem longeth for your doughter: giue hyr hym to wife,
Genesis 34:9 & make mariages wt vs: giue your doughters vnto vs, & take our doughters vnto you,
Genesis 34:10 & dwel with vs & the land shal be at your pleasure, dwel & do your busines, & haue your possessions therein.
Genesis 34:11 And Sichem sayed vnto hyr father & hyr brethren: lette me fynde grace in your eyes, & whatsoeuer ye appoint me, that wyl I gyue.
Genesis 34:12 Axe frely of me both the dowry and gyftes, & I wyll giue accordynge as ye saye vnto me, & gyue me the damsel to wyfe.
Genesis 34:13 Then the sonnes of Iacob answered to Sichem & Hemor hys father deceytfullye, because he had defiled Dina theyr sister.
Genesis 34:14 And they sayd vnto them, we can not do thys thing that we shoulde gyue our syster to one that is vncircumcised, for that were a shame vnto vs.
Genesis 34:15 Only in thys wyl we consent vnto you? If ye wyl be as we be, that all the men children amonge you be circumcised,
Genesis 34:16 then wyll we gyue our doughter to you & take youres to vs, & wil dwell with you & be one people.
Genesis 34:17 But & if ye wyll not herken vnto vs to be circumcised, then wyll we take oure doughter and go our waies.
Genesis 34:18 And their words pleased Hemor: & Sichem his sonne.
Genesis 34:19 And the yonge man deferred not but to do the thyng, bicause he had a lust to Iacobs doughter: he was also most set by of all that were in hys fathers house.
Genesis 34:20 Then Hemor & Sichem wente vnto the gate of theyr citye, & comuned with the men of theyr city saying:
Genesis 34:21 these men are peaceable with vs, & wyl dwel in the land and do their occupation therin. And in the lande is rowme inoughe for them, let vs take theyr doughters to wyues & gyue them ours:
Genesis 34:22 only herein wyll they consent vnto vs for to dwel with vs & to be one people: if all the men children that are among vs be circumcised as they are.
Genesis 34:23 Their goodes and their substaunce, & all theyr cattel are ours, only let vs consent vnto them, that they may dwell with vs.
Genesis 34:24 And vnto Hemor and Sichem hys sonne harkened al that went out at the gate of hys city. And al the men children were circumcised whatsoeuer went out at the gates of his city.
Genesis 34:25 And the thyrd day when it was paynfull to them .ij. two of the sons of Iacob Simeon, & Leuy Dinas brethren, toke either of them his swerd & went into the citye boldly, & slewe al that was male,
Genesis 34:26 and slewe also Hemor and Sichem his sonne wt the edge of the swerde, and toke Dina their syster oute of Sichems house, and went theyr way.
Genesis 34:27 Then came the sonnes of Iacob vpon the dead, & spoyled the city, bicause they had defyled theyr syster:
Genesis 34:28 and toke theyr shepe, oxen asses and what so euer was in the citye, and also in the fyeldes.
Genesis 34:29 And all theyr goodes, all theyr chyldren, and theyr wyues toke they captiue and made hauocke of al that was in the houses.
Genesis 34:30 And Iacob sayd to Simeon and Leui: ye haue troubled me and made me stincke vnto the inhabitours of the Lande, boeth to the Canaanites and also vnto the Pherezites. And I am a fewe in numbre. Wherefore they shal gather them selues togyther against me & slee me, & so shal I and my house be destroied.
Genesis 34:31 And they answered: shold they deale with our sister as wyth an whore.

CHAPTER: 35

Genesis 35:1 And God sayd vnto Iacob, aryse & get the vp to Bethel, and dwell there. And make ther an aultare vnto God that appered vnto the when thou fleddest from Esau thy brother.
Genesis 35:2 Then sayd Iacob vnto hys houshold & to all that were with him, put away the straunge Goddes that are amonge you, and make your selues cleane, and chaunge your garmentes,
Genesis 35:3 and let vs arise and go vp to Bethel, that I may make an aulter there vnto God, whyche hearde me in the day of my tribulation and was wyth me in the waye whyche I wente.
Genesis 35:4 And they gaue vnto Iacob all the straunge Gods whych were vnder theyr handes, & al theyr earynges which were in theyr eares, & Iacob hid them vnder an oke at Sichem.
Genesis 35:5 And they departed. And the feare of God fel vpon the cities that were rounde aboute them, that they durste not folowe after the sonnes of Iacob.
Genesis 35:6 So came Iacob to Lus in the land of Canaan, otherwise called Bethell, wyth all the people that was wyth hym.
Genesis 35:7 And he builded there an aulter, and called the place Bethel: bicause that god appeared vnto him there, when he fled from hys brother.
Genesis 35:8 Then dyed Debora Rebeccas norsse, & was buryed beneth Bethell vnder an ooke. And the name of it was called the oke of lamentation.
Genesis 35:9 And God appeared vnto Iacob againe after he came oute of Messopotamia & blessed him,
Genesis 35:10 & saied vnto him: thy name is Iacob. Notwithstandinge thou shalt be no more called Iacob, but Israell shall be thy name. And so was hys name called Israell.
Genesis 35:11 And God sayd vnto hym: I am God almighty, growe & multiplye: for people and a multitude of people shall sprynge of the, yea & kinges shal come out of thy loynes.
Genesis 35:12 And the Land whych I gaue Abraham & Isaac wyl I giue vnto the, & vnto thy sede after the wyl I gyue it also.
Genesis 35:13 And God departed from him in the place where he talked wyth hym.
Genesis 35:14 And Iacob set vp a marke in the place where he talked with hym: euen a pilloue of stone, & poured drynke offeryng thereon, & poured also oyle thereon,
Genesis 35:15 & called the name of the place wher God spake with him, Bethel.
Genesis 35:16 And they departed from Bethell, & when he was but a feld breath from Ephrath, Rahel began to trauel. And in trauelynge she was in perell.
Genesis 35:17 And as she was in paynes of hyr laboure the mydwyfe sayed vnto hir: feare not, for thou shalt haue thys sonne also.
Genesis 35:18 Then as hyr soule was a departynge, that she must die, she called his name BenOni. But his father called him BenIamyn.
Genesis 35:19 And thus died Rahel & was buried in the way to Ephrath which nowe is called Bethlehem.
Genesis 35:20 And Iacob sette vp a piller vpon hir graue, whych is called Rahelles graue piller vnto thys daye.
Genesis 35:21 And Israel went thence & pytched vp his tent beyond the tower of Eder.
Genesis 35:22 And it chaunced as Israel dwelt in that lande, that Ruben went & laye wyth Bilha hys fathers concubyne, and it came to Israels eare. The sonnes of Iacob were .xij. in numbre.
Genesis 35:23 The sonnes of Lea. Ruben Iacobs eldest sonne, and Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, & Zabulon.
Genesis 35:24 The sonnes of Rahell: Ioseph & BenIamin.
Genesis 35:25 The sonnes of Bilha Rahels mayde: Dan and Nepthali.
Genesis 35:26 The sonnes of Zilpha Leas mayde, Gad and Aser. These are the sonnes of Iacob whyche were borne hym in Messopotamia.
Genesis 35:27 Then Iacob went vnto Isaac his father to Mamre a principal city, otherwise called Hebron: where Abraham & Isaac soieourned as straungers.
Genesis 35:28 And the dayes of Isaac were an hundred & .lxxx. yeres:
Genesis 35:29 & then fell he sycke & dyed, & was put vnto his people beyng olde and full of dayes. And his sonnes Esau and Iacob buried him.

CHAPTER: 36

Genesis 36:1 These are the generations of Esau which is called Edom.
Genesis 36:2 Esau toke hys wyues of the doughters of Canaan, Ada the doughter of Elon an Hethite, & Ahalibama the daughter of Ana, which Ana was the sone of Zibeon an Heuite.
Genesis 36:3 And Basmath Ismaels daughter & sister of Nebaioth.
Genesis 36:4 And Ada bare vnto Esau Eliphas: & Basmath bare Regue.
Genesis 36:5 And Ahalibama bare Ieus, Iaelam, & Korah. These ar the sons of Esau which were borne him in the land of Canaan.
Genesis 36:6 And Esau toke hys wyues, hys sonnes & daughteres & all the soules of hys house: his goodes and al hys cattel & al hys substaunce whych he had gott in the lande of Canaan, and wente into a contrey awaye frome hys brother Iacob:
Genesis 36:7 for theyr rychesse was so much, that they could not dwel togyther, & that the lande wherin they were straungers, could not receiue them: bicause of theyr cattell.
Genesis 36:8 Thus dwelte Esau in the mounte Seir, which Esau is called Edom.
Genesis 36:9 These are the generations of Esau father of the Edomites in mounte Seir,
Genesis 36:10 & these are the names of Esaus sonnes: Eliphas the sonne of Ada, the wife of Esau, & Reguell the sonne of Basmath the wife of Esau also.
Genesis 36:11 And the sonnes of Eliphas were. Theman, Omar, Zepho, Gaetham and Kenas.
Genesis 36:12 And Thimna was concubine to Eliphas Esaus son, & bare vnto Eliphas Amalech. And these be the sonnes of Ada Esaus wyfe.
Genesis 36:13 And these are the sons of Reguel: Nahath, Serah, Samma, and Misa: these were the sonnes of Basmath Esaus wyfe.
Genesis 36:14 And these were the sonnes of Ahalibama Esaus wyfe the daughter of Ana, sonne of Zebeon whyche she bare vnto Esau: Ieus, Iealam, and Roah.
Genesis 36:15 These were dukes of the sonnes of Esau. The chyldren of Eliphas the fyrst sonne of Esau were these: duke Theman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke Kenas,
Genesis 36:16 duke Korah, duke Gaetham, & duke Amalech: these are the dukes that came of Eliphas in the lande of Edom, & these were the sonnes of Ada.
Genesis 36:17 These were the children of Reguel Esaus sone: duke Nahath, duke Serah, duke Samma, duke Missa. These are the dukes that came of Reguel in the Land of Edom, and these were the sonnes of Basmath Esaus wife.
Genesis 36:18 These were the children of Ahalibama Esaus wyfe: duke Ieus duke Gaelan, duke Korah, these dukes came of Ahalibama the doughter of Ana Esaus wyfe.
Genesis 36:19 These are the children of Esau, & these are the dukes of them: which Esau is called Edom.
Genesis 36:20 These are the children if Seir the Horite the inhabitoure of the Lande: Lothan, Soball, Zibeon, Ana,
Genesis 36:21 Dison, Eser, & Disan. These are the Dukes of the Horites the chyldren of Seir, in the Lande of Edomme.
Genesis 36:22 And the chyldren of Lothan were: Hori and Heman. And Lothans syster was called Thimna.
Genesis 36:23 The chyldren of Sobal were these: Aluan, Manahath, Ebal, Sepho, & Onam.
Genesis 36:24 These were the children of Zibeon, Aia & Ana, thys was that Ana that found the mules in the wildernes, as he fed hys father Zibeons asses.
Genesis 36:25 The children of Ana were these. Dison, & Ahalibama the doughter of Ana.
Genesis 36:26 These ar the children of Dison, Hemdan, Esban, Iethran, & Cheran.
Genesis 36:27 The children of Ezer were these, Bilhan, Seauan, & Akan.
Genesis 36:28 The children of Disan were: vz & Aran.
Genesis 36:29 These are the dukes that came of Hori: duke Lothan, duke Saball, duke Zibeon, duke Ana,
Genesis 36:30 duke Dison, duke Ezet, duke Disan. These be the dukes that came of Hory in theyr dukedoms in the land of Seir.
Genesis 36:31 These are the kynges that reigned in the land of Edom before there raygned any kynge amonge the chyldren of Israel,
Genesis 36:32 Bela the sonne of Beor raygned in Edomea, & the name of hys city was Dinhaba.
Genesis 36:33 And when Bela dyed, Iobab the sonne of Serah oute of Bezara, reigned in his steade.
Genesis 36:34 When Iobab was dead, Husam of the land of Themany reygned in hys stede,
Genesis 36:35 And after the death of Husem, Hadad the sonne of Bedad which slew the Madianites in the feyld of the Moabites, reigned in his stead, & the name of hys city was Auith.
Genesis 36:36 When Hadad was deade, Samla of Masteka reigned in hys stead.
Genesis 36:37 When Samla was deade, Saule of the ryuer Rehoboth reygned in hys steade.
Genesis 36:38 When Saul was deade, Baal Hanam the sonne of Achbor reygned in hys steade.
Genesis 36:39 And after the deathe of Baal Hanan the sonne of Achbor, Hadad reygned in hys steade, & the name of the city was Pagu. And hys wyues name Mehetabeell the doughter of Matred the daughter of Mesaab.
Genesis 36:40 These are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, in the .xij. kynredes, places & names: Duke Thimma, duke Alua, duke Ietheth,
Genesis 36:41 Duke Ahalibana, Duke Ela, duke Pinon,
Genesis 36:42 duke Kenas, duke Theman, duke Mibzar,
Genesis 36:43 duke Magdiel, duke Iram. These be the dukes of Edomea in theyr habitations, in the Lande of theyr possessions. Thys Esau is the father of the Edomites.

CHAPTER: 37

Genesis 37:1 And Iacob dwelt in the Lande wherin his father was a straunger, that is to saye in the Land of Canaan.
Genesis 37:2 And these are the generations of Iacob, when Iosephe was .xvij. yere olde, he kepte shepe wyth hys brethren, and the ladde was wyth the sonnes of Bilha and of Zilpha hys fathers wyues. And he brought vnto theyr father an euil sayinge that was of them.
Genesis 37:3 And Israel loued Ioseph more then al his chyldren bicause he begate hym in hys olde age, and he made him a cote of many colours.
Genesis 37:4 When hys brethren sawe that theyr father loued hym more then all his brethren, they hated him, & could not speake one kinde worde vnto hym.
Genesis 37:5 Moreouer Iosephe dreamed a dreame & told it his brethren: wherfore they hated him yet the more.
Genesis 37:6 And he sayed vnto them heare I praye you thys dreame whyche I haue dreamed:
Genesis 37:7 Beholde we were makynge sheues in the field: & lo, my sheffe arose and stode vpryght, & youres stode round aboute and made obeysaunce to my shefe.
Genesis 37:8 Than sayd hys brethren vnto hym: what, shalt thou be our kyng or shalt thou reygne ouer vs? And they hated him yet the more, because of hys dreame and of hys wordes.
Genesis 37:9 And he dreamed yet another dreame & told it his brethren sayinge: beholde, I haue had one dreame more: me thought the sonne and the moone and .xi. starres made obeysaunce to me.
Genesis 37:10 And when he had told it vnto his father and his brethren, hys father rebuked hym & sayde vnto him: what meaneth this dreame which thou hast dreamed: shal I and thy mother and thy brethren come and fall on the grounde before the?
Genesis 37:11 And his brethren hated him, but his father noted the saying.
Genesis 37:12 His brethren went to kepe their fathers shepe in Sichem,
Genesis 37:13 and Israel sayde vnto Ioseph: do not thy brethren kepe in Sichem? come that I may sende the to them. And he answered here am I.
Genesis 37:14 And he sayde vnto hym: go & see whether it be well wyth thy brethren and the shepe, and brynge me worde agayne. And sent hym out of the vale of Hebron, for to go to Sichem.
Genesis 37:15 And a certayne man founde hym wandrynge out of his way in the felde, and axed hym what he soughte.
Genesis 37:16 And he answered: I seke my brethren, tell me I praye the where they kepe shepe.
Genesis 37:17 And the man said: they are departed hence, for I herde them say let vs goo vnto Dothan. Thus went Ioseph after hys brethren, and founde them in Dothan.
Genesis 37:18 And when they sawe him a farre of before he came at them, they toke councell agaynst him, for to sley him,
Genesis 37:19 and sayd one to another, Beholde thys dreamer cometh,
Genesis 37:20 come nowe and let vs sley hym and caste hym in to some pytt, and let vs saye that some wycked beast hath deuoured him, and let vs see what hys dreames wyl come to.
Genesis 37:21 When Ruben herde that, he went aboute to ryd hym out of their handes and sayd, let vs not kyl hym.
Genesis 37:22 And Ruben sayde moreouer vnto them, shede not his bloud, but cast him in to this pytt that is in the wyldernes, and laye no handes vpon him: for he wolde haue rydd hym out of their handes and delyuered him to his father agayn.
Genesis 37:23 And as soone as Ioseph was come vnto hys brethren, they strypte hym oute of hys gay coote that was vpon hym,
Genesis 37:24 and they toke hym and caste hym in to a pyt: But the pyt was emptie and had no water therein.
Genesis 37:25 And they satt them doune to eate breade. And as they lyft vp their eyes and loked aboute, there came a companye of Ismaelites from Gilead, and their camels laden wyth spicery baulme, and myrre, and were goynge doune into Egypte.
Genesis 37:26 Than sayde Iuda to hys brethren, what auayleth it that we sley oure brother, & kepe hys bloude secret?
Genesis 37:27 come on, let vs sell hym to the Ismaelites, & let not our handes be defyled vpon him: for he is our brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content.
Genesis 37:28 Than as the Madianites marchaunt men passed by, they drewe Ioseph out of the pyt & solde hym vnto the Ismaelites for .xx. peces of syluer. And they brought him into Egypte.
Genesis 37:29 And when Ruben came agayne vnto the pyt and found not Ioseph there, he rent hys cloothes
Genesis 37:30 and went agayne vnto his brethren saying: the lad is not yonder, & whether shall I go?
Genesis 37:31 And they toke Ioseps coote and kylled a goote, & dypped the coote in the bloud.
Genesis 37:32 And they sent that gay coote and caused it to be brought vnto their father and sayde: Thys haue we founde: se, whether it be thy sonnes coote or no.
Genesis 37:33 And he knewe it sayinge: it is my sonnes coote, a wicked beast hath deuoured hym, and Ioseph is rent in peces.
Genesis 37:34 And Iacob rent hys cloothes, and put sacke cloth about hys loynes, and sorowed for hys sonne a longe season.
Genesis 37:35 Than came all hys sonnes and all hys doughters to comforte him. And he wold not be comforted, but sayde: I wyll go doune in to the graue vnto my sonne, mournynge. And thus his father wepte for hym.
Genesis 37:36 And the Madianytes solde hym in Egypte vnto Putiphar a Lorde of Phoraos: & hys chefe marshall.

CHAPTER: 38

Genesis 38:1 And it fortuned at that tyme that Iudas went from his brethren & gat him to a man called Hira of Odollam,
Genesis 38:2 & there he sawe the daughter of a man called Sua & Canaanyte: And he toke her and went in vnto her.
Genesis 38:3 And she conceyued & bare a sonne and called hys name Er.
Genesis 38:4 And she conceyued agayne and bare a sonne & called him Onan.
Genesis 38:5 And she conceyued the thyrde tyme & bare a sonne, whom she called Sela: and he was at Chesyb when she bare him.
Genesis 38:6 And Iudas gaue Er hys Eldest sonne a wyfe whose name was Thamar.
Genesis 38:7 But thys Er Iudas eldest sonne was wicked in the syght of the Lord, wherfore the Lorde slewe him.
Genesis 38:8 Than sayde Iudas vnto Onan: goo into thy brothers wyfe & marye her, and styrre vp seed vnto thy brother.
Genesis 38:9 And when Onan perceyued that the seed should not be hys: therfore when he went in to hys brothers wyfe, he spylled it on the ground, because he wolde not geue seed vnto his brother.
Genesis 38:10 And the thyng whych he dyd, dyspleased the Lorde, wherfore he slewe hym also.
Genesis 38:11 Than sayde Iudas to Thamar hys daughter in lawe: remayne a wydow at thy fathers house, tyll Sela my sonne be growne: for he feared lest he should haue dyed also, as hys brethren dyd. Thus went Thamar & dwelt in hyr fathers house.
Genesis 38:12 And in processe of tyme, the daughter of Sua Iudas wyfe dyed. Than Iudas when he had left mornynge, went vnto hys shepe sherers to Thymnath with his frende Hira of Odollam.
Genesis 38:13 And one told Thamar sayinge: beholde, thy father in lawe goth vp to Thymnathe, to shere hys shepe.
Genesis 38:14 And she pute hyr wyddows garments of from her & couered her wyth a clooke, & dysguysed her self: And sat her downe at the enterynge of Enaim which is by the heye waye syde to Thymnath, for because she sawe that Sela was growne, and she was not geuen vnto hym to wyfe.
Genesis 38:15 When Iuda sawe her, he thought it had bene an whoore, because she had couered her face.
Genesis 38:16 And turned to her vnto the waye and sayde, come I praye the, let me lye wyth the, for he knewe not that it was his daughter in lawe. And she sayd what wylt thou geue me for to lye wt me?
Genesis 38:17 Than sayde he, I wyl sende the a kydd from the flocke. She answered, Than geue me a pledge tyl thou send it.
Genesis 38:18 Than sayde he, what pledge shall I geue the? And she sayde: thy sygnet, thy bracelet, and thy staffe that is in thy hande. And he gaue it her & lay by her, & she was whith childe by him.
Genesis 38:19 And she gather vp & went & put her mantell from her, and put on her wydowes rayment agayn.
Genesis 38:20 And Iudas sent the kydd by his neybure of Odollam, for to fetch out his pledge agayn from the wyfes hande. But he found her not.
Genesis 38:21 Than asked he the men of the same place sayinge: where is the whoore that sat at Enaim in the waye? And they sayde: there was no whoore here.
Genesis 38:22 And he came to Iuda agayne sayinge: I can not fynde her, & also the men of the place sayd: that there was no whoore there.
Genesis 38:23 And Iuda sayde: let her take it to her, lest we be shamed: for I sent the kydd and thou couldest not fynde her.
Genesis 38:24 And it came to passe that after .iij. monethes, one tolde Iuda sayinge: Thamar thy daughter in lawe hath played the whoore, & wyth playinge the whoore is become greate wt chylde.
Genesis 38:25 And Iuda sayde: brynge her forth & let her be brente. And when they brought her forth, she sent to her father in law saying: by the man vnto whome these thynges pertayne, am I wyth chylde. And sayd also: loke whose are thys seall, bracelet, and staffe.
Genesis 38:26 And Iuda knewe them saying: she is more ryghtwes than I, because I gaue her not to Sela my sonne. But he lay with her nomore.
Genesis 38:27 When tyme was come that she shulde be delyuered, beholde there was two twynnes in her wombe.
Genesis 38:28 And as she traueled, the one put out hys hande and the mydwyfe toke & bound a redde threde aboute it sayinge: thys wyll come oute fyrste.
Genesis 38:29 But he plucked hys hande backe agayne, and hys brother came out. And she sayd: wherfore hast thou rent a rent vpon the? and called hym Pharez.
Genesis 38:30 And afterwarde came oute his brother that had the rede threde about his hande, whyche was, called Zarah.

CHAPTER: 39

Genesis 39:1 Ioseph was brought vnto Egypte, and Putiphar a Lorde of Pharaos: & his chefe marshal an Egyptian, bought him of the Ismaelites which brought him thyther.
Genesis 39:2 And the Lorde was wyth Ioseph, & he was a luckie felowe and continued in the house of his master the Egyptian.
Genesis 39:3 And hys mayster sawe that the Lorde was wyth hym, and that the Lorde made all that he dyd prosper in hys hande:
Genesis 39:4 Wherfore he founde grace in his masters syghte, and serued him. And hys mayster made hym ruelar of hys house, and put al that he had in hys hand.
Genesis 39:5 And as soone as he had made him ruelar ouer his house & ouer al that he had, the Lorde blessed this Egyptians house for Ioseps sake, and the blessynge of the Lorde was vpon all that he had: both in the house & also in the feldes.
Genesis 39:6 And therfore he left all that he had in Iosephs hande, & loked vpon nothing that was with him, saue only on the bread which he ate. And Ioseph was a goodly persone and a wel fauored.
Genesis 39:7 And it fortuned after thys, that hys masters wyfe cast her eyes vpon Ioseph & sayd: come lye with me.
Genesis 39:8 But he denyed & sayde to her: Beholde, my master woteth not what he hath in the house wt me, but hath commytted all that he hath to my hande.
Genesis 39:9 He him selfe is not greater in the house than I, and hath kepte nothyng from me, but only the because thou art hys wyfe. How than can I do thys great wykydnes, for to synne agaynst God?
Genesis 39:10 And after thys maner spake she to Ioseph daye by day: but he harkend not vnto her, to slepe nere her, or to be in her company.
Genesis 39:11 And it fortuned aboute the same season, that Ioseph entred in to the house, to do hys busynes: & there was none of the housholde by, in the house.
Genesis 39:12 And she caught hym by the garment saying: come slepe wyth me. And he left his garment in her hande & fled and got him out.
Genesis 39:13 When she sawe that he had left hys garment in her hande, and was fled out,
Genesis 39:14 she called vnto the men of the house, & tolde them sayinge: Se, he hath brought in an Hebrewe vnto vs to do vs shame: for he came in to me, for to haue slept wyth me. But I cryed with a loude voyce.
Genesis 39:15 And when he harde, that I lyfte vp my voyce & cryed, he left hys garment wt me & fled away and got him out.
Genesis 39:16 And she layed vp his garment by her, vntil her Lord came home.
Genesis 39:17 And she told him accordyng to these wordes saying. This Hebrues seruaunte whiche thou hast brought vnto vs came in to me to do me shame.
Genesis 39:18 But as soone as I lyft vp my voyce and cryed, he left hys garment with me & fled out.
Genesis 39:19 When his master herde the woordes of his wyfe which she told hym sayinge: after thys maner dyd thy seruaunte to me, he waxed wrooth.
Genesis 39:20 And he toke Ioseph & put him in preson: euen in the place where the kinges prisoners laye bounde. And there continued he in preson,
Genesis 39:21 but the Lorde was wyth Ioseph & shewed hym mercye, & got him fauoure in the syghte of the keper of the preso
Genesis 39:22 which commytted to Iosephs hande all the presoners that were in the preson house. And what soeuer was done there, that dyd he.
Genesis 39:23 And the keper of the preson loked vnto nothynge that was vnder hys hande, because the Lorde was wyth hym, and because that what soeuer he dyd, the Lorde made it come luckely to passe.

CHAPTER: 40

Genesis 40:1 And it chaunced after this, that the chefe butlar of the kyng of Egypte and hys chefe baker had offended their Lorde the kynge of Egipte.
Genesis 40:2 And Pharao was angrye wt them and put them inwarde in hys chefe marshals house:
Genesis 40:3 euen in the preson where Ioseph was bound.
Genesis 40:4 And the chefe marshall gaue Ioseph a charge wyth them, and he serued them. And they contynued a season inwarde.
Genesis 40:5 And they dreamed ether of them in one nyghte: both the butlar and the baker of the kynge of Egypte whych were bounde in the preson house, ether of them hys dreame, and eche mannes dreame of a sondrye interpretacion.
Genesis 40:6 When Ioseph came in vnto them in the mornyng, & loked vpon them: beholde, they were sadd. And he asked them saying:
Genesis 40:7 wherfore loke ye so sadly to day?
Genesis 40:8 They answered him, we haue dreamed a dreame, & haue no man to declare it. And Ioseph sayd vnto them. Interpretynge belongeth to God but tell me yet.
Genesis 40:9 And the chefe butlar tolde his dreame to Ioseph and sayde vnto hym. In my dreame me thought there stode a vyne before me,
Genesis 40:10 & in the vyne were .iij. braunches, and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shott forth: & the grapes there of waxed rype.
Genesis 40:11 And I had Pharaos cuppe in my hand, and toke of the grapes & wronge them into Pharaos cuppe, & delyuered Pharaos cuppe in to hys hande.
Genesis 40:12 And Ioseph sayd vnto him, this is the interpretacion of it.
Genesis 40:13 The .iij. braunches are thre dayes: for wythin thre dayes shall Pharao lyft vp thyne heade, & restore the vnto thyne offyce agayne, and thou shalt delyuer Pharaos cuppe in to his hande, after the old maner, euen as thou dydest when thou wast his butlar.
Genesis 40:14 But thynke on me wyth the, when thou art in good case, and shewe mercy vnto me. And make mencion of me to Pharao, & helpe to brynge me oute of thys house:
Genesis 40:15 for I was stollen out of the lande of the Hebrues, & here also haue I done nothing at all wherfore they should haue put me in to thys dongeon.
Genesis 40:16 When the chefe baker sawe that he had well interpretate it, he sayde vnto Ioseph, me thought also in my dreame, that I had .iij. wyker baskettes on my heade.
Genesis 40:17 And in the vppermost basket of all maner bakemeates for Pharao. And the byrdes ate them out of the basket vpon my head.
Genesis 40:18 Ioseph answered and sayde: thys is the interpretacion therof. The .iij. baskettes are .iij. dayes,
Genesis 40:19 for thys daye .iij. dayes shall Pharao take thy heade from the, and shall hange the on a tree, and the byrdes shall eate thy fleshe from of the.
Genesis 40:20 And it came to passe the thyrde day which was Pharaos byrth daye, that he made a feast vnto all hys seruauntes. And he lyfted vp the head of the chefe buttelar and of the chefe baker amonge his seruauntes.
Genesis 40:21 And restored the chefe buttelar vnto hys buttelarshippe agayne, and he reched the cuppe in to Pharaos hande,
Genesis 40:22 and hanged the chefe baker euen as Ioseph had interpretated vnto them.
Genesis 40:23 Notwythstandyng the chefe buttelar remembred not Ioseph, but forgat hym.

CHAPTER: 41

Genesis 41:1 And it fortuned at .ij. yeres ende that Pharao dreamed, & thought that he stode by a ryuers syde,
Genesis 41:2 and that there came out of the ryuer .vij. goodly kyne and fatflesshed, and fedd in a medowe,
Genesis 41:3 and hym thought that .vij. other kyne came vp after them out of the ryuer euel fauored and leane fleshed and stode by the other vpon the brynke of the ryuer.
Genesis 41:4 And the euyll fauored and leans flesshed kyne: ate vp the .vij. wel fauored and fat kyne: and he awoke there wyth.
Genesis 41:5 And he slepte agayne and dreamed the second tyme, that seuen eares of corne grewe vpon one stalke rancke and goodly.
Genesis 41:6 And that .vij. thynne eares blasted wyth the wynde, sprange vp after them:
Genesis 41:7 and that the .vij. thynne eares deuoured the .vij. rancke and full eares. And than Pharao awaked: & se, here is his dreame.
Genesis 41:8 When the mornynge came, hys sprete was troubled. And he sent and called for all the sothesayers of Egypte & al the wyse men therof, and tolde them his dreame: but there was none of them that coulde interpretate it vnto Pharao.
Genesis 41:9 Than spake the chefe buttelar vnto Pharao saying. I do remembre my faute thys daye.
Genesis 41:10 Pharao was angrye wt his seruauntes, & put in warde in the chefe marshals house both me & the chefe baker.
Genesis 41:11 And we dreamed both of vs in one nyght & ech mannes dreame of a sondrye interpretacion.
Genesis 41:12 And there was wyth vs a yonge man, an Hebrue borne, seruaunte vnto the chefe marshall. And we told hym, and he declared our dreames to vs accordynge to ether of oure dreames.
Genesis 41:13 And as he declared them vnto vs, euen so it came to passe. I was restored to myne office agayn, and he was hanged.
Genesis 41:14 Than Pharao sent & called Ioseph. And they made him haste out of preison. And he shaued him self and chaunged his rayment, and went in to Pharao.
Genesis 41:15 And Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: I haue dreamed a dreame & no man can interpretate it, but I haue herde say of the that as sone as thou hearest a dreame thou dost interpretate it.
Genesis 41:16 And Ioseph answered Pharao saying: God shal geue Pharao an answere of peace without me.
Genesis 41:17 Pharao sayd vnto Ioseph: in my dreame me thought I stode by a ryuers syde,
Genesis 41:18 and there cam out of the ryuer .vij. fat fleshed and well fauored kyne, and fedde in the meddow.
Genesis 41:19 And then .vij. other kyne came vp after them, poore & very euell fauored & leane fleshed: so that I neuer sawe their lyke in all the lande of Egypte in euell fauordnesse.
Genesis 41:20 And the .vij. leane and euel fauored kyne eate vp the fyrste .vij. fat kyne.
Genesis 41:21 And when they had eaten them vp a man coulde not perceyue that they had eaten them: for they were styll as euyll fauored as they were at the begynnyng. And I awoke.
Genesis 41:22 And I sawe agayn in my dreame .vij. eares spring out of one stalke ful and good,
Genesis 41:23 and .vij. other eares wytherd, thynne an blasted wt wynde, sprynge vp after them.
Genesis 41:24 And the thynne eares deuowred the .vij. good eares. And I haue tolde it vnto the sothsayers, but no man can tell me what it meaneth.
Genesis 41:25 Then Ioseph sayde vnto Pharao: both Pharaos dreames are one. And God doth shewe Pharao what he is aboute to do.
Genesis 41:26 The seuen good kyne are .vij. yeres: & the seuen good eares: are seuen yeres also, and it is but one dreame.
Genesis 41:27 Likewyse the seuen thynne and euel fauored kyne that came out after them, are seuen yeres: and the .vij. emptye and blasted eares shalbe .vij. yeres of hunger.
Genesis 41:28 This is that whiche I sayde vnto Pharao, that god doth shewe Pharao what he is about to do.
Genesis 41:29 Beholde there shal come .vij. yere of great plenteousnes through oute all the lande of Egypte.
Genesis 41:30 And there shal aryse after them .vij. yeres of hunger. So that al the plenteousnes shalbe forgotten in the lande of Egypt. And the hunger shall consume the lande:
Genesis 41:31 so that the plenteousnes shall not be once a sene in the lande by reason of that hunger that shall come after, for it shalbe exceadynge greate.
Genesis 41:32 And as concernynge that the dreame was doubled vnto Pharao the seconde tyme, it betokeneth that the thynges is certanly prepared of God, and that God wyll shortlye brynge it to passe.
Genesis 41:33 Nowe therfore let Pharao prouyde for a man of vnderstandyng & wysdome, and set him ouer the land of Egypte.
Genesis 41:34 And let Pharao make offycers ouer the lande, & take vp the fyfte parte of the lande of Egypte in the .vij. plenteous yeres
Genesis 41:35 & let them gather all the foode of these good yeres that come, and lay vp corne vnder the power of Pharao, that there may be foode in the cyties,
Genesis 41:36 and there let them kepe it: that there maye be foode in stoore in the lande, agaynste the .vij. yeres of hunger whych shal come in the land of Egypte, and that the land perysh not thorow hunger.
Genesis 41:37 And the sayinge pleased Pharao & all his seruauntes.
Genesis 41:38 Than sayde Pharao vnto hys seruauntes: where shal we fynde soch a man as thys is, that hath the sprete of GOD in hym?
Genesis 41:39 wherfore Pharao sayde vnto Ioseph: for as moch as God hath shewed the al this, there is no man of vnderstandyng or of wysdome lyke vnto the.
Genesis 41:40 Thou therfore shalt be ouer my house, and acordyng to thy worde shall al my people obeye: only in the kynges seate wyll I be aboue the.
Genesis 41:41 And he sayde vnto Ioseph: beholde, I haue set the ouer all the lande of Egypte.
Genesis 41:42 And he toke of hys rynge from hys fyngre, and put it vpon Iosephs fyngre, and arayed him in rayment of bysse, & put a golden cheyne about hys neck
Genesis 41:43 & set him vpon the best charet that he had saue one. And they cryed before hym Abrech, & that Pharao had made him ruelar ouer al the land of Egypte.
Genesis 41:44 And Pharao said vnto Ioseph: I am Pharao, without thy wyll, shall no man lyfte vp ether his hand or fote in al the land of Egypte.
Genesis 41:45 And he called Iosephs name Zaphnath Paena. And he gaue him to wyfe Asnath the daughter of Putiphar preast of On. Than went Ioseph abrode in the lande of Egypte.
Genesis 41:46 And he was .xxx. yere olde when he stode before Pharao kyng of Egypte. And than Ioseph departed from Pharao, & went thorow out al the lande of Egypte.
Genesis 41:47 And in the .vij. plenteous yeres they made sheues
Genesis 41:48 & gathered vp all the fode of the .vij. plenteous yeres whych were in the lande of Egypte & put it in to the cyties. And he put the foode of the feldes that grewe rounde about euery cyte: euen in the same.
Genesis 41:49 And Ioseph layde vp corne in stoore, lyke vnto the sande of the sea in multitude out of mesure, vntyll he left nombrynge: For it was wyth out nombre.
Genesis 41:50 And vnto Ioseph were borne .ij. sonnes before the yeres of hunger came, which Asnath the doughter of Putiphar preast of On, bare vnto him.
Genesis 41:51 And he called the name of the fyrst sonne Manasse, for God (sayde he) hath made me forget all my laboure and all my fathers houshold.
Genesis 41:52 The seconde called he Ephraim, for God (sayde he) hath caused me to growe in the lande of my trouble.
Genesis 41:53 And when the .vij. yeres of plenteousnes that was in the land of Egypte were ended,
Genesis 41:54 than came the .vij. yeres of derth, acordyng as Ioseph had sayd. And the derth was in all landes: but in the lande of Egypte was there yet foode.
Genesis 41:55 When now all the lande of Egypt beganne to hunger, than cryed the people to Pharao for breade. And Pharao sayde vnto all Egypte: goo vnto Iosephe, and what he sayth to you that doo.
Genesis 41:56 And when the dearthe was throw out all the lande, Ioseph opened all that was in the cyties and solde vnto the Egypcyans. And hunger waxed sore in the lande of Egypte:
Genesis 41:57 And all countrees came to Egypte to Ioseph for to bye corne: bicause that the hunger was so sore in all the landes.

CHAPTER: 42

Genesis 42:1 When Iacob sawe that ther was corne to be solde in Egypte, he sayd vnto hys sonnes: why are ye negligent?
Genesis 42:2 beholde, I haue harde that there is corne to be solde in Egypte. Gette you thyther and by vs corne from thence, that we maye lyue and not dye.
Genesis 42:3 So went Iosephs ten brethren doune to bye corne in Egypte,
Genesis 42:4 for Beniamyn Iosephs brother woulde not Iacob sende wyth hys other bretheren: for he sayde: some misfortune myght happen hym.
Genesis 42:5 And the sonnes of Israel came to bye corne among other that came, for there was derth also in the lande of Canaan.
Genesis 42:6 And Ioseph was gouernour in the land, and solde corne to all the people of the land. And his brethren came, & fel flat on the grounde before him.
Genesis 42:7 When Ioseph sawe his brethren, he knewe them: But made straung vnto them, and spake roughly vnto them sayinge: Whence come ye? & they sayde: out of the lande of Canaan, to bye vytayle.
Genesis 42:8 Ioseph knewe his brethren, but they knewe not hym.
Genesis 42:9 And Ioseph remembred his dreames which he dreamed of them, and sayde vnto them: ye are spies, and to se where the lande is weake is youre comynge.
Genesis 42:10 And they sayd vnto hym: nay my Lorde: but to bye vytayle thy seruauntes are come.
Genesis 42:11 We are al one mans sonnes, & meane truely, and thy seruauntes are no spies.
Genesis 42:12 And he sayd vnto them: nay verely, but euen to se where the lande is weake is youre comyng.
Genesis 42:13 And they sayde: we thy seruauntes are .xij. brethren, the sonnes of one man in the lande of Canaan. The yongest is yet with oure father, and one, no man woteth where he is.
Genesis 42:14 Ioseph sayde vnto them, that is it that I sayde vnto you, that ye are surelye spies.
Genesis 42:15 Here by ye shall be proued. For by the lyfe of Pharao, ye shall not go hence, vntyll your yongest brother be come hither.
Genesis 42:16 Sende therfore one of you and let him fet your brother, and ye shalbe in preyson in the meane season. And thereby shall youre wordes be proued, whether there be any trueth in you: or els by the lyfe of Pharao, ye are but spies
Genesis 42:17 And he put them in warde thre dayes.
Genesis 42:18 And Ioseph said vnto them the thyrd day: Thys do and lyue, for I feare God.
Genesis 42:19 If ye meane no hurte, let one of youre brethren be bounde in the preyson, and go ye and brynge the necessarie foode vnto youre housholdes,
Genesis 42:20 and brynge youre yongest brother vnto me: that youre wordes maye be beleued, and that ye dye not. And they dyd so.
Genesis 42:21 Than they sayde one to another: we haue verely synned agaynst oure brother, in that we sawe the anguysh of hys soull when he besought vs, & wold not heare him: therfore is thys troubyll come vpon vs.
Genesis 42:22 Ruben answered them sayinge: sayd I not vnto you that ye shulde not synne agaynst the lad? but ye wolde not heare. And nowe verely see, hys bloud is requyred.
Genesis 42:23 They were not aware that Ioseph vnderstode them, for he spake vnto them by an interpreter.
Genesis 42:24 And he turned from them & wepte, and than turned to them again and comened with them, & toke out Symeon from amonge them and bounde hym before their eyes,
Genesis 42:25 & commaunded to fyl their sackes wyth corne, and to put euery mans money in his sacke, and to geue them vitayle to spende by the waye. And so it was done to them.
Genesis 42:26 And they laded theyr asses wyth the corne and departed thence.
Genesis 42:27 And as one of them opened hys sacke, for to geue hys asse prouender in the Inne, he spyed hys money in hys sacks mouth.
Genesis 42:28 And he sayde vnto hys brethren: my money is restored me agayne, and is euen in my sackes mouth. Than their hartes fayled them, and were astoynyed and sayde one to another: howe cometh it that God dealeth thus wyth vs.
Genesis 42:29 And they came vnto Iacob their father vnto the land of Canaan, and tolde hym all that had happened them sayinge.
Genesis 42:30 The Lorde of the lande spake roughly to vs, and toke vs for spyes to serch the countre.
Genesis 42:31 And we sayde vnto hym: we meane truely and are no spyes.
Genesis 42:32 We be .xij. brethren sonnes of oure father, one is away, and the yongest is now wyth oure father in the lande of Canaan.
Genesis 42:33 And the Lorde of the countre sayde vnto vs: here by shal I knowe yf ye meane truely: leaue one of youre brethren here with me, and take foode necessary for youre housholdes and get you away,
Genesis 42:34 and brynge youre yongest brother vnto me. And thereby shall I knowe that ye are no spyes, but meane truely: So wyll I delyuer you youre brother agayn, and ye shal occupye in the lande.
Genesis 42:35 And as they emptied their sackes, behold: euery mans bundel of money was in his sacke. And when both they & their father sawe the bundels of money, they were afrayde.
Genesis 42:36 And Iacob their father said vnto them: Me haue ye robbed of my chyldren: Ioseph is away, and Symeon is awaye, and ye wyll take Ben Iamin awaye. All these thynges fall vpon me.
Genesis 42:37 Ruben answered hys father sayinge: Slee my two sonnes, yf I brynge him not to the agayn. Delyuer hym therfore to my hande, and I wyll brynge hym to the agayne:
Genesis 42:38 And he sayde: my sonne shall not go doune wyth you. For his brother is dead, & he is left alone. Moreouer some mysfortune myght happen vpon him by the way whych ye go. And so shuld ye bring my gray head with sorowe vnto the graue.

CHAPTER: 43

Genesis 43:1 And the derth waxed sore in the lande.
Genesis 43:2 And when they had eaten vp the corne which they brought out of the lande of Egypt, their father sayde vnto them: go agayn and by vs a lytle food.
Genesis 43:3 Than sayd Iuda vnto him: the man dyd testifye vnto vs sayinge loke that ye sea not my face excepte your brother be wyth you.
Genesis 43:4 Therfore yf thou wylt sende oure brother wyth vs, we wyl go and bye the food.
Genesis 43:5 But yf thou wylt not sende hym, we wyl not goo: for the man sayde vnto vs: loke that ye see not my face, excepte your brother be wyth you.
Genesis 43:6 And Israel sayd: wherfore delt ye so cruelly with me, as to tel the man that ye had yet another brother?
Genesis 43:7 And they sayde: The man asked vs of our kynred sayinge: is youre father yet alyue? haue ye not another brother? And we tolde him acording to these wordes. How could we knowe that he wold byd vs bryng oure brother doune wyth vs?
Genesis 43:8 Than sayd Iuda vnto Israel his father: Send the lad with me, and we wyll ryse and go, that we maye lyue and not dye: both we, thou and also oure chyldren.
Genesis 43:9 I wylbe suerty for him, & of my handes requyre him. If I bryng him not to the and set hym before thyne eyes, than let me bere the blame for euer.
Genesis 43:10 For except we had made thys taryeng: by thys, we had bene there twyse, and come agayne.
Genesis 43:11 Than their father Israel sayd vnto them: Yf it must nedes be so now: than do thus, take of the best frutes of the lande in your vesselles, and brynge the man a present, a curtesye of bawlme, and a curtesy of hony, spices and myrre, dates & almondes.
Genesis 43:12 And take as moch money more wyth you. And the money that was brought agayne in youre sackes, take it agayn with you, peraduenture it was som ouersyghte.
Genesis 43:13 Take also your brother wyth you, & aryse & go agayn to the man.
Genesis 43:14 And God almightye geue you mercy in the syghte of the man and send you youre other brother and also BenIamin, and I wylbe as a man robbed of his chyldren.
Genesis 43:15 Thus toke they the present and twyse so moche more money with them, and BenIamin. And rose vp, went doune to Egipte, and presented them selfes to Ioseph.
Genesis 43:16 When Ioseph sawe BenIamin with them, he sayde to the ruelar of his house: brynge these men home & sley and make redy: for they shal dyne with me at none.
Genesis 43:17 And the man dyd as Ioseph bad, and brought them in to Iosephes house.
Genesis 43:18 When they were brought to Iosephs house, they were afrayde and sayde: because of the money that came in oure sackes mouthes at the fyrst tyme, are we brought, to pyke a quarell with vs and to laye some thynge to oure charge to bryng vs in bondage and our asses also.
Genesis 43:19 Therfore came they to the man that was the ruelar ouer Iosephes house, & comened with him at the door
Genesis 43:20 & sayde. Syr, we came hyther at the fyrste tyme to bye food,
Genesis 43:21 & as we came to an inne and opened oure sackes: beholde, euery mannes money was in his sacke with full weyghte: But we haue brought it agayne with vs,
Genesis 43:22 and other mony haue we brought also in oure handes, to bye foode, but we can not tel who put our money in oure sackes.
Genesis 43:23 And he sayde: be of good chere, feare not: your God and the god of youre fathers, hath put you that treasure in youre sackes, for I had youre money. And he brought Simeon out to them
Genesis 43:24 & led them into Iosephes house, and gaue them water to washe their fete, and gaue their asses prouender:
Genesis 43:25 And they made redy their present against Ioseph came at none, for they herde say that they shuld dyne there.
Genesis 43:26 When Ioseph came home, they brought the present into the house to him, which they had in their handes, and fel flat on the ground befor him.
Genesis 43:27 And he welcomed them courteously saying: is youre father that olde man whych ye tolde me of, in good health? and is he yet alyue?
Genesis 43:28 they answered: thy seruaunt our father is in good health and is yet aliue. And they bowed them selues and fel to the ground.
Genesis 43:29 And he lyfte vp his eyes & behelde his brother BenIamin his mothers sonne, & sayde: is thys your yongest brother of whome ye sayde vnto me? And sayde: God be mercyful vnto the my sonne.
Genesis 43:30 And Ioseph made hast (for his hert did melt vpon his brother) & sought where to wepe, & entred in to his chambre, for to wepe there.
Genesis 43:31 And he wasshed hys face & came out and reframed him self, and bad, set bread on the table.
Genesis 43:32 And they prepared for hym by hym selfe, & for them by them selues, & for the Egipcians the Egypcians may not eate bread wyth the Hebrues, for that is an abhominacion vnto the Egypcians.
Genesis 43:33 And they sat before hym: the eldest acordynge vnto hys age, and the yongest accordyng vnto his youth. And the men marueled among them selues.
Genesis 43:34 And thei brought rewardes vnto them from before hym: but Beniamins parte was fyue tymes so moche as any of theyrs. And they eate and dronke, and were dronke with hym.

CHAPTER: 44

Genesis 44:1 And he commaunded the ruler of his house saying: fyl the mens sackes with food, as moche as they can carye,
Genesis 44:2 and put euery mans moneye in hys bagge mouth, & put my syluer cuppe in the sackes mouthe of the yongest and his corne money also. And he dyd as Ioseph had sayd.
Genesis 44:3 And in the mornyng as soone as it was lyghte, the men were let go with their asses.
Genesis 44:4 And when they were oute of the cytie & not yet farre away, Ioseph said vnto the ruelar of his house: vp and folowe after the men and ouertake them, and say vnto them: wherfore haue ye rewarded euel for good?
Genesis 44:5 is that not the cuppe of which my Lord drynketh, and doth he not prophesye therin? ye haue euel done, that ye haue done.
Genesis 44:6 And he ouertoke them and sayde the same wordes vnto them.
Genesis 44:7 And they answered him: wherfore sayth my Lord soch wordes? God forbyd that thy seruauntes should do so.
Genesis 44:8 Beholde, the money whyche we founde in oure sackes mouthes, we brought agayne vnto the, oute of the lande of Canaan: howe then shuld we steale out of my lordes house, ether siluer or gold?
Genesis 44:9 with whom soeuer of thy seruauntes it be founde let him dye, and let vs, also be my Lordes bondmen.
Genesis 44:10 And he sayde: Now therfore acording vnto your woordes, he wt whom it is found, shalbe my seruaunte: but ye shalbe harmelesse.
Genesis 44:11 And attonce euery man toke doune hys sacke to the grounde, and euery man opened hys sacke.
Genesis 44:12 And he serched, and began at the eldest and left at the yongest. And the cuppe was founde in Beuiamins sacke.
Genesis 44:13 Then they rent their clothes, and laded euery man hys asse and went agayne vnto the cytie.
Genesis 44:14 And Iuda and hys brethren came to Iosephes house, for he was yet there, and they fel before hym on the grounde.
Genesis 44:15 And Ioseph sayde vnto them: what dede is thys which ye haue done? wyst ye not that soche a man as I can prophesye?
Genesis 44:16 Then sayde Iuda: what shall we saye vnto my Lorde, what shall we speake or what excuse can we make? God hath founde out the wekednesse of thy seruauntes. Behold, both we and he wt whom the cuppe is founde, are thy seruauntes.
Genesis 44:17 And he answered: God forbyd that I should do so, the man wt whom the cuppe is found, he shalbe my seruaunte: but go ye in peace vnto your father.
Genesis 44:18 Then Iuda went vnto hym and sayde: oh my Lorde, let thy seruaunte speake a worde in my Lordes eare, and be not wrouth wyth thy seruaunte: for thou art euen as Pharao.
Genesis 44:19 My Lord axed hys seruaunte sayinge: haue ye a father or a brother?
Genesis 44:20 And we answered my Lord, we haue a father that is olde, & a yonge lad which he begat in his age: and the brother of the sayd lad is dead, & he is al that is left of that mother. And his father loueth him.
Genesis 44:21 Then sayde my Lorde vnto hys seruauntes brynge hym vnto me, that I maye set myne eyes vpon hym.
Genesis 44:22 And we answered my Lorde, that the lad coulde not goo from hys father, for yf he shoulde leaue hys father, he were but a deed man.
Genesis 44:23 Than saydest thou vnto thy seruauntes excepte youre yongest brother come wyth you, loke that ye se my face no moare.
Genesis 44:24 And when we came vnto thy seruaunt our father, we shewed hym what my Lorde had sayde.
Genesis 44:25 And when oure father sayde vnto vs, goo agayne and bye vs a lytle fode:
Genesis 44:26 we sayde, that we coulde not goo. Neuerthelesse yf oure yongest brother go with vs then wyl we go, for we maye not see the mannes face excepte oure youngest brother be wt vs.
Genesis 44:27 Then sayde thy seruaunt oure father vnto vs. Ye knowe that my wyfe bare me two sonnes.
Genesis 44:28 And the one went out from me and it is sayde of a suertye that he is torne in peaces of wyld beastes, and I sawe him not sence.
Genesis 44:29 If ye shall take thys also awaye from me and some mysfortune happen vpon him, then shall ye bryng my gray head with sorow vnto the graue.
Genesis 44:30 Now therfore when I come to thy seruaunt my father, yf the lad be not with me: seyinge that hys lyfe hangeth by the laddes lyfe,
Genesis 44:31 then as soone as he seeth that the lad is not come, he wyll dye. So shall we thy seruauntes brynge the gray hedde of thy seruaunt oure father wyth sorow vnto the graue.
Genesis 44:32 For I thy seruaunt became suerty for the lad vnto my father and sayde: yf I brynge hym not vnto the agayne. I wyll bere the blame all my lyfe longe.
Genesis 44:33 Nowe therfore let me thy seruaunt byde here for the lad, and be my Lordes bondman: and let the lad goo home with hys brethren.
Genesis 44:34 For howe can I goo vnto my father, and the lad not wyth me: lest I shulde sea the wretchednes that shall come on my father.

CHAPTER: 45

Genesis 45:1 And Ioseph coulde no longer refraine before al them that stode about hym, but commaunded that they shuld go all out from hym, & that there should be no man with him, whyle he vttred him selfe vnto his brethren.
Genesis 45:2 And he wepte alowde, so that the Egypcians & the house of Pharao herd it.
Genesis 45:3 And he said vnto his brethren: I am Ioseph, doth my father yet lyue? But his brethren coulde not answere him, for they were abasshed at hys presence.
Genesis 45:4 And Ioseph sayd vnto his brethren: come nere to me, and they came nere. And he sayd: I am Ioseph youre brother whom ye solde in to Egypte.
Genesis 45:5 And nowe be not greued therwyth, nether let it seme a cruel thynge in your eyes, that ye sold me hyther. For god dyd send me before you to saue lyfe.
Genesis 45:6 For thys is the seconde yere of derth in the lande, and fyue mo are behynd in which there shall nether be earyng nor heruest.
Genesis 45:7 Wherfore god sent me before you to make prouisyon, that ye myghte continue in the erthe and to saue youre lyues by a greate delyuerance.
Genesis 45:8 So nowe it was not ye that sent me hyther, but god: and he hath made me father vnto Pharao and Lorde ouer al his house, & rueler in all the lande of Egypte.
Genesis 45:9 Hast you & goo to my father & tell hym, thys sayeth thy sonne Ioseph: God hath made me Lord ouer all Egypte. Come doune vnto me, and tarye not.
Genesis 45:10 And thou shalt dwell in the lande of Gosan and be by me: both thou and thy children, and thy chyldrens chylderen: and thy shepe, and beastes & all that thou hast.
Genesis 45:11 There wyll I make prouisyon for the: for there remayne yet .v. yeres of derth, lest thou and thy housholde and all that thou hast perysh.
Genesis 45:12 Beholde, youre eyes do se, and the eyes also of my brother Beniamyn, that I speake to you by mouth.
Genesis 45:13 Therfore tell my father of all my honoure wych I haue in Egypt and of all that ye haue sene, and make hast and brynge my father hyther.
Genesis 45:14 And he fell on his brother Beniamynes necke & wepte, and Beniamyn wepte on his necke.
Genesis 45:15 Moerouer he kissed all his brethren & wepte vpon them. And after that, his brethren talked with him
Genesis 45:16 And when the tydinges was come vnto Pharaos house that Iosephs bretheren were come it pleased Pharao wel & all his seruauntes.
Genesis 45:17 And Pharao spake vnto Ioseph: saye vnto thy brethren, this do ye: lade youre beastes & get you hence, And when ye be come vnto the lande of Canaan,
Genesis 45:18 take youre father and your housholdes & come vnto me, & I wyll geue you the best of the land of Egypte, and ye shall eate the fatt of the lande.
Genesis 45:19 And commaunded also. This do ye: take charretes wt you out of the lande of Egypte, for youre children and for your wyfes: and bryng your father and come.
Genesis 45:20 Also, regarde not youre stuff, for the goodes of al the land of Egypt shalbe youres.
Genesis 45:21 And the chyldren of Israel dyd euen so, And Ioseph gaue them charettes at the commaundement of Pharao, & gaue them vitayle also to spende by the way.
Genesis 45:22 And he gaue vnto eche of them chaunge of rayment: but vnto BenIamin he gaue .iij. hundred peces of syluer & .v. chaunge of rayment.
Genesis 45:23 And vnto his father he sent after the same maner .x. asses laden wyth good out of Egypt, & .x. she asses laden with corne, bred and meate: to serue hys father by the waye.
Genesis 45:24 So sent he hys brethren awaye, and they departed. And he sayd vnto them: se that ye fal not out by the way.
Genesis 45:25 And they departed from Egypt and came in to the land of Canaan vnto Iacob their father, & told him sayinge.
Genesis 45:26 Ioseph is yet a lyue and is gouerner ouer al the land of Egypte. And Iacobs hert wauered, for he beleued them not.
Genesis 45:27 And they tolde him all the wordes of Ioseph which he had sayde vnto them. But when he sawe the charettes whyche Ioseph had sent to carye hym, then hys sprites reuiued.
Genesis 45:28 And Israel sayde. I haue ynough, yf Ioseph my sonne be yet alyue: I wyll go and se hym, yer that I dye.

CHAPTER: 46

Genesis 46:1 Israel toke his iourney wt all the he had, & came vnto Berseba and offred offrynges vnto the God of hys father Isaac.
Genesis 46:2 And God sayd vnto Israel in a visyon by nyghte, & called vnto him: Iacob Iacob. And he answered: here am I.
Genesis 46:3 And he sayde: I am the myghtie God of thy father, feare not to goo doune in to Egypte. For I wyl make of the a great people.
Genesis 46:4 I wyll go doune wyth the in to Egypt, and I wyll also bryng the vp agayn, & Ioseph shal put his hand vpon thyne eyes.
Genesis 46:5 And Iacob rose vp from Berseba. And the sonnes of Israel caryed Iacob their father, & their children & their wyues in the charettes which Pharao had sent to carie him.
Genesis 46:6 And they toke their catel & the goodes which they had gotten in the land of Canaan, and came in to Egypte: both Iacob & al hys seed wyth hym,
Genesis 46:7 hys sonnes and hys sonnes sonnes wt hym, hys doughters & hys sonnes doughters & all his seed brought he wt him into Egypte.
Genesis 46:8 These are the names of the chyldren of Israel which came in to Egypte, both Iacob & his sonnes: Ruben Iacobs first sonne.
Genesis 46:9 The chyldren of Ruben: Hanoch, Pallu, Hizron and Charmi.
Genesis 46:10 The chyldren of Symeon: Iemuel, Iamin, Ohad, Iachin, Zohar & Saul the sonne of a Cananitish woman.
Genesis 46:11 The chyldren of Leui: Gerson, Rahath and Merari.
Genesis 46:12 The chyldren of Iuda: Er, Onan, Sela, Pharez & Zerah, but Er and Onan dyed in the lande of Canaan, The chyldren of Pharez, Hezron & Hamul.
Genesis 46:13 The chyldren of Isachar: Tola, Phua, Iob and Semson.
Genesis 46:14 The chyldren of Zabulon: Sered, Elon & Iaheleel.
Genesis 46:15 These be the chyldren of Lea whiche she bare vnto Iacob in Mesopotamia with hys daughter Dina. All these soules of hys sonnes and doughters make .xxx. and .iij.
Genesis 46:16 The children of Gad: Ziphion, Raggi, Suni, Ezbon, Eri, Arodi and Areli.
Genesis 46:17 The chyldren of Asser: Iemna, Iesua, Iesui, Brya & Serah their syster. And the chyldren of Brya were Heber and Malchiel.
Genesis 46:18 These are the chyldren of Silpha whom Laban gaue to Lea hys doughter. And these she bare vnto Iacob in nombre .xvi. soules.
Genesis 46:19 The chyldren of Rahel Iacobs wyfe: Ioseph and Beniamin.
Genesis 46:20 And vnto Ioseph in the lande of Egypte were borne: Manasses and Ephraim whiche Asnath the daughter of Putiphar prest of On bare vnto hym.
Genesis 46:21 The chyldren of Beniamin: Bela, Becher, Asbel, Gera, Nacman, Ehi, Ros, Mupim, Hupim and Ard.
Genesis 46:22 These are the chyldren of Rahel whiche were borne vnto Iacob .xiiij. soules al to gether.
Genesis 46:23 The chyldren of Dan: Husim.
Genesis 46:24 The chyldren of Nepthali: Zahezeel Guni, Iezer and Sillem.
Genesis 46:25 These are the sonnes of Bilha which Laban gaue vnto Rahel his daughter, and she bare these vnto Iacob, all together .vij. soules.
Genesis 46:26 Al the soules that came wyth Iacob in to Egypte whyche came oute of hys loyns (besyde hys sonnes wyfes) were al together .lx. and .vi. soules.
Genesis 46:27 And the sonnes of Ioseph, whiche were borne hym in Egypte were two soules: So that al the soules of the house of Iacob whyche came in to Egypte are .lxx.
Genesis 46:28 And he sent Iuda before him vnto Ioseph that the waye myghte be shewed hym vnto Gosan, and they came in to the lande of Gosan.
Genesis 46:29 And Ioseph made redye his charet and went to mete Israhel hys father vnto Gosan, and presented hym selfe vnto hym, and fell on hys necke and wepte vpon hys necke a good whyle.
Genesis 46:30 And Israel sayd vnto Ioseph: Nowe am I content to dye, in so moch I haue sene the, that thou art yet alyue.
Genesis 46:31 And Ioseph sayde vnto hys brethren and vnto hys fathers house: I wyl go and shewe Phrrao and teel hym: that my brethren and my fathers house whyche were in the lande of Canaan are come vnto me,
Genesis 46:32 and howe they are shepardes (for they were men of catell) and they haue brought their shepe and their oxen and all that they haue wyth them.
Genesis 46:33 If Pharao call you and axe you what youre occupacion is,
Genesis 46:34 saye: thy seruauntes haue bene occupyed aboute catell, from oure chylhode vnto thys tyme: both we and oure fathers, that ye maye dwell in the lande of Gosan. For the Egyptyans abhore all shepardes.

CHAPTER: 47

Genesis 47:1 And Ioseph went & tolde Pharao and sayde: my father and my brethren their shepe and their beastes & al that they haue, are come oute of the lande of Canaa
Genesis 47:2 and are in the lande of Gosan. And Ioseph toke a parte of his brethren: euen fyue of them, and presented them vnto Pharao.
Genesis 47:3 And Pharao said vnto his brethren: what is youre occupacion? And they sayde vnto Pharao: sheppardes are thy seruauntes, both we & also oure fathers.
Genesis 47:4 They said moreouer vnto Pharao: for to sogeorne in the lande are we come, for thy seruauntes haue no pasture for their shepe so sore is the fameshment in the land of Canaan. Now therfore let thy seruauntes dwell in the lande of Gosan.
Genesis 47:5 And Pharao said vnto Ioseph: thy father and thy brethren are come vnto the.
Genesis 47:6 The land of Egypt is open before the: In the best place of the lande make both thy father & thy brethren dwell: And euen in the lande of Gosan let them dwell. Moreouer yf thou knowe any men of actiuyte amonge them, make them ruelars ouer my catell.
Genesis 47:7 And Ioseph brought in Iacob his father and set hym before Pharao. And Iacob blessed Pharao,
Genesis 47:8 and Pharao axed Iacob, how olde art thou?
Genesis 47:9 And Iacob sayd vnto Pharao: the dayes of my pilgremage are an hundred and .xxx. yeres. Fewe & euell haue the dayes of my lyfe bene, & haue not attayned vnto the yeres of the lyfe of my fathers in the dayes of their pilgremages.
Genesis 47:10 And Iacob blessed Pharao and went out, from hym.
Genesis 47:11 And Ioseph prepared dwellinges for his father and his brethren, & gaue them possessions in the land of Egypte, in the best of the lande: euen in the lande of Rameses, as Pharao commaunded.
Genesis 47:12 And Ioseph made prouysion for hys father, hys brethren & all hys fathers housholde, as yonge chyldren are fedd with bread.
Genesis 47:13 There was no bread in all the lande, for the derth was exceadyng sore: so that the land of Egypt & the land of Canaan, were fameshyd by the reason of the derth.
Genesis 47:14 And Ioseph brought together al the money that was found in that lande of Egypte and of Canaan, for the corne which they bought: & he layde vp the money in Pharaos house.
Genesis 47:15 When money fayled in the lande of Egypte & of Canaan, all the Egypcians came vnto Ioseph and sayde: geue vs sustenaunce: wherfore suffrest thou vs to dye before the: for our money is spent.
Genesis 47:16 Then sayde Ioseph: brynge your catell, and I wyll geue you for your catell, yf ye be without money.
Genesis 47:17 And they brought their catell vnto Ioseph. And he gaue them bread for horsses & shepe, and oxen and asses: so he fed them with bread for al their catell that yere.
Genesis 47:18 When that yere was ended, they came vnto hym the nexte yere and sayde vnto him: we wyll not hyde it from my Lorde, howe that we haue nether money nor catell for my Lorde: there is no moare left for my Lorde, but euen our bodies and our landes.
Genesis 47:19 Wherfore lettest thou vs dye before thine eyes, and the lande to go to noughte? bye vs and oure landes for bread: and let both vs and our landes be bonde to Pharao. Geue vs seed, that we may lyue and not dye, and that the lande go nat to wast.
Genesis 47:20 And Ioseph bought al the land of Egypte for Pharao. For the Egypcians solde euery man hys lande because the derth was sore vpon them: and so the lande be came Pharaos.
Genesis 47:21 And he appoynted the people vnto the cyties, from one syde of Egypte, vnto the other:
Genesis 47:22 only the land of the Prestes bought he not. For there was an ordinaunce made by Pharao for the prestes, that they shoulde eate that which was appoynted vnto them: whyche Pharao had geuen them wherfore they solde not their landes.
Genesis 47:23 Then Ioseph sayde vnto the folke: beholde I haue boughte you thys daye & youre landes for Pharao. Take there seed, and go sowe the lande.
Genesis 47:24 And of the encrease, ye shall geue the fyfte parte vnto Pharao, and .iiij. partes shalbe youre owne, for seed to sowe the felde: and for you, and them of your hous holdes, and for youre chyldren, to eate.
Genesis 47:25 And they answered: Thou haste saued our lyues. Let vs fynde grace in the syghte of my Lord, and let vs be Pharaos seruauntes.
Genesis 47:26 And Ioseph made it a lawe ouer the lande of Egypte vnto thys daye: that men muste geue Pharao the fyfte parte, excepte the lande of the preastes only, whych was not bond vnto Pharao.
Genesis 47:27 And Israel dwelt in Egypte: euen in the countre of Gosan. And they had their possessions therin, and they grewe and multiplyed exceadynglye.
Genesis 47:28 Moreouer Iacob, lyued in the lande of Egypte .xvij. yeres, so that the whole age of Iacob was an hundred & .xlvij. yere.
Genesis 47:29 When the tyme drewe nye, that Israel must dye: he sent for hys sonne Ioseph and sayde vnto hym: If I haue founde grace in thy syghte, put thy hande vnder my thye & deale mercyfully and truely wyth me, that thou burye me not in Egypte:
Genesis 47:30 but let me lye by my fathers, and carye me out of Egypte, and burye me in their buryall. And he answered: I wyll do as thou hast sayde.
Genesis 47:31 And he sayde swere vnto me. And he sware vnto hym. And than Israell bowed hym vnto the beddes head.

CHAPTER: 48

Genesis 48:1 After these deades, tydynges were brought vnto Ioseph, that his father was sycke. And he toke with him his two sonnes, Manasses & Ephraim.
Genesis 48:2 Then was it sayde vnto Iacob: beholde, thy sonne Ioseph commeth vnto the. And Israel toke hys strength vnto him, and sat vp on the bedd,
Genesis 48:3 & sayd vnto Ioseph: God almyghtie apeared vnto me at Lus in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,
Genesis 48:4 and sayd vnto me: beholde, I wyl make the growe and wyl multiplye the, and wyll make a great nombre of people of the, and wyl geue this lande vnto the & vnto thy seed after the vnto an euerlastyng possession.
Genesis 48:5 Now therfore, thy two sonnes Manasses & Ephraim, which were borne vnto the before I came to the, into Egypte, shalbe myne: euen as Ruben and Symeon shal they be vnto me.
Genesis 48:6 And the children which thou getest after them, shalbe thyne owne: but shalbe called wyth the names of their brethren in their inheritaunces.
Genesis 48:7 And after I came from Mesopotamia, Rahel dyed vpon my hand in the land of Canaan, by the waye: when I had but a feldes brede to goo vnto Ephrat. And I buried her there in the waye to Ephrat whyche is nowe called Bethlehem.
Genesis 48:8 And Israhel behelde Iosephs sonnes and sayde: what are these?
Genesis 48:9 And Ioseph sayde vnto his father: they are my sonnes, which god hath geuen me here. And he sayde: brynge them to me, and let me blesse them.
Genesis 48:10 And the eyes of Israel were dymme for age, so that he coulde not well see. And he brought them to hym, and he kyssed them and embraced them.
Genesis 48:11 And Israell sayde vnto Ioseph: I had not thought to haue sene thy face, and yet loo, God hath shewed it me and also thy seed.
Genesis 48:12 And Ioseph toke them awaye from his lappe, and they fell on the grounde before hym.
Genesis 48:13 Than toke Ioseph them both: Ephraim in hys ryghte hande towarde Israels lefte hand & Manasses in his left hande, towarde Israels ryghte hande, and brought them vnto hym.
Genesis 48:14 And Israel stretched oute hys ryghte hand & layd it vpon Ephraims head which was the yonger, and hys lyft hande vpon Manasses heed, crossynge hys handes, for Manasses was the elder.
Genesis 48:15 And he blessed Ioseph saying: God before whome my fathers Abraham and Isaac dyd walke, and the god whyche had fedde me all my lyfe longe vnto thys day,
Genesis 48:16 And the augell which hath delyuered me from al euyll, blesse these laddes: that they may be called after my name, and after my father Abraham and Isaac, and that they may growe & multiplye vpon the erth.
Genesis 48:17 When Ioseph sawe that hys father layde his ryght hand vpon the heade of Ephraim, it displeased him. And he lyfte vp his fathers hande, to haue remoued it from Ephrayms head vnto Manasses head,
Genesis 48:18 and sayde vnto hys father: Not so my father, for thys is the eldest. Put thy ryght hande vpon hys head.
Genesis 48:19 And hys father wold not: but sayd: I knowe it well my sonne, I knowe it well. He shalbe also a people & shalbe great. But of a truth hys yonger brother shalbe greatter than he, and hys seed shall be full of people.
Genesis 48:20 And he blessed them sayinge. At the ensample of these, the Israelites shal blesse and say: God make the as Ephraim and as manasses. Thus sett he Ephraim before Manasses.
Genesis 48:21 And Israel sayde vnto Ioseph: beholde, I dye. And God shalbe with you & brynge you agayn vnto the land of your fathers.
Genesis 48:22 Moreouer I geue vnto the, a porcyon of lande aboue thy brethren, whiche I gat oute of the handes of the Amorytes wyth my swerde & wyth my bowe.

CHAPTER: 49

Genesis 49:1 And Iacob called for hys sonnes & sayde: come together, that I may tell you what shall happen you in the last daies.
Genesis 49:2 Gather you together and heare ye sonnes of Iacob, & herken vnto Israel youre father.
Genesis 49:3 Ruben thou art myne eldest sonne, my myghte and the begynnyng of my strength, chefe in receyuynge and chefe in power.
Genesis 49:4 As vnstable as water wast thou: thou shalt therfore not be the chefest, for thou wenst vp vpon thy fathers bedd, and than defyledest thou my couche with goyng vp.
Genesis 49:5 The brethren Symeon and Leui, wycked instrumentes are their wepons.
Genesis 49:6 In to theyr secrettes come not my soule, and vnto their congregacion be my honour not coupled: for in their wrath they slewe a man, and in theyr selfe wyll they houghed an oxe.
Genesis 49:7 Cursed be their wrath for it was stronge, and theyr fearsnes for it was cruell. I wyl therfore deuyde them in Iacob, & scater them in Israell.
Genesis 49:8 Iuda, thy brethren shal prayse the, & thyne hand shalbe in the necke of thyue enemyes, & thy fathers chyldren shall stoupe vnto the.
Genesis 49:9 Iuda is a lyons whelpe, From spoyle my sonne thou art come an hye: he layde hym doune and couched hym selfe as a lyon, and as a lionesse. Who dare stere hym vp?
Genesis 49:10 The sceptre shal not departe from Iuda, nor a ruelar from betwene hys legges, vntyll Sylo come, vnto whome the people shal hark
Genesis 49:11 He shall bynde hys fole vnto the vyne, & hys asses colt vnto the vyne braunche, and shall wash hys garment in wyne and hys mantel in the bloud of grapes,
Genesis 49:12 hys eyes are roudier than wyne, & his teeth whitter then mylke.
Genesis 49:13 Zabulon shal dwel in the hauen of the sea and in the porte of shyppes, and shal reache vnto Sydon.
Genesis 49:14 Isachar is a stronge asse, he couched hym doune betwene two borders,
Genesis 49:15 and sawe that rest was good and the land that it was pleasant, and bowed his shulder to beare, and became a seruaunte vnto trybute.
Genesis 49:16 Dan shall iudge his people, as one of the trybes of Israel.
Genesis 49:17 Dan shalbe a serpent in the way, and an edder in the path, & byte the horsse heles, so that hys ryder shal fal bacward.
Genesis 49:18 After thy sauynge loke I Lord.
Genesis 49:19 Gad, men of warre shal inuade him. And he shal turne them to flyght.
Genesis 49:20 Of Asser cometh fat breed, and he shal geue pleasures for a kynge.
Genesis 49:21 Nepthalim is a swyft hynde, & geueth goodly wordes.
Genesis 49:22 That florisshyng chylde Ioseph, that florysshyng chylde and goodly vnto the eye: the daughters ran vpon the wall.
Genesis 49:23 The shoters haue enuyed hym and chydd wt hym and hated hym,
Genesis 49:24 and yet hys bowe bode fast, & his armes & hys handes were strong, by the handes of the mightye god of Iacob: out of hym shall come an herde man, a stone in Israel.
Genesis 49:25 Thy fathers God shall helpe the, & the almyghtie shal blesse the wt blessynges from heauen aboue, and wyth blessynges of the water that lieth vnder, & with blessynges of the brestes and of the wombe.
Genesis 49:26 The blessynges of thy father were stronge: euen as the blessynges of my elders, after the desyre of the hyest in the worlde, & these blessynges shall fall on the head of Ioseph, and on the toppe of the head of hym that was separat from hys brethren.
Genesis 49:27 Beniamin is a raueshynge wolfe. In the mornyng he shal deuoure hys praye, and at nyght he shal deuyde his spoyle.
Genesis 49:28 Al these are the .xij. tribes of Israel, & this is that whiche their father spake vnto them when he blessed them, euery man wyth a seuerall blessyng.
Genesis 49:29 And he charged them & sayd vnto them. I shalbe put vnto my people: se that ye burye me wyth my fathers, in the caue that is in the felde of Ephron the Hethyte,
Genesis 49:30 in the double caue that is in the felde before Mamre in the lande of Canaan. Which feld Abraham boughte of Ephron the Hethyte for a possession to burye in.
Genesis 49:31 There they buryed Abraham and Sara his wyfe, there they buryed Isaac & Rebecca his wyfe. And there I buried Lea
Genesis 49:32 which felde and the caue that is therin, was bought of the chyldren of Heth.
Genesis 49:33 When Iacob had commaunded all that he wold vnto his sonnes, he plucked vp his fete vpon the bedd and dyed, and was put vnto his people.

CHAPTER: 50

Genesis 50:1 And Ioseph fell vpon his fathers face, & wepte vpon him, and kyssed hym.
Genesis 50:2 And Ioseph commaunded his seruauntes that were Phisicions, to enbawme his father, and the Phisicions enbawmed Israel
Genesis 50:3 .xl. daies longe, for so long doth the embawmyng last & the Egypcians bewepte him .lxx. dayes.
Genesis 50:4 And when the dayes of wepyng were ended, Ioseph spake vnto the house of Pharao sayinge. If I haue founde fauoure in youre eyes, speake vnto Pharao and tell him,
Genesis 50:5 how that my father made me swere and sayd: loo, I dye, se that thou burye me in my graue whych I haue made me in the lande of Canaan. Now therfore let me go and burye my father, and than wyll I come agayne.
Genesis 50:6 And Pharao sayd, goo and bury thy father, acordyng as he made the swere.
Genesis 50:7 And Ioseph went vp to bury his father, and with him went al the seruauntes of Pharao that were the elders of his house, and al the elders of Egypte,
Genesis 50:8 and al the house of Ioseph and hys brethren & hys fathers house: only their chyldren and their shepe and their catell lefte they behynde them in the land of Gosan.
Genesis 50:9 And there went wyth hym also Charettes and horsemen: so that they were an exceadyng great company.
Genesis 50:10 And when they came to the felde of Atad beyonde Iordane, there they made great & exceadyng sore lamentacion. And he mourned for his father .vij. daies.
Genesis 50:11 When the enhabiters of the land of the Cananytes sawe the mournyng in the feld of Atad, they sayd: this is a great mournynge whiche the Egypcians make. Wherfore the name of the place is called Abel mizraim, which place lyeth beyond Iordane.
Genesis 50:12 And his sonnes dyd vnto him acordyng as he had commaunded them.
Genesis 50:13 And his sonnes caryed him in to the land of Canaan & buryed him in the double caue which Abraham had bought wyth the felde to be a place to burye in, of Ephron the Hethite before Mamre.
Genesis 50:14 And Ioseph returned to Egypte agayne and hys brethren, and all that went vp wyth hym to burye hys father, assoue as he had buryed hym.
Genesis 50:15 When Iosephs brethren sawe that their father was deade, they sayd: Ioseph myghte fortune to hate vs and rewarde vs agayne al the euel which we did vnto him.
Genesis 50:16 They did therfore a commandement vnto Ioseph saying: thy father charged vs before his deth saying.
Genesis 50:17 This wyse say vnto Ioseph, forgeue I pray the the trespace of thy brethren & their synne for they rewarded the euell. Nowe therfore we pray the, forgeue the trespace of the seruauntes of thy fathers God. And Ioseph wepte when they spake vnto him.
Genesis 50:18 And his brethren came and fel before hym and sayd: beholde we be thy seruauntes.
Genesis 50:19 And Ioseph sayde vnto them feare not, for am not I vnder god?
Genesis 50:20 Ye thoughte euel vnto me, but God turned it vnto good to brynge to passe, as it is thys daye, euen to saue moche people a lyue.
Genesis 50:21 Feare not therfore, for I wyll care for you and for youre chyldren, and he spake kyndly vnto them.
Genesis 50:22 Ioseph dwelt in Egypte and hys fathers house also, and liued an hundred and .x. yere.
Genesis 50:23 And Ioseph sawe Ephraims chyldren, euen vnto the thyrde generacion. And vnto Machir the sonne of Manasses were chyldren borne, and sat on Iosephes knees.
Genesis 50:24 And Ioseph sayd vnto his brethren: I dye: And God wyl suerlye vyset you & brynge you out of thys lande, vnto the lande whych he sware vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.
Genesis 50:25 And Ioseph toke an ooth of the chyldren of Israel and sayd: God wyl not fayle but vpset you: se therfore that ye cary my boones hence.
Genesis 50:26 And so Ioseph dyed, when he was an hundred & .x. yere olde. And they enbawmed him & put him in a chest in Egypte.

BOOK: Exodus

CHAPTER: 1

Exodus 1:1 These are the names of the chyldrene of Israel, whiche came to Eypte with Iacob, euery man wyth hys houshold:
Exodus 1:2 Ruben, Simeon, Leui, Iuda,
Exodus 1:3 Isachar, Zabulon, Beniamyn,
Exodus 1:4 Dan, Nephtali, Gad, and Aser.
Exodus 1:5 All these soules that came out of the loynes of Iacob were .lxx. and Ioseph was in Egypte all ready.
Exodus 1:6 When Ioseph was deade and all hys brethren, and all that generation:
Exodus 1:7 the chyldren of Israell grewe, encreased multiplied, & waxed exceadyng myghtye: so that the land was full of them.
Exodus 1:8 Then there rose vp a new kyng in Egipt whyche knewe not Iosephe.
Exodus 1:9 And he sayed vnto hys folke: beholde, the people of the chyldren of Israell are moo and myghtyer then wee.
Exodus 1:10 Come on, lette vs playe wyselye wyth theym: least they multiplye, and then (if there chaunce anye warre) they ioyne theym selues vnto oure enimyes and lighte agaynste vs, and so gette theym oute of the Lande.
Exodus 1:11 And he sette taskemasters ouer theim, to kepe them vnder wyth burthens. And they buylte vnto Pharao treasure cityes: Phyton, and Rameses.
Exodus 1:12 But the more they vexed theym, the more they multiplyed and grew: so that they abhorred the chyldren of Israell.
Exodus 1:13 And the Egyptians helde the chyldren of Israell in bondage wythoute mercye,
Exodus 1:14 and made theyr lyues bytter, vnto theym, wyth cruell laboure in clay and brycke, and all maner worcke in the fyeldes, and in all maner of seruice, whyche they caused theim to worcke cruellye.
Exodus 1:15 And the Kynge of Egypte sayed vnto the mydwyues of the Ebrues women, of which the ones name was Sephora, and the other Phua:
Exodus 1:16 when ye do the offyce of a mydwyfe to the women of the Hebrues, and see in the byrthe tyme that it is a boye, kyl it. But if it be a mayed, lette it lyue.
Exodus 1:17 Notwythstanding the mydwyues feared God, and dyd not as the Kynge of Egpt commaunded them: but saued the men chyldren.
Exodus 1:18 Then the Kynge of Egypte called for the mydwiues and said vnto them: why haue ye delt on thys maner and haue saued the men-children?
Exodus 1:19 And the midwiues answerd Pharao, that the Hebrues women were not as the women of Egipte: but were sturdy women, and were deliuered yer the midwyues came at them.
Exodus 1:20 And God therfore dealte wel to the mydwyues. And the people multiplyed and waxed very myghty.
Exodus 1:21 And bycause the mydwyues feared God, he made them houses.
Exodus 1:22 Then Pharao charged al his people saying Al the men children that are borne, cast into the ryuer, and saue the mayd children alyue.

CHAPTER: 2

Exodus 2:1 And there went a man of the house of Leui. And toke a daughter of Leuy.
Exodus 2:2 And the wyfe conceaued and bare a sonne. And when she saw that it was a propre chylde, she hydde hym three monethes longe.
Exodus 2:3 And when she could no longer hyde him she toke a basket of bulryshes, & dawbed it wyth slyme & pytch, & laied the child therin, & put it in the flagges by the ryuers brinke.
Exodus 2:4 And his sister stode a farre of, to wete what wold come out of it.
Exodus 2:5 And the daughter of Pharao came downe to the riuer to wash hir selfe & hir maidens walked a long by the riuers side. And when she saw the basket among the flagges, she sent one of hir maydes & caused it to be fet.
Exodus 2:6 And when she had opened it she sawe the chyld, & behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on it: & sayed it is one of the Ebrues chyldren.
Exodus 2:7 Then sayd his sister vnto Pharaos daughter: shall I go and call vnto the a nurse of the Ebrues women, to nurse the child?
Exodus 2:8 And the mayd ranne & called the childs mother.
Exodus 2:9 Then Pharaos daughter saied vnto hyr take thys chylde awaye and nurse it for me, & I wil reward the for thy laboure. And the womanne toke the chylde, and nursed it vp.
Exodus 2:10 And when the chylde was growen, she broughte it vnto Pharaos daughter, and it was made hyr son, & she called it Moses, bicause (said she) I toke hym oute of the water.
Exodus 2:11 And it happened in those daies when Moses was waxte great, that he went out vnto hys brethren and loked on theyr burdens, & spyed an Egiptian smytynge one of his brethren an Ebrue.
Exodus 2:12 And he loked round aboute and when he sawe that there was no man by, he slewe the Egyptian and hyd him in the sond.
Exodus 2:13 And he went oute an other daye: & behold, two Hebrues strowe togyther. And he sayd vnto hym that did the wrong: wherfore smytest thou thyne neyghbour?
Exodus 2:14 And he answered: who hathe made the a ruler or a iudge ouer vs? intendest thou to kyll me, as thou kylledst the Egyptian? Then Moyses feared and sayed: of a suretye the thynge is knowen.
Exodus 2:15 And Pharao hearde of it and went about to slea Moyses: but he fled from Pharao and dwelte in the Lande of Madian, & he sate downe by a wells syde.
Exodus 2:16 The priest of Madian had .vij. doughters which came and drewe water and filled the troughes, for to water theyr fathers shepe.
Exodus 2:17 And the shepherdes came & droue them away: but Moyses stode vp & helped them, & watred their shepe.
Exodus 2:18 And when they came to Raguel their father he saied: howe happeneth it that ye are come so sone to daye?
Exodus 2:19 And they answered: there was an Egiptian that deliuered vs from the shepeherds, & so drew vs water, & watered the shepe.
Exodus 2:20 And he sayed vnto hys doughters: wher is he? why haue ye left the man? Go call him that he may eate breade.
Exodus 2:21 And Moyses was content to dwel with the manne. And he gaue Moyses Zelphora his daughter,
Exodus 2:22 which bare a sonne, & he called him Gerson: for he said: I haue bene a straunger in a straunge lande.
Exodus 2:23 And she bare yet an other sonne, whom he called Elieser, sayinge: the God of my father is myne helper, and hath ryd me out of the handes of Pharao. And it chaunced in processe of tyme, that the kynge of Egypt dyed, and the chyldren of Israel syghed by the reason of labour and cried.
Exodus 2:24 And their complaint came vp vnto God from the labour. And God remembred hys promise wyth Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob.
Exodus 2:25 And God loked vpon the children of Israel, and knewe them.

CHAPTER: 3

Exodus 3:1 Moyses kepte the sheepe of Iethro hys father in lawe prieste of Madian, and he droue the flocke to the backesyde of the deserte, and came to the mountayne of God, Horeb.
Exodus 3:2 And the Angell of the Lorde appeared vnto hym in a flame of fyre oute of a bushe. And he perceyued that the bush burned wyth fyre, and consumed not.
Exodus 3:3 Then Moyses sayed: I wyll go hence, and se thys greate syghte howe it commeth that the bush burneth not.
Exodus 3:4 And when the Lord sawe that he came for to see, he called to hym out of the bushe, and sayed: Moyses, Moyses. And he answered: here am I.
Exodus 3:5 And he sayed: Come not hyther, but put thy shooes of thy fete: for the place wheron thou standest is holy ground.
Exodus 3:6 And he sayed: I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob. And Moses hyd hys face for he was afrayed to loke vpon God.
Exodus 3:7 Then the Lorde sayed: I haue surelye sene the trouble of mi people which ar in Egipt, and haue heard their cry whyche they haue of their taskemasters. For I know theyr sorow,
Exodus 3:8 and am come downe to deliuer them out of the handes of the Egyptians, & to bringe them out of that land vnto a good lande & a large, & vnto a land that floweth with milke & hony: euen vnto the place of the Cananites Hethites, Amorites, Pherezites, Heuites, & of the Iebusites.
Exodus 3:9 Nowe therfore behold, the complaynt of the chyldren of Israel is come vnto me, and I haue also sene the oppression wherwyth the Egyptians oppresse them.
Exodus 3:10 But come, I wyl sende vnto Pharao, that thou maist bring my people, the children of Israel out of Egypt.
Exodus 3:11 And Moyses said vnto God: what am I to go vnto Pharao, & to brynge the chyldren of Israell out of Egypt?
Exodus 3:12 And he sayde: I wyll be wt the. And this shalbe a token vnto the that I haue sente the, after that thou hast brought the people out of Egyte, ye shall serue God vpon thys mountayne.
Exodus 3:13 Then said Moses vnto God: when I come vnto the children of Israel & say vnto them, the God of your fathers hath sent me vnto you & they say vnto me, what is hys name, what answer shal I gyue them?
Exodus 3:14 Then sayd God vnto Moyses: I wilbe what I wyll be: & he said, this shalt thou say vnto the children of Israel: I wilbe did send me to you.
Exodus 3:15 And God spake further vnto Moyses: thus shalt thou say vnto the children of Israel: the Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, & the God of Iacob hath sent me vnto you: this is my name for euer, and thys is my memorial thorowout al generations.
Exodus 3:16 Goo therfore & gather the elders of Israell togyther, & say vnto them: the Lorde God of youre fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob appeared vnto me, and sayed. I haue bene and sene both you and that which is done to you in Egypte.
Exodus 3:17 And I haue sayed it, that I wyll brynge you out of the tribulation of Egypte vnto the Lande of the Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Pherezites, Heuites, and Iebusites: euen a land that floweth wt milke & hony.
Exodus 3:18 If it come to passe that they heare thy voice then go, boeth thou and the elders of Israel vnto the kyng of Egypt, and say vnto him: The Lorde God of the Hebrues hath mette with vs: let vs go therfore .iij. dayes iourney into the wyldernes, that we maye sacrifice vnto the Lord our God.
Exodus 3:19 Notwithstandynge I am sure that the kyng of Egypte wyl not let you go, except it be wyth a myghty hand:
Exodus 3:20 yea, & I wil therfore stretche out myne hand & smyte Egypt wyth al my wonders which I wyll do therin. And after that he wyll lett you goo.
Exodus 3:21 And I wyll gette this people fauour in the syghte of the Egyptians: so that when ye go, ye shall not go emptye:
Exodus 3:22 but euery wyfe shall borowe of hyr neyghbouresse, & of hyr that soiourneth in hir house, iewels of siluer and of gold & rayment. And ye shal put them on youre sonnes & daughters, and shal robbe the Egyptians.

CHAPTER: 4

Exodus 4:1 Moyses answered and said: Se, they wil not beleue me, nor herken vnto my voice: but wil say the Lord hath not appeared to the.
Exodus 4:2 Then the Lord sayed vnto hym: what is that in thyne hand? and he said a rodde.
Exodus 4:3 And he sayd cast it on the grounde, and it turned into a serpente. And Moyses ranne away from it.
Exodus 4:4 And the Lord sayd vnto Moyses, put forth thyne hand & take it by the tayle. And he put forth hys hand & caught it, and it became a rodde agayne in his hand,
Exodus 4:5 that they may beleue that the Lorde God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the god of Isaac, and the God of Iacob hathe appeared vnto the.
Exodus 4:6 And the Lord sayd furthermore vnto him thruste thyne hand into thy bosome. And he thrust hys hand into hys bosome and toke it out. And behold, his hand was leperous euen as snowe.
Exodus 4:7 And he sayed: put thyne hand into thy bosome agayne. And he put his hande into hys bosome agayne, and plucked it oute his bosome, & behold, it was turned agayne as his other flesh.
Exodus 4:8 If they wyl not beleue the neither hear the voyce of the firste token: yet wyll they beleue the voyce of the second token.
Exodus 4:9 But and if they wyll not beleue the two sygnes, neyther herken vnto thy voyce, then take of the water of the riuer and poure it vpon the dry land. And the water which thou takest out of the ryuer shall turne to bloude vpon the drye land.
Exodus 4:10 And Moses sayed vnto the Lorde: oh my Lorde I am not eloquent, no not in tymes past, and namely sence thou hast spoken vnto thy seruaunt: but I am slowe mouthed, and slow tonged.
Exodus 4:11 And the Lord sayed vnto hym: who hath made mans mouthe, or who hath made the dombe or the deaffe, the seynge or the blind? haue not I the Lord?
Exodus 4:12 Go therfore and I wilbe with thy mouth, and teach the what thou shalte saye.
Exodus 4:13 But he sayed: oh my Lord, send I pray the whom thou wylt.
Exodus 4:14 And the lord was angry with Moyses and said: I knowe Aaron thy brother the Leuite that he can speake. And more ouer behold, he cometh to mete the, & when he seeth the he wyll be glade in hys herte.
Exodus 4:15 And thou shalt speake vnto hym and put the wordes in his mouth, and I wylbe wyth thy mouth and wyth his mouth, and wyl teach you what ye shall do.
Exodus 4:16 And he shal be thy spokesman vnto the people he shall be thy mouth, & thou shalt be hys God:
Exodus 4:17 and take thys rodde in thy hande, wherwyth thou shalt do myracles.
Exodus 4:18 And Moyses wente & returned to Iethro hys father in law againe and said vnto him, lette me goo (I pray the) & turne agayne vnto my brethren which are in Egypte, that I mai se whether they be yet aliue. And Iethro said to Moyses: goo in peace.
Exodus 4:19 And the Lorde said vnto Moses in Madian: returne agayne into Egypt for they are dead whych wente about to kil the.
Exodus 4:20 And Moyses toke his wyfe and his sonnes, and put them on an asse and wente agayne to Egypte, and toke the rodde of God in his hande.
Exodus 4:21 And the Lorde sayd vnto Moyses: when thou art come in to Egypte ogayne, see that thou do al the wonders before Pharao which I haue put in thy hand: but I wyl harden his herte, so that he shal not lette the people go.
Exodus 4:22 And tel Pharao, thus sayeth the Lorde: Israel is myne eldest sonne,
Exodus 4:23 and therfore sayth vnto the let my sonne go, that he maye serue me. If thou wylt not lette him go: behold, I wyl slea thyne eldest sonne.
Exodus 4:24 And it chaunced by the way in the ynne, that the Lord mett hym & woulde haue kylled him.
Exodus 4:25 Then Zephora toke a stone & circumcised hyr sonne & fell at hys fete, and sayed: a bloudy husband art thou vnto me.
Exodus 4:26 And he lette him go. She sayed a blouddy husbande bicause of the circumcision.
Exodus 4:27 Then sayed the Lord vnto Aaron: go mete Moses in the wildernes. And he went & mett hym in the mount of God & kissed him.
Exodus 4:28 And Moses told Aaron al the wordes of the Lord which he had sent by hym, & all the tokens which he had charged hym withall.
Exodus 4:29 So went Moses & Aaron and gathered all the elders of the chyldren of Israell.
Exodus 4:30 And Aaron told al the wordes whych the Lorde had spoken vnto Moses, & did the myracles in the syght of the people,
Exodus 4:31 & the people beleued. And when they hearde that the Lord had visited the children of Israell and had loked vpon their tribulation they bowed them selues and worshypped.

CHAPTER: 5

Exodus 5:1 Then Moses & Aaron went & told Pharao, thus saieth the Lorde God of Israel. Let my people go, that they maye kepe holye day vnto me in the wildernes.
Exodus 5:2 And Pharao answered: what felowe is the Lorde, that I should heare hys voyce for to let Israell go?
Exodus 5:3 I knowe not the Lord, neyther wyll let Israell go. And they sayed: the God of the Hebrues hath mett wyth vs: lett vs go (we praye the) thre dayes iourney into the deserte, that we may sacrifice vnto the Lord our God: lest he smyte vs eyther with pestilence, or wyth sworde.
Exodus 5:4 Then sayed the kynge of Egypte vnto them: wherefor do ye Moses and Aaron let the people from their worke, get you vnto your labour.
Exodus 5:5 And Pharao sayd furthermore: behold, there is much peaple in the lande, and ye make them playe and let theyr worcke stand.
Exodus 5:6 And Pharao commaunded the same day vnto the taskemasters ouer the people, & vnto the officers saying:
Exodus 5:7 se that ye giue the people no more strawe to make brycke withall, as ye dyd in time passed: let them go and gather them strawe them selues,
Exodus 5:8 and the numbre of brycke whyche they were wonte to make in tymes passed, laye vnto their charges also, & minish nothing therof. For they be idle and therfore cry saying: let vs goo and do sacrifyce vnto our God.
Exodus 5:9 They muste haue more worcke layed vpon them, that they maye laboure therein, and then wyll they not turne them selues to false wordes.
Exodus 5:10 Then wente the taskemasters of the people and the officers oute and told the people sayinge: Thus sayth Pharao:
Exodus 5:11 I wyll gyue you no more strawe, but go your selues and gather you strawe wher you can fynd it, yet shall none of your labour be minished.
Exodus 5:12 Then the people scatered abrode thoroweout all the land of Egypt for ta gather them stubble to be in stede of strawe.
Exodus 5:13 And the taskemasters hasted them forwarde saying: fulfyl your worcke day by day, euen as when strawe was geuen you.
Exodus 5:14 And the officers of the children of Israel whych Pharaos taskemasters had set ouer theym, were beaten. And it was sayd vnto them: wherfore haue you not fulfilled your taske in making brycke both yesterdaye and to daye, as well as in tymes past.
Exodus 5:15 Then went the offycers of the chyldren of Israel & complayned vnto Pharao saynge: wherfore dealest thou thus with thy seruantes?
Exodus 5:16 there is no strawe geuen vnto thy seruauntes, and yet they say vnto vs make bryke. And loo, thy seruauntes are beaten, and thy people is fowle intreated.
Exodus 5:17 And he aunswered: idle are ye idle, and therefore ye say: let vs goo and do Sacrifice vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 5:18 Go therefore and worcke, for there shall no strawe be geuen you, & yet se that ye delyuer the whole tale of brycke.
Exodus 5:19 When the officers of the children of Israel sawe them selues in shrode case (in that he said ye shall minysh nothyng of your dayly makyng of brycke)
Exodus 5:20 then they mette Moses and Aaron standinge in theyr way as they came out from Pharao,
Exodus 5:21 and sayd vnto them. The Lorde loke vnto you and iudge, for ye haue made the fauour of vs stynke in the syght of Pharao, and of his seruauntes, and haue put a swerd into their handes to slea vs.
Exodus 5:22 Moyses returned vnto the Lord & sayed: Lorde wherefore dealest thou cruellye wyth this people: and wherfore hast thou sent me?
Exodus 5:23 For sence I came to Pharao to speke in thy name, he hath fared foule with thys folke, & yet thou hast not deliuered thy people at al.

CHAPTER: 6

Exodus 6:1 Then the Lord sayed vnto Moyses: Nowe shalte thou se what I wyll do vnto Pharao for wyth a myghtye hande shall he let them go, and wyth a myghty hande shal he dryue them out of his land.
Exodus 6:2 And God spake vnto Moyses saying vnto him: I am the Lord
Exodus 6:3 and I appeared vnto Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob an almyghtye God: but in my name Iehouah was I not knowne vnto them.
Exodus 6:4 Moreouer I made an appoyntmente wyth them to gyue them the Land of Canaan: the land of theyr pilgrimage wherin thei wer straungers
Exodus 6:5 And I haue also hearde the gronynge of the chyldren of Israell, bycause the Egyptians kepe them in bondage, and haue remembred my promise.
Exodus 6:6 Wherfore say vnto the chyldren of Israel I am the Lord, & wyll bryng you out frome vnder the burdens of the Egyptians, & wyl ryd you out of theyr bondage, and wil delyuer you with a stretched out arme and with great iudgements.
Exodus 6:7 And I wyl take you for my people and wil be to you a God. And ye shall know that I am the Lorde your God, whyche bryng you out from vnder the burdens of the Egyptians.
Exodus 6:8 And I wyll brynge you vnto the land ouer the which I did lift vp my hande to giue it vnto Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and wyll gyue it vnto you for a possession: euen I the Lorde.
Exodus 6:9 And Moses told the children of Israell euen so: But they harkened not vnto Moyses for anguyshe of spirite and for cruell bondage.
Exodus 6:10 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying.
Exodus 6:11 Go & bydde Pharao kinge of Egypte, that he let the chyldren of Israell go oute of hys lande.
Exodus 6:12 And Moyses spake before the Lorde saying: behold, the chyldren of Israell herken not vnto me, howe then shall Pharao heare me: seynge that I haue vncircumcised lippes.
Exodus 6:13 And the Lord spake vnto Moyses and Aaron and gaue them a charge vnto the children of Israel & vnto Pharao kyng of Egipte: to bryng the children of Israell out of the Lande of Egypte.
Exodus 6:14 These be the heades of theyr fathers houses. The children of Ruben the eldest sonne of Israell are these: Hanoh, Pallu, Hezron, Charmy, these be the housholders of Ruben.
Exodus 6:15 The children of Simeon are these: Gemuel, Iamin, Ohad, Iachyn, Zoher, & Saule the sonne of a Cananityshe wyfe: These are the kynreds of Symeon.
Exodus 6:16 These are the names of the chyldren of Leuy in their generations: Gerson, Kahath, and Merary. And Leuy lyued an hundred and .xxxvij. yere.
Exodus 6:17 The sons of Gerson: Libni and Semei in theyr kynreddes.
Exodus 6:18 The children of Kahath: Amram, Iesear, Hebron, and Vsiel. And Kahath lyued an hundred and .xxxiij. yere.
Exodus 6:19 The chyldren of Merary are these: Mahely, & Musy: these are the kynreddes of Leuy in theyr generations.
Exodus 6:20 And Amram toke Iochebed his nece to wife, which bare him Aaron & Moses. And Amram liued an hundred and .xxxvij. yere.
Exodus 6:21 The children of Iezear: Korah, Nepheg and Sychri.
Exodus 6:22 The children of: Vsiell, Misaell, Elzaphan and Sithri.
Exodus 6:23 And Aaron toke Elizaba daughter of Aminadab & sister of Nahason, to wife: which bare him Nadab, Abehu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
Exodus 6:24 The chyldren of Korah: Assir, Elkana, & Abiassaph: these are the kynreddes of the Korahites.
Exodus 6:25 And Eliazar Aarons sonne toke him one of the daughters of Putuel to wife whiche bare him Pinehas: these be the principal fathers of the Leuites in theyr kinreds
Exodus 6:26 These are that Aaron and Moses to whom the Lord sayed: cary the chyldren of Israell out of the Land of Egipt with their armies.
Exodus 6:27 These are that Moyses and Aaron whyche spake to Pharao kynge of Egypt, that they myght brynge the chyldren of Israel oute of Egypte.
Exodus 6:28 And in the daye when the Lorde spake vnto Moyses in the lande of Egypte,
Exodus 6:29 he spake vnto hym saiynge, I am the Lorde, se that thou speake vnto Pharao the kynge of Egypte all that I say vnto the,
Exodus 6:30 And Moses answered before the Lord: I am of vncircumcised lyppes, how shall Pharao then geue me audience.

CHAPTER: 7

Exodus 7:1 And the lord said vnto Moses: behold I haue made the Pharaos God, & Aaron thy brother shalbe thy prophete.
Exodus 7:2 Thou shalt speake all that I commaunde the & Aaron thy brother shall speake vnto Pharao: that he sende the children of Israel out of his land.
Exodus 7:3 But I wyl harden Pharaos hert, that I may multiply my miracles & my wunders in the land of Egypt.
Exodus 7:4 And yet Pharao shall not herken vnto you, that I may sette myne hand vpon Egypte and brynge out myne armies, euen my people the chyldred of Israell out of the land of Egypte, with greate Iudgementes.
Exodus 7:5 And the Egyptyans shall knowe that I am the Lorde when I haue stretched forthe my hande vpon Egypte, and haue brought out the children of Israel from among them.
Exodus 7:6 Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commaunded them.
Exodus 7:7 And Moses was .lxxx. yere olde, and Aaron .lxxxiij. when they spake vnto Pharao.
Exodus 7:8 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses and Aaron sayinge:
Exodus 7:9 when Pharao speaketh vnto you & sayeth: shewe a wonder, then shalt thou saye vnto Aaron, take the rod & cast it before Pharao, and it shall turne to a serpent.
Exodus 7:10 Then went Moses & Aaron in vnto Pharao, and dyd euen as the Lorde had commaunded. And Aaron cast forth his rodd before Pharao, and before hys seruauntes, & it turned to a serpent.
Exodus 7:11 Then Pharao called for the wyse men and enchaunters of Egypte: & they dyd in lyke maner with their sorcery.
Exodus 7:12 And they cast down euery man hys rodde, & they turned to serpentes: but Aarons rod ate vp theyr roddes:
Exodus 7:13 & yet for all that Pharaos hert was hardened, so that he herkened not vnto them, euen as the Lord had sayd.
Exodus 7:14 Then sayd the Lord vnto Moyses, Pharaos herte is hardened, and he refuseth to let the people go.
Exodus 7:15 Get the vnto Pharao in the mornynge: for he wyll come vnto the water, & stand thou vpon the riuers brynke agaynst he come, and the rod whiche turned to a serpente take in thyne hande.
Exodus 7:16 And saye vnto hym: the Lorde God of the Hebrues hathe sent me vnto the sayinge: let my people goo, that they maye serue me in the wyldernes: but hitherto thou woldest not hear.
Exodus 7:17 Wherfore thus sayth the Lorde: hereby thou shalt knowe that I am the Lord. Behold, I wyl smite with the staffe that is in myne hand vpon the waters that are in the ryuer, and they shal turne to bloude.
Exodus 7:18 And the fyshe that is in the ryuer shal dye, and the ryuer shal stinke so that it shall greue the Egyptians to drynke of the water of the ryuer.
Exodus 7:19 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saye vnto Aaron: take thy staffe and stretche oute thyne hande ouer the waters of Egypte ouer theyr streames, ryuers pondes, and all pooles of water, that they maye be bloude, and that there maye be bloude in all the land of Egypt: boeth in vessels of wodde, and also of stone.
Exodus 7:20 And Moyses and Aaron dyd euen as the Lord commaunded, And he lyft vp the staffe and smote the waters that were in the riuer in the syght of Pharao, & in the sight of hys seruauntes, & all the water that was in the riuer turned into bloud.
Exodus 7:21 And the fish that was in the riuer died and the riuer stanke so that the Egyptians coulde not drinke of the water of the ryuer. And there was bloude thorow out al the land of Egypt.
Exodus 7:22 And the enchaunters of Egypt dyd lykewyse with theyr enchaimtmentes, so that Pharaos hert was hardened and did not regard them as the Lord had sayed.
Exodus 7:23 And Pharao turned hym selfe and wente into hys house, and set not his herte therunto.
Exodus 7:24 And the Egyptians dygged round about the ryuer for water to drynke, for they coulde not dryncke of the water of the riuer.
Exodus 7:25 And it continued a weke after that the Lorde had smitten the ryuer.

CHAPTER: 8

Exodus 8:1 The Lord spake vnto Moyses: Go vnto Pharao and tel him, thus sayth the Lorde: let my people go, that they may serue me.
Exodus 8:2 If thou wylt not let them go: beholde, I wyll smyte all thy lande with frogges.
Exodus 8:3 And the ryuer shall scrale wyth frogges, and they shall come vp and go into thyne house, and into thy chambre where thou sleapest, and vpon thy bedde, & into the houses of thy seruauntes, and vpon thy people, & into thine ouens, and vpon thy vytails whych thou hast in store.
Exodus 8:4 And the frogges shall come vpon the, and on the people, and vpon al thy seruauntes.
Exodus 8:5 And the Lorde spake vnto Moyses, saye vnto Aaron: stretch forthe thine hande wyth thy rodd ouer the stremes, riuers & pondes. And bryng vp frogges vpon the land of Egypte.
Exodus 8:6 And Aaron stretched his hand ouer the water of Egypt, & the frogges came vp & couered the land of Egipt.
Exodus 8:7 And the sorcerers did lyke wyse with their sorcerye, & the frogges came vp vpon the land of Egipt.
Exodus 8:8 Then Pharao called for Moses & Aaron and sayed, praye ye vnto the Lorde that he maye take away the frogges frome me and from my people, and I wyll lette the people goo, that they maye do Sacrifice vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 8:9 And Moses sayed vnto Pharao: Appoynt thou the tyme vnto me, when I shall praye for the & thy seruauntes and thy people, to dryue away the frogges from the and thy house, so that they shall remayne but in the ryuer onely.
Exodus 8:10 And he sayd to morow. And he said euen as thou hast saied, that thou maist know that there is none lyke vnto the Lord oure God.
Exodus 8:11 And the frogges shal depart from the and from thine houses and from thy seruauntes, and from thy people, and shall remayne in the ryuer onely.
Exodus 8:12 And Moses & Aaron went out from Pharao, & Moses cryed vnto the Lord vpon the appointment of frogges whych he had made vnto Pharao.
Exodus 8:13 And the Lord dyd accordinge to the saying of Moses. And the frogges died out of the houses, courtes and feyldes.
Exodus 8:14 And they gathered them togyther vpon heapes: so that the land stanke of them.
Exodus 8:15 But when Pharao sawe that he had rest geuen hym, he hardened his hert and herkened not vnto them, as the Lord had sayed.
Exodus 8:16 And the Lord sayed vnto Moyses: saye vnto Aaron stretch out thy rod and smite the dust of the Lande that it maye turne to lyfe in all the land of Egypt.
Exodus 8:17 And they dyd so. And Aaron stretched out hys hand wyth his rodd & smot the dust of the earth, & it turned to lyse both in man and beast, so that all the dust of the Lande turned to lyse, thorowout all the land of Egypt.
Exodus 8:18 And the enchaunters assayed lykewyse wyth theyr enchauntments to bringe forthe lyse, but they coulde not. And the lyse were boeth vpon man and beaste.
Exodus 8:19 Then saied the enchaunters vnto Pharao, it is the finger of God. Neuerthe later Pharaos hert was hardened, and he regarded them not, as the Lorde had sayed.
Exodus 8:20 And the Lord sayd vnto Moyses: ryse vp early in the mornynge & stande before Pharao, for he wyll come vnto the water: & saye vnto hym, thus sayeth the Lord: let my people goo, that they maye serue me.
Exodus 8:21 If thou wylt not let my people go, beholde, I wyll sende all maner of flyes both vpon the & thy seruauntes, and thy people, & into thy houses. And the houses of the egyptians shall be ful of flyes, and the ground wheron they are.
Exodus 8:22 But I wyl seperate the same daye, the Lande of Gosan wherein my people are, so that there shall no flyes be there: that thou mayst knowe that I am the Lorde vppon the earth.
Exodus 8:23 And I wyl put a deuision betwene my people and thyne. And euen to morrowe shal this myracle be done.
Exodus 8:24 And the Lord dyd euen soo: & there came noysom flyes into the house of Pharao, and into hys seruauntes houses, and into all the land of Egypt: so that the lande was marred with flyes.
Exodus 8:25 Then Pharao sente for Moses & Aaron & sayd: Go & do sacrifice vnto youre God in the land.
Exodus 8:26 And Moses answered: it is not mete so to do. For we muste offer vnto the Lorde oure God, that whiche is abhomination vnto the Egyptians: beholde, shall we sacrifice that which is an abhomination vnto the Egiptians before theyr eyes, and shal they not stone vs?
Exodus 8:27 we wyll therfore goo thre dayes iourney into the deserte, and sacrifice vnto the Lorde oure God as he hathe commaunded vs.
Exodus 8:28 And Pharao said: I wyl let you goo, that ye may do sacrifice vnto the lord your God in the wildernes: onely go not farre awaye, & se that ye pray for me.
Exodus 8:29 And Moses sayed: beholde, I wyll go out frome the and praye vnto the Lord, and the flyes shall depart from Pharao & from his seruauntes and from his people to morrow. But let Pharao from hence forth deceyue no more, that he wyll not lette the people go to sacrifice vnto the Lord.
Exodus 8:30 And Moses went out from Pharao and prayed vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 8:31 And the Lord did as Moses had said, & toke away the flyes from Pharao & from his seruaunts, & from his people so that ther remayned not one.
Exodus 8:32 But for all that Pharao hardened his hert euen then also and would not let the people go.

CHAPTER: 9

Exodus 9:1 And the Lord saied vnto Moyses, goo vnto Pharao & tell him, thus sayeth the Lorde God of the Hebrues: let my people go that they maye serue me,
Exodus 9:2 If thou wylt not let them go but wylt hold them styl:
Exodus 9:3 behold, the hand of the Lorde shal be vppon thy cattell whyche thou hast in the felde, vpon horses, asses, camels, oxen, and shepe, with a mighty greate morrayne.
Exodus 9:4 But the lord shal make a deuision betwen the Beastes of the Israelites, and the Beastes of the Egiptians: so that there shall nothing dye of all that pertayneth to the children of Israell.
Exodus 9:5 And the Lord apponited a time sayinge: to morowe the Lord shal do thys thing in the Lande.
Exodus 9:6 And the Lorde dyd the thynge on the morowe, and all the cattell of Egypte dyed: but of the cattel of the children of Israel dyed not one.
Exodus 9:7 And Pharao sent to wete: but there was not one of the cattell of the Israelites deade. Notwythstandyng the herte of Pharao hardened, and he woulde not lette the people goo.
Exodus 9:8 And the Lorde sayed vnto Moyses & Aaron: take youre handes full of ashes oute of the furnace, and let Moses sprynkle it vp into the ayre in the syghte of Pharao,
Exodus 9:9 and it shall turne to dust in al the Londe of Egypt & shall make swellynge sores wyth blaynes both on man & beast in al the land of Egipt.
Exodus 9:10 And they toke ashes oute of the fornace, and stoode before Ppharao, and Moyses sprynkled it vp into the ayre. And ther brake out soores with blaines both in man & beaste
Exodus 9:11 so that the sorcerers could not stande before Moses, for there were botches vpon the enchaunters, and vpon all the Epyptians.
Exodus 9:12 But the Lord hardened the hert of Pharao, that he herkened not vnto them, as the Lord had sayd vnto Moses.
Exodus 9:13 And the Lord sayd vnto Moyses: ryse vp early in the mornyng, & stande before Pharao and tel hym, thus sayeth the Lord God of the Hebrues: Let my people go, that they may serue me,
Exodus 9:14 or els I wyll at this tyme send all my plages vpon thyne hert, and vpon thy seruantes, and on thy people, that thou maist knowe that there is none lyke me in all the earth.
Exodus 9:15 For nowe I wyl stretch out my hand & wil smite the & thy people with pestelence: so that thou shalt perysh from the earth.
Exodus 9:16 Yet in verye dede for this cause haue I sterred the vp, for to shewe my power in the and to declare my name thorow out al the worlde.
Exodus 9:17 If it be so that thou stoppest my people that thou wylte not let them goo:
Exodus 9:18 beholde, to morow this tyme I wyl send down a mighty great hayle: euen such one as was not in Egipt sence it was grounded vnto this time
Exodus 9:19 Sende therefore and fette home thy beastes and all that thou hast in the feyld. For vpon all the men and beastes whyche are founde in the felde and not brought home, shall the haile fall and they shall dye.
Exodus 9:20 And as manye as feared the worde of the Lorde among the Seruauntes of Pharao, made theyr seruauntes and theyr beastes flee to house:
Exodus 9:21 and they that regarded not the word of the Lord lefte theyr seruauntes and theyr Beastes in the fyelde.
Exodus 9:22 And the Lorde sayd vnto Moses: stretch forth thyne hand vnto heauen, that there maye be haile in al the land of Egypt: vpon man & beast, & vpon all the herbes of the fielde in the feld of Egypt.
Exodus 9:23 And Moses stretched out his rodd vnto heauen, & the Lorde thondered and hayled, so that the fyre ran a longe vpon the ground And the Lord so hayled in the land of Egypt,
Exodus 9:24 that there was hayle & fyre mingled with the hayle, so greauouse, that there was none suche in all the Lande of Egypte, sence people inhabited it.
Exodus 9:25 And the hayle smote in the lande of Egypte al that was in the fyeld both man and beaste. And the hayle smote al the herbes of the field, and broke al the trees of the felde:
Exodus 9:26 only in the land of Gosan wher the chyldrene of Israell were, was there no hayle.
Exodus 9:27 And Pharao sent and called for Moses and Aaron, and sayed vnto them: I haue now synned, the Lord is ryghtuous, & I and my people are wicked.
Exodus 9:28 Pray ye vnto the Lord, that the thonder of God & hayle may cease, and I wyll let you go, and ye shall tarye no lenger.
Exodus 9:29 And Moyses sayd vnto hym: as sone as I am out of the city, I wyl sprede abrode my handes vnto the Lorde, and the thonder shal cease, neither shal there be any more hayle that thou mayste knowe howe that the earth is the Lordes.
Exodus 9:30 But I know that thou & thy seruauntes yet feare not the Lorde God.
Exodus 9:31 The flaxe and the barley were smitten for the barley was shot vp, & the flaxe was boulled:
Exodus 9:32 but the wheat and the rye were not smytten for they were late sowne.
Exodus 9:33 And Moses went out of the city from Pharao, and spread abrode hys handes vnto the Lord, and the thunder and hayle ceased, neither rayned it any more vpon the earth,
Exodus 9:34 when Pharao sawe that the rayne and the hayle & thunder were ceased, he synned agayne and hardened his hert: both he and his seruantes.
Exodus 9:35 So was the herte of Pharao hardened, that he wolde not let the children of Israel go, as the Lord had said by Moses.

CHAPTER: 10

Exodus 10:1 The Lord sayed vnto Moses: go vnto Pharao: neuerthelesse I haue hardened hys herte, & the hertes of hys seruauntes, that I myght shew these my signes amongest them,
Exodus 10:2 & that thou tell in the audience of thy sonne, & of thy sonnes sonne, the pageantes which I haue played in Egypt, and the miracles which I haue done among them: that ye may know how that I am the Lord.
Exodus 10:3 Then Moses and Aaron went in vnto Pharao, and sayd vnto hym: Thus sayth the Lorde God of the Hebrues: howe longe shall it be or thou wylt submit thy selfe vnto me? Let my people go that they may serue me.
Exodus 10:4 If thou wylt not lette my people go: beholde, to morrowe wyll I brynge greshoppers into thy lande,
Exodus 10:5 and they shall couer the face of the earth that it can not be seene, and they shal eate the residue whiche remayneth vnto you and escaped the hayle: and they shall eate all youre grene trees vppon the feilde,
Exodus 10:6 and they shall fyll thy houses, and all thy seruauntes houses, & the houses of al the Egyptyans after suche a maner: as nether thy fathers nor thi fathers fathers haue sene sence the tyme they were vpon the earth vnto thys day. And he turned him selfe about, and went out from Pharao.
Exodus 10:7 And Pharaos seruauntes said vnto him: How long shal we be thus euyll entreated? Lette the men goo that they maye serue the Lord theyr God: wylte thou not yet knowe that Egypt is destroyed?
Exodus 10:8 And then Moyses and Aaron were brought againe vnto Pharao, and he sayed vnto them: Goo and serue the Lorde youre God, but who are they that shall go?
Exodus 10:9 And Moyses answered: we wyll go with yonge and olde: yea, & with our sonnes and with our daughters, and wyth our shepe & oxen must we go. For we must hold a feast vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 10:10 And he sayd vnto them: let it be so? The Lorde be wyth you, should I lette you goo, and your chyldren also? Take hede, for ye haue some myschiefe in hande,
Exodus 10:11 Nay not so: but go ye that are men and serue the Lorde, for that was your desyre. And they thruste them out of Pharaos presence.
Exodus 10:12 And the Lord sayd vnto Moses: Stretch out thyne hande ouer the Lande of Egypte, for greshoppers, that they come vppon the Land of Egypt and eat all the herbes of the lande, and al that the hayle lefte vntouched.
Exodus 10:13 And Moses stretched forth his rod ouer the Lande of Egypt, and the Lorde brought an east wynd vpon the Land, all that daye and all nyghte. And in the mornynge the Easte wynde brought the Greshoppers,
Exodus 10:14 and the greshoppers wente vp ouer all the Land of Egypt and lyghted in all quarters of Egypte verye greuouslye: so that before theym were there no suche greshoppers, neither after them shal be.
Exodus 10:15 And they couered all the face of the earth, so that the land was darke therwyth. And they ate all the herbes of the land and all the fruites of the trees whyche the haile had left: so that there was no grene thynge left in the trees & herbes of the felde, thorow all the land of Egypte.
Exodus 10:16 Then Pharao, called for Moses & Aaron in haste & sayed: I haue synned agaynste the Lord your God and against you.
Exodus 10:17 Forgyue me yet my sinne only thys once, & pray vnto the Lord your God that he may take away from me thys death onely.
Exodus 10:18 And he went out from Pharao, & prayed vnto the Lord:
Exodus 10:19 & the Lord turned the wynd into a myghty strong west wynde, & it toke away the greshoppers and cast them into the rede sea: so that ther was not one greshopper in all the coastes of Egypte.
Exodus 10:20 But the Lorde hardened Pharaos herte, so that he woulde not lette the chyldren of Israell go.
Exodus 10:21 And the Lord sayd vnto Moses: Stretch out thy hand vnto heauen, & let ther be darcknesse vpon the land of Egypt: euen that they may fele the darckenes.
Exodus 10:22 And Moyses stretched forth hys hand vnto heauen, & ther was a thycke darckenes vpon al the land of Egipt .iij. dayes long,
Exodus 10:23 so that no man sawe another neither rose vp from the place wher he was by the space of .iij. dayes, but al the chyldren of Israel had light wher they dwelled.
Exodus 10:24 Then Pharao called for Moses & sayed: go and serue the Lord, onely let your shepe, & your oxen abyde, but let your children go wyth you.
Exodus 10:25 And Moses answered: thou must giue vs also offeringes, & burntofferings for to sacrifyce vnto the Lord our God:
Exodus 10:26 our catel therefore shall go with vs, and there shal not one hooffe be lefte behynde, for thereof muste we take to serue the Lorde oure God. Moreouer, we can not knowe wherewyth wee shall serue the Lorde, vntyl we come thyther.
Exodus 10:27 But the Lord hardened Pharaos hert, so that he wold not let them go.
Exodus 10:28 And Pharao said vnto him: get the from me, & take hede to thy selfe that thou se my face no more. For when so euer tou comest in my syghte, thou shalte dye.
Exodus 10:29 And Moses sayd: Let it be as thou hast sayd: I wyl se thy face no more.

CHAPTER: 11

Exodus 11:1 And the Lorde said vnto Moyses: yet wyl I bryng one plage more vpon Pharao, and vpon Egypt, & after that he wyll let you go hence. And when he letteth you go, he shal vtterly driue you hence
Exodus 11:2 But byd the people, that euery man borowe of hys neyghboure, and euery womanne of hyr neyghboures, Iewels of siluer and iewels of golde.
Exodus 11:3 And the Lorde gate the people fauour in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreouer Moses was very greate in the Lande of Egypt: both in the syght of Pharao & also in the syght of the people.
Exodus 11:4 And Moses sayd: thus sayeth the Lorde: About mydnyght wyll I go oute amonge the Egiptians,
Exodus 11:5 & all the first borne in the Land of Egypte shal dye: euen from the first borne of Pharao that sitteth on his seat, vnto the fyrst borne of the mayde seruaunte that is in the mylle, and al the firstborne of the cattell.
Exodus 11:6 And there shalbe a great crye thorow out all the lande of Egypt: so that there was neuer none lyke nor shall be.
Exodus 11:7 And amonge all the chyldren of Israel shal not a dogge moue his tonge, nor yet manne or beaste: that ye maye knowe howe the Lorde putteth a difference betwene the Egyptians & Israel.
Exodus 11:8 And these thy seruauntes shall come downe vnto me, & fal before me and say: get the out & al the people that are vnder the, & then wyll I departe. And he wente out frome Pharao, in a great anger.
Exodus 11:9 And the Lorde sayd vnto Moses: Pharao shall not regarde you, that many wonders may be wrought in the land of Egypt.
Exodus 11:10 And Moses & Aaron dyd al these wonders before Pharao. But the Lord hardened Pharaos hert, so that he woulde not let the chyldren of Israel go out of hys Land.

CHAPTER: 12

Exodus 12:1 And the lord spake vnto Moses & Aaron in the lande of Egipt saying:
Exodus 12:2 This moneth shal be your chiefe moneth: euen of the fyrst moneth of the yeare shal it be vnto you.
Exodus 12:3 Speake ye vnto all the felowshyp of Israell saying: That they take the .x. day of thys moneth to euery houshold a shepe.
Exodus 12:4 If the houshold be to few for a shepe, then let hym & his neighboure that is next vnto his house, take accordynge to the numbre of the soules, & counte vnto a shepe accordynge to euery mans eatynge.
Exodus 12:5 A shepe without spot & a male of one yere olde shal it be, and from amonge the lambes and the gootes shal ye take it.
Exodus 12:6 And ye shall kepe hym in, vntyll the .xiiij. daye of the same moneth. And euery man of the multitude of Israel shal kyl hym aboute euen.
Exodus 12:7 And they shall take of the bloud & strike it on the two side postes & on the vpperdore post of the houses, wherin they eate hym.
Exodus 12:8 And they shal eate the flesh the same nyghte, rost with fyre and with vnleuended bread, & wt sowre herbes they shall eate it.
Exodus 12:9 Se that ye eate not therof rawe ner soden in water, but rost with fyre: both the head, fete, & purtenance together.
Exodus 12:10 And se that ye let nothyng of it remayne vnto the mornyng: yf ought remayne burne it wyth fyre.
Exodus 12:11 Of thys maner shal ye eate it: with youre loynes gyrded, and shoes on youre fete, and your staues in your handes. And ye shal eate it in haste, for it is the Lordes passeouer,
Exodus 12:12 for I wyl go aboute in the lande of Egypte thys same nyght, and wyl smyte al the fyrste borne in the lande of Egypte, both of man & beast, and vpon all the Goddes of Egypte wyl I the Lorde do execution.
Exodus 12:13 And the bloud shall be vnto you a token vpon the houses wherin ye are, for when I se the bloude, I wyl passe ouer you, and the plage shal not be vpon you to destroye you, when I smyte the land of Egypte.
Exodus 12:14 And thys daye shal be vnto you a remembraunce, & ye shall kepe it holy vnto the Lord: euen thorow out your generacions after you shal ye kepe it holy daye, that it be a custome for euer.
Exodus 12:15 Seuen dayes shall ye eate vnleuended bread, so that euen the fyrst daye ye shall put awaye leuen out of youre housses. For whosoeuer eateth leuended bread from the fyrst day vntyl the .vij. day, that soule shal be plucked out from Israel.
Exodus 12:16 The fyrste daye shalbe a holy feaste vnto you, & the .vij. also. There shall be no maner of worcke done in them, saue about that only which euery man must eate that only may ye do.
Exodus 12:17 And se that ye kepe you to vnleuended bread. For vpon that same day I wyl brynge your armyes out of the lande of Egypte, therfore ye shal obserue thys day and al your children after you, that it be a custome for euer.
Exodus 12:18 The fyrst moneth & the .xiiij. daye of the moneth at euen, ye shall eate swete breed vnto the .xxi. daye of the moneth at euen agayne.
Exodus 12:19 Seuen dayes se that there be no leuended bread founde in your houses. For whosoeuer eateth leuended bread, that soule shalbe roted out from the multitude of Israel: whether he be a straunger or borne in the lande.
Exodus 12:20 Therfore se that ye eate not leuended bread, but in all youre habitacions eate swete bread.
Exodus 12:21 And Moses called for the elders of Israel & sayde vnto them: chose out & take to euerye housholde a shepe, & kyl passeouer.
Exodus 12:22 And take a bunch of ysope, & dyppe it in the bloud that is in the basyn, and strycke it vpon the vpper poste & on the two syde postes, & se that none of you go out at the dore of hys house vntyll the mornyng.
Exodus 12:23 For the Lord wyll goo aboute & smyte Egipte. And when he seyth the bloud vpon the vpper door poste & on the two syde postes, he wyl passe ouer the doore, & wyll not suffre the destroyer to come in to youre house to plage you.
Exodus 12:24 Therfore se that thou obserue thys thyng, that it be an ordynaunce to the & thy sonnes for euer.
Exodus 12:25 And when ye be come in to the land which the Lord wyl geue you accordyng as he hath promysed, se that ye kepe thys seruyce.
Exodus 12:26 And when youre children axe you what maner of seruyce is thys ye do?
Exodus 12:27 Ye shal say: it is the sacrifice of the Lordes passeouer, which passed ouer the houses of the chyldren of Israel in Egypte, as he smote the Egypcyans & saued oure houses. Than the people bowed them selues & worshypped.
Exodus 12:28 And the chyldren of Israel went, and dyd as the Lord had commaunded Moses and Aaron.
Exodus 12:29 And at mydnyght the Lorde smote all the fyrst borne in the land of Egypt: from the fyrst borne of Pharao that sat on his seat, vnto the fyrst borne of the captyue that was in presone, & all the fyrst borne of catell.
Exodus 12:30 Than Pharao arose the same nyght & al hys seruauntes and al the Egypcians: & there was a great crieng thorow out Egypte, for there was no house where there was not one deed.
Exodus 12:31 And he called vnto Moses and Aaron by nyghte sayinge: Ryse vp, & get you out from amonge my people: both ye & also the children of Israel, & go & serue the Lorde as ye haue sayd.
Exodus 12:32 And take youre shepe and your oxen wt you as ye haue sayd, & departe & blesse me also.
Exodus 12:33 And the Egipcians were ferce vpon the people, & made haste to send them oute of the land: for they sayd: we be al deed men.
Exodus 12:34 And the people toke the dough before it was sowered whych they had in stoare, and bounde it in clothes, & put it vpon their shoulders.
Exodus 12:35 And the chyldren of Israel dyd accordyng to the saying of Moses: and they borowed of the Egypcyans yewels of siluer, and yewels of gold, and rayment.
Exodus 12:36 And the Lorde gat the people fauour in the syghte of the Egypcians: and so they borowed & robbed the Egypcyans.
Exodus 12:37 Thus toke the children of Israel their yourneye from Rameses to Suchoth .vi. hundred thousand men of foote, besyde chyldren.
Exodus 12:38 And moch comon people went also with them, and shepe, & oxen, & catell exceadyng moch.
Exodus 12:39 And they baked swete cakes of the dough whych they broughte out of Egypte, for it was not sowered: because they were thrust oute of Egypte & coulde not tarye, nether had they prepared any other prouision of meate.
Exodus 12:40 And the tyme of the dwellynge of the chyldren of Israel which they dwelled in Egyte, was .iiij. hundred & .xxx. yere.
Exodus 12:41 And when the .iiij. hundred & .xxx. yeres were expyred, euen the selfe same daye departed all the hostes of the Lorde out of the lande of Egypt.
Exodus 12:42 This is a nyght to be obserued to the Lorde, because he brought them out of the lande of Egypte. Thys is a nyghte of the Lorde to be kepte of al the chyldren of Israel and of their generacions after them.
Exodus 12:43 And the Lord sayd vnto Moses & Aaron: thys is the maner of Passeouer; there shal no straunger eate therof,
Exodus 12:44 but all the seruauntes that are bought for money shall ye cyrcumcyse, and then let them eate therof.
Exodus 12:45 A straunger and a hyerd seruaunte shalnot eate therof.
Exodus 12:46 In one house shal it be eaten. Ye shall carie none of the flesh out at the doores: more ouer se that ye breke not a bone therof.
Exodus 12:47 All the multitude of the chyldren of Israel shall obserue it.
Exodus 12:48 If a straunger dwel among you, and wyl holde Passeouer vnto the Lorde, let him circumcyse al that be males, and then let hym come and obserue it, and be taken as one that is borne in the lande. No vncircumcised person shal eate therof:
Exodus 12:49 one maner of law shalbe vnto them that are borne in the lande, and vnto the straungers that dwell amonge you.
Exodus 12:50 And al the chyldren of Israel dyd as the Lord commaunded Moses and Aaron.
Exodus 12:51 And euen the self same daye dyd the Lorde brynge the chyldren of Israel out of the lande of Egypt wyth their armyes.

CHAPTER: 13

Exodus 13:1 And the lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Exodus 13:2 Sanctifie vnto me all the fyrst borne that open al maner matrices amonge the chyldren of Israel as wel of men as of beestes: for they are myne.
Exodus 13:3 And Moses sayd vnto the people: thyncke on thys day in whych ye came out of Egypt & out of the house of bondage: for wt a mighty hand the Lord brought you out from thence. Se therfore that ye eate no leuended bread.
Exodus 13:4 This day come ye out of Egypt in the moneth of Abid.
Exodus 13:5 When the Lord hath brought the into the lande of the Cananytes, Hethites, Amorites Heuytes & Iebusites, whiche he sware vnto thy fathers that he wolde geue the a lande where in mylcke & hony floweth, then se that thou kepe this seruice in thys same moneth.
Exodus 13:6 Seuen dayes thou shalt eate swete brede: & the .vij. day shal be feastfull vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 13:7 Therfore thou shalt eate swete bread seuen dayes, & se that there be no leuended bread sene nor yet leuen among you in al your quarters.
Exodus 13:8 And thou shalt shewe thy sonne at the tyme saying: this is done, because of that whiche the Lord did vnto me when I came out of Egypt.
Exodus 13:9 Therfore it shall be a sygne vnto the vpon thyne hande a remembraunce betwene thyne eyes, that the Lordes lawe maye be in thy mouth. For with a stronge hande the Lord brought the out of Egypt,
Exodus 13:10 se thou kepe therfore this ordynaunce in his season from yere to yere.
Exodus 13:11 Moreouer when the Lord hath broughte the in to the lande of the Cananytes, as he hath sworne vnto the & to thy fathers, & hath geuen it the,
Exodus 13:12 then thou shalt apoynt vnto the Lorde all that openeth the matryce, all the fyrst borne amonge the bestes which thou hast yf they be males.
Exodus 13:13 And al the fyrst borne of the asses, thou shalt redeme wt a shepe: yf thou redeme hym not, then breake his necke. But al the fyrstborne amonge thy chyldren shalt thou bye out.
Exodus 13:14 And when thy sonne axeth the in tyme to come saying: what is this? thou shalt say vnto him: with a myghty hand the Lord brought vs out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Exodus 13:15 And when Pharao was loth to let vs go, the Lord slewe all the fyrstborne in the lande of Egypte: as well the fyrst borne of men as of beastes. And therfore I sacrifice vnto the Lord al the males that open the matrice, but al the fyrst borne of my chyldren I must redeme.
Exodus 13:16 And thys shalbe as a token in thyne hande, & as a thing hanged vp betwene thyne eyes: because the Lorde brought vs out of Egypte wyth a myghtye hande.
Exodus 13:17 When Pharao had let the people go, God caried them not thorow the lande of the Philistines, though it were a nye waye. For God ayd: the people might happely repent when they se warre, & so turne agayne to Egypte:
Exodus 13:18 therfore God led them aboute thorow the wildernesse that bordeth on the red sea. The children of Israel went harnessed out of the lande of Egypte.
Exodus 13:19 And Moses toke the bones of Ioseph with him for he made the chyldren of Israel swere sayinge: God wyll surely vyset you, take my bones therfore awaye hence wt you.
Exodus 13:20 And they toke their iourney from Sucoth: & pitched their tentes in Etham in the edge of the wyldernesse.
Exodus 13:21 And the Lord went before them by daye in a pyler of a clowde to leade them the waye: and by nyghte in a pyler of fyre to geue them lyght: that they myght goo both by day and nyght.
Exodus 13:22 And the pyler the cloude neuer departed by daye nor the pyler of fyre by nyght out of the peoples syght.

CHAPTER: 14

Exodus 14:1 Than the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Exodus 14:2 byd the chyldren of Israel that they turne and pitch their tentes before the entrynge of Hiroth betwene Mygdole & the sea toward Baalzephon: euen before that shal ye pitch vpon the sea.
Exodus 14:3 For Pharao wyll say of the children of Israel: they are tangled in the lande, the wyldernesse hath shut them in.
Exodus 14:4 And I wyl harden his harte, that he shall folow after them, that I may get me honour vpon Pharao & vpon all his hoste, that the Egypcyans may knowe that I am the Lorde. And they dyd euen so.
Exodus 14:5 And when it was tolde the kynge of Egypt that the people fled, than Pharaos harte and all hys seruauntes turned vnto the people & sayde: why haue we thys done that we haue let Israel goo out of oure seruice?
Exodus 14:6 & he made ready hys charettes and toke hys people wt hym
Exodus 14:7 and toke .vi. hundred chosen charettes & all the charettes of Egypte and captaynes vpon al hys people.
Exodus 14:8 For the Lord hardened the harte of Pharao kynge of Egypt, that he folowed after the chyldren of Israel whyche for al that went oute thorow and hye hande
Exodus 14:9 and the Egypcians folowed after them and ouertoke them where they pytched by the sea, wt all the horsses & charettes of Pharao & wt his horssemen & his hoste, euen fast by the entryng of Hiroth before Baall Zephon.
Exodus 14:10 And Pharao drewe nye, & when the chyldren of Israel lyft vp their eyes & sawe howe the Egyptians folowed after them, they were sore a frayde & cryed out vnto the Lord.
Exodus 14:11 Than sayde they vnto Moses? were there no graues for vs in Egypte, but thou muste brynge vs awaye for to dye in the wyldernesse? wherfore hast thou serued vs thus, for to carye vs out of Egypte?
Exodus 14:12 Dyd not we tell the thys in Egypte sayinge, let vs be in rest & serue the Egypcians? For it had bene better for vs to haue serued the Egyptians, than for to dye in the wyldernesse.
Exodus 14:13 And Moses sayde vnto the people: feare ye not but stonde styll and beholde howe the Lorde shall saue you thys daye: For as ye se the Egyptians thys daye, shall ye se them nomore for euer tyl the worldes ende.
Exodus 14:14 The Lord shal fyghte for you and ye shal holde your peace.
Exodus 14:15 The Lorde sayde vnto Moses: wherfore cryest thou vnto me? speake vnto the chyldren of Israel that they goo forwarde.
Exodus 14:16 But lyfte thou vp thy rodd & stretch out thy hand ouer the sea and deuyde it a sondre, that the chyldren of Israel may goo on drye grounde thorow the myddest therof.
Exodus 14:17 And beholde I wyl harden the hertes of the Egyptians that they maye folowe you. And I wyll gett me honoure vpon Pharao and vpon all hys hoste, vpon his charettes and vpon his horsse men.
Exodus 14:18 And the Egyptians shal know that I am the Lord whan I haue gotten me honour vpon Pharao vpon his charettes and vpon his horssemen.
Exodus 14:19 And the angell of God which went before the hoste of Israel, remoued & went behynde them. And the clouden pyler that was before them remoued & stode behinde them and
Exodus 14:20 went betwene the hoste of the Egypcians & the host of Israel. It was a darke clowde, and gaue lyghte by nyghte: so that all the nyghte long the one coulde not come at the other.
Exodus 14:21 When now Moses stretched forth hys hande ouer the sea, the Lorde caryed awaye the sea wt a stronge east wynde that blewe all nyghte, & made the sea drye land and the water deuyded it selfe.
Exodus 14:22 And the chyldren of Israel went in thorow the myddest of the sea vpon the drye ground. And the water was a walle vnto them, both on their ryghthand & on their lefte hande.
Exodus 14:23 And the Egiptians folowed and went in after them to the myddest of the sea, with all Pharaos horsses, & hys charettes & his horssemen.
Exodus 14:24 And in the mornynge watch, the Lorde loked vnto the hoste of the Egyptians out of the fiery and clowdy pyller, and troubled their hoste
Exodus 14:25 & smote of their charett wheles and cast them doune to the grounde. Than sayde the Egypcians: Let vs fle from Israel, for the Lord fyghteth for them agaynst vs.
Exodus 14:26 Than sayd the Lord vnto Moses: stretch out thyne hande ouer the sea, that the water may come agayn vpon the Egypcians vpon their charettes and horssemen.
Exodus 14:27 Than stretched forth Moses hys hande ouer the sea, & it came agayne to hys course early in the mornyng, & the Egypcians fledd agaynste it. Thus the Lorde ouerthrewe the Egypcians in the myddest of the sea,
Exodus 14:28 & the water returned and couered the charettes and the horssemen: so that of all the hoste of Pharao that came in to the sea after them, there remayned not one.
Exodus 14:29 But the chyldren of Israel went vpon drye lande in the myddest of the sea, & the water was a walle vnto them: both on the ryghte hande of them and also on the lefte.
Exodus 14:30 Thus the Lord delyuered Israel the self same day out of the hande of the Egypcians, and Israel sawe the Egypcians deade vpon the sea syde.
Exodus 14:31 And when Israel sawe that myghty hande which the Lorde had shewed vpon the Egypcians they feared the Lorde: & beleued both the Lorde, and also hys seruaunte Moses.

CHAPTER: 15

Exodus 15:1 Then Moses and the chyldren of Israel sange thys songe vnto the Lord & sayd. Let vs synge vnto the Lorde, for he is become gloryous, the horsse & hym that rode vpon him hath he ouerthrowne in the sea.
Exodus 15:2 The Lorde is my strength & my songe, and is become my saluacion. He is my God and I wyll glorifie hym, he is my fathers God and I wyll lyfte hym vp an hye.
Exodus 15:3 The Lorde is a man of warre Iehouah is hys name:
Exodus 15:4 Pharaos charettes and his hoste hath he cast in to the sea. Hys iolye captaynes are drowned in the redde sea,
Exodus 15:5 the depe waters haue couered them: they soncke to the botome as a stone.
Exodus 15:6 Thyne hand Lorde is glorious in power, thyne hand Lord hath all to dashed the enemye.
Exodus 15:7 And wyth thy greate glorye thou haste destroyed thyne aduersaries, thou sentest forth thy wrath and it consumed them, euen as stubbell.
Exodus 15:8 Wyth the breth of thyne anger the water gathered to gether and the floddes stode styl as a rocke, and the depe water congeled to gether in the myddest of the sea.
Exodus 15:9 The enemye sayd: I wyl folowe and ouertake them, & wyll deuyde the spoyle: I wyll satysfye my lust vpon them: I wyll drawe my swerde, & myne hande shal destroy them.
Exodus 15:10 Thou bluest with thy breth & the sea couered them, & they sancke as leed in the mighty waters.
Exodus 15:11 Who is lyke vnto the O Lorde amonge goddes: who is lyke the so gloryous in holynes, fearfull, laudable & that shewest wondres?
Exodus 15:12 Thou stretchedest out thy ryght hande, and the erth swalowed them.
Exodus 15:13 And thou cariedest wyth thy mercye this people which thou delyueredest, & broughtest them wyth thy strength vnto thy holy habitacion.
Exodus 15:14 The nacions heard, & were afrayed, panges came vpon the Phylystines.
Exodus 15:15 Than the dukes of the Edomytes were amased, and tremblyng came vpon the myghtiest of the Moabytes, & al the inhabiters of Canaan waxed faynte harted.
Exodus 15:16 Let feare and dreade fall vpon them thorow the greatnesse of thyne arme, & let them be as styll as a stone: whyle thy people passe thorow o Lord, whyle the people passe thorowe, whych thou hast gotten.
Exodus 15:17 Brynge them in, & plante them in the mountayns of thyne enherytaunce, the place Lorde whych thou hast made for to dwell in, the sanctuary Lord, which thy handes haue prepared.
Exodus 15:18 The Lorde raygne euer & all waye.
Exodus 15:19 For Pharao went in on horsebacke with hys charettes & horssemen in to the sea, and the Lord brought the waters of the sea vpon them. And the chyldren of Israel went on drye lande thorow the myddest of the sea.
Exodus 15:20 And MirIam a Prophetisse the syster of Aaron toke a tymbrell in her hand, & all the woman came out after her with tymbrels in a daunse.
Exodus 15:21 And MirIam sange before them: Synge ye vnto the Lord, for he is become glorious in deade: the horsse and his ryder hath he ouerthrowne in the sea.
Exodus 15:22 Moses brought Israell from the redd sea, and they went out into the wyldernesse of Sur. And they went thre dayes longe in the wyldernesse, and coulde fynde no water.
Exodus 15:23 At the laste they came to Mara: but they coulde not dryncke of the waters for bytternesse, for they were bitter, therfore the name of the place was called Mara.
Exodus 15:24 Then the people murmured agaynst Moses, sayinge: What shall we dryncke?
Exodus 15:25 And Moses cried vnto the Lorde, and he shewed hym a tree: and he cast it in to the waters, and they waxed swete. There he made them an ordinaunce & a law & there he tempted them,
Exodus 15:26 & sayde: If ye wyll herken vnto the voyce of the Lord your god, & wyl do that which is ryght in his syght & wyl geue an eare vnto hys commaundementes, and kepe all hys ordynaunces: than wyll I put none of these diseases vpon the whych I brought vpon the Egypcyans, for I am the Lord thy surgione.
Exodus 15:27 And they came to Elim where were .xij. welles of water & .lxx. date trees & they pytched there by the water.

CHAPTER: 16

Exodus 16:1 And they toke theyr iourney from Elim, & all the hole company of the chyldren of Israel came to the wyldernesse of Sin, which lyeth betwene Elim and Sinay: the .xv. day of the .ij. moneth after that they were come out of the lande of Egypte.
Exodus 16:2 And the hole multitude of the chyldren of Israel murmured agaynst Moses & Aaron in the wyldernesse,
Exodus 16:3 & sayd vnto them: wolde to God we had dyed by the hand of the Lorde in the lande of Egypte, when we sat by the fleshpottes, & eate bred our belyes ful, for ye haue brought vs out into this wyldernesse to kyl thys holy multitude for honger.
Exodus 16:4 Than sayd the Lord vnto Moses: behold I wyl rayne bred from heauen doune to you, & let the people go out, & gather day by daye that I maye proue them whether they wyll walke in my lawe or no.
Exodus 16:5 The .vi. day let them prepare that which they wyll brynge in, and let it be twyse as moche as they gather in dayly.
Exodus 16:6 And Moses & Aaron sayd vnto al the chyldren of Israel: at euen ye shal know that it is the Lorde, whych broughte you oute of the lande of Egypte,
Exodus 16:7 and in the mornyng ye shal se the glorye of the Lorde: because he hath hearde youre grudgynges agaynst the Lorde: for what are we that ye shuld murmure agaynst vs.
Exodus 16:8 And moreouer spake Moses. At euen the Lord wil geue you flesh to eate, and in the mornynge bread ynough, because the Lord hath hearde youre murmure which ye murmur against him: for what are we? your murmuryng is not agaynst vs, but agaynst the Lorde.
Exodus 16:9 And Moses spake vnto Aaron: Saye vnto al the company of the children of Israel, come forth before the Lord: for he hath hearde your grudgynges.
Exodus 16:10 And as Aaron spake vnto the hole multitude of the chyldren of Israel, they loked toward the wyldernesse: & behold, the glorye of the Lord apeared in a clowde.
Exodus 16:11 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Exodus 16:12 I haue heard the murmuring of the chyldren of Israel, tel them therfore & say that at euen they shall eate flesh, & in the mornyng they shall be fylled wyth bred, & ye shall knowe that I am the Lorde youre God.
Exodus 16:13 And at euen the quayles came and couered the grounde where they laye. And in the mornyng the dewe lay round about the hoste.
Exodus 16:14 And when the dewe was fallen: behold it laye vpon the grounde in the wyldernesse, small and round and thynne as the hore frost on the grounde.
Exodus 16:15 When the children of Israel sawe it they sayde one to another: what is this? For they wyst not what it was. And Moses sayd: this is the bread which the Lord hath geuen you to eate.
Exodus 16:16 Thys is the thyng whych the Lord hath commaunded, that ye gather euery man ynough for hym to eate: a gomer full for a man accordynge to the uombre of you, and gather euery man for them whyche are in hys tente.
Exodus 16:17 And the children of Israel dyd euen so, and gathered some more some lesse,
Exodus 16:18 & dyd mete it with a gomer. And vnto him that had gathered moche remayned no thynge ouer, & vnto hym that had gathered lytle was ther no lacke: but euery man had gathered sufficient for his eating.
Exodus 16:19 And Moses sayde vnto them: Se that no man let oughte remayne of it tyl the mornyng.
Exodus 16:20 Not withstandyng they harkened not vnto Moses: but some of them lefte of it vntyl the mornyng, & it waxte ful of wormes & stancke, & Moses was angry with them.
Exodus 16:21 And they gathered it al morninges: euery man as moche as suffysed for his eating, for as soone as the hete of the sonne came it moulte.
Exodus 16:22 And the .vi. daye they gathered twise so moch bred .ij. gomers for one man: & the ruelars of the multitude came & tolde Moses.
Exodus 16:23 And he sayde vnto them: this is that whych the Lorde hath sayde: to morowe is the Saboth of the holy rest of the Lord: bake that which ye wyl bake & sethe that ye wyll sethe, & that whych remayneth laye vp for you, & kepe it tyl the mornynge.
Exodus 16:24 And they layde it vp tyll the mornyng as Moses bade, and it stancke not, nether was there any wormes therin.
Exodus 16:25 And Moses sayd: that eate thys daye: for to day it is the Lordes Saboth: to day ye shall fynde none in the feld.
Exodus 16:26 Sixe dayes ye shal gather it, for the .vij. is the Saboth: there shalbe none therin.
Exodus 16:27 Notwithstanding there went out of the people in the seuenth day for to gather: but they founde none.
Exodus 16:28 Then the Lorde said vnto Moses: how long shall it be yer ye wyl kepe my commaundementes & lawes?
Exodus 16:29 Se because the Lord hath geuen you a Saboth, therfore he geueth you the syxte daye bred for twoo dayes. Byde therfore euery man at home, & let no man go out of hys place the seuenth day.
Exodus 16:30 And the people rested the seuenth daye.
Exodus 16:31 And the housse of Israel called it Man. And it was lyke vnto Coriander seede, & whyte, & the taste of it was lyke vnto wafers made wyth hony.
Exodus 16:32 And Moses sayde: thys is that which the Lord commaundeth: fyll a Gomor of it, that it may be kept for youre chyldren after you: that they may se the bred wherwyth he fedd you in wildernesse, when he had brought you out of the land of Egypt.
Exodus 16:33 And Moses spake vnto Aaron: take a cruse & put a Gomer full of Man therin, and laye it vp before the Lorde to be kept for youre chyldren after you,
Exodus 16:34 as the Lorde commaunded Moses. And Aaron layde it vp before the testymonye there to be kept.
Exodus 16:35 And the chyldren of Israell ate man .xl. yere vntyll they came vnto a lande inhabited. And so they ate Man, euen vntyl they came vnto the borders of the lande of Canaan.
Exodus 16:36 And a Gomor is the tenth parte of an Epha.

CHAPTER: 17

Exodus 17:1 And al the company of the children of Israel went on their iourneys from the wildernesse of Sin at the commaundement of the Lorde, & pytched in Raphidim: where was no water for the people to dryncke.
Exodus 17:2 And the people chode wyth Moses and sayde: geue vs water to drynke. And Moses sayde vnto them: why chyde ye wyth me, and wherfore do ye tempte the Lord?
Exodus 17:3 There the people thyrsted for water, and murmured agaynst Moses & sayde: wherfore hast thou brought vs out of Egypte, to kyll vs and oure chyldren & oure catel with thyrste?
Exodus 17:4 And Moses cryed vnto the Lord sayinge what shall I do vnto this people? they be all most redye to stone me.
Exodus 17:5 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: go before the people, and take wyth the of the elders of Israell: and thy rodd wherwyth thou smotest the ryuer take in thyne hande and go.
Exodus 17:6 Beholde, I wyl stande there before the vpon a rocke in Horeb: and thou shalt smyte the rocke, and there shall come water out therof, that the people may drynke. And Moses dyd euen so before the elders of Israel.
Exodus 17:7 And he called the name of the place: Massa and Meriba: because of the chydynge of the children of Israel, and because they tempted the Lorde saynge: is the Lorde amog vs or not?
Exodus 17:8 Then came Amelech and fought with Israel Raphidim.
Exodus 17:9 And Moises sayde vnto Iosua: chose out men and goo fighte wt Amelech. Tomorow I wil stonde on the toppe of the hyll and the rood of God in myne hand.
Exodus 17:10 And Iosua dyd as Moses bade hym, and foughte with the Amelechites. And Moses, Aaron and Hur went vp to the toppe of the hyll.
Exodus 17:11 And when Moses helde vp his hande, Israel had the better. And when he lete hys hande doune, Amelech had the better.
Exodus 17:12 When Moses handes were weery, they toke a stone & put it vnder hym, and he satte downe thereon. And Aaron and Hur stayed vp hys handes, the one on the one syde, and the other on the other syde. And hys handes were steady vntill the sunne was downe.
Exodus 17:13 And Iosua discomfyted Amelech and his people with the edge of the swerde.
Exodus 17:14 And the Lorde sayed vnto Moses, write thys for a remembraunce in a boke and tell it vnto Iosua, for I wyll put out the remembraunce of Amelech from vnder heauen.
Exodus 17:15 And Moses made an aulter and called the name of it Iehouah Nissi,
Exodus 17:16 for he sayed: the hande is on the seate of the Lorde, that the Lorde wyll haue warre wyth Amelech thorow out all generations.

CHAPTER: 18

Exodus 18:1 Iethro the prieste of Madian, Moses father in lawe hearde of al that god had done to Moses & to Israel hys people, how that the Lord had brought Israel out of Egipt.
Exodus 18:2 And he toke Ziphora Moses wyfe, after she was sent backe,
Exodus 18:3 and hir two sonnes, of whyche the one was called Gerson, for he sayed: I haue bene an aliente in a straunge land.
Exodus 18:4 And the other was called Eliesar: for the God of my father was myne helpe and deliuered me from the swerde of Pharao.
Exodus 18:5 Aod Iethro Moses father in lawe came wyth hys two sonnes and hys wyfe vnto Moses into the wyldernes: where he had pytched hys tent by the mount of God.
Exodus 18:6 And he sent word to Moses: I thy father in lawe Iethro am come to the, & thy wife also & hir .ij. sonnes with hyr.
Exodus 18:7 And Moses wente out to mete hys father in lawe and did obeisaunce and kissed him, and they saluted eche other & came into the tent.
Exodus 18:8 And Moses tolde his father in lawe al that the Lord had done vnto Pharao & to the Egiptians for Israels sake, and all the trauayle that had happened them by the way, and how the Lord had deliuered them.
Exodus 18:9 And Iethro reioysed ouer all the good which the Lorde had done to Israell, & bicause he had deliuered them out of the handes of the Egyptians.
Exodus 18:10 And Iethro saied: blessed be the Lord whyche hath deliuered you oute of the hand of the Egyptians and out of the hand of Pharao, whych hath deliuered hys people from vnder the power of the Egiptians
Exodus 18:11 Now I knowe that the Lord is greater then al Gods, for bicause that they dealt proudly with them.
Exodus 18:12 And Iethro Moses father in lawe offered burnte offerynges and sacrifices vnto God. And Aaron and all the elders of Israell came to eate bread with Moses father in lawe before God.
Exodus 18:13 And it chaunced on the morow that Moses satt to iudge the people, & the people stode about Moses from morninge vnto euen.
Exodus 18:14 When his father in law sawe all that he did vnto the people, he sayde: what is this that thou doest vnto the people? why sittest thou thy self & lettest all the people stonde aboute the from mornynge vnto euen?
Exodus 18:15 And Moses sayd vnto his father in lawe: because the people came vnto me to seke counsayll of God.
Exodus 18:16 For when they haue a matter, thei come vnto me, and I must iudge betwene euery man & his neyghboure, & must shew them the ordinaunces of God and hys lawes.
Exodus 18:17 And his father in lawe sayde vnto him: it is not wel that thou doest.
Exodus 18:18 Thou doest vnwisely & also this people that is with the: because the thinge is to greuous for the & thou arte not able to do it thy selfe alone.
Exodus 18:19 But heare my voyce, and I will geue the counsayl, and God shalbe with the. Be thou vnto the people to Godward, and bryng the causes vnto God
Exodus 18:20 and prouide them ordinaunces & lawes, and shewe them the waye wherin they must walke and the workes that they must do.
Exodus 18:21 Moreouer seke oute amonge all the people, men of actiuitie which feare God and men that are true and hate coueteousnes: & make them heades ouer the people, captaines ouer thousandes, ouer hundredes, ouer fifty & ouer ten.
Exodus 18:22 And let them iudge the people at all seasons: If there be any great matter let theym bringe that vnto the, & let them iudge al smal causes them selfes, & ease thy selfe & let them bere with the.
Exodus 18:23 If thou shalt do this thing, then thou shalt be able to endure that which God chargeth the with all, & all this people shall go to their places quietly.
Exodus 18:24 And Moses hearde the voyce of his father in lawe, and dyd all that he had sayd,
Exodus 18:25 & chose actyue men out of all Israel and made them heades ouer the people, captaynes ouer thousandes, ouer hundreds, ouer fiftye and ouer ten.
Exodus 18:26 And thei iudged the people at all seasons, & brought the harde causes vnto Moyses: & iudged all small matters them selfes.
Exodus 18:27 And than Moses let hys father in lawe departe, and he went into his owne lande.

CHAPTER: 19

Exodus 19:1 The thyrd moneth after the children of Israel were gone out of Egipt: the same daye they came into the wildernesse of Sinai.
Exodus 19:2 For they were departed from Raphidim, & were come to the desert of Sinai, and had pitched their tentes in the wildernesse. And there Israell pitched before the mounte.
Exodus 19:3 And Moses went vp vnto God. And the Lorde called to hym out of the mountayn, sayinge: thus saye vnto the house of Iacob, & tell the chyldren of Israel:
Exodus 19:4 ye haue sene what I dyd vnto the Egipcians & how I toke you vp vpon Egles wynges, & haue brought you vnto my self.
Exodus 19:5 Now therefore if ye will heare my voyce & kepe myne apoyntement: ye shall be myne owne aboue al nacions, for all the erth is myne.
Exodus 19:6 Ye shalbe vnto me a kyngdome of priestes & an holy people: these are the wordes which thou shalt say vnto the children of Israel.
Exodus 19:7 And Moses came & called for the elders of Israel, & layde before them all these wordes which the Lord had commaunded hym.
Exodus 19:8 And the people aunswered altogether and sayde: All that the Lorde hath sayde, we will do. And Moses brought the wordes of the people vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 19:9 And the Lord sayde vnto Moses: Lo, I will come vnto the in a thycke cloude, that the people maye heare when I talke with the, and also beleue the for euer. And Moses shewed the wordes of the people vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 19:10 And the Lord sayde vnto Moses: Go vnto the people & sanctifye them to daye & to morow, & let them washe their clothes:
Exodus 19:11 that they waye be redy agaynste the thyrde daye. For the thyrd day the Lord will come doune in the sighte of all the people vppon mounte Synai.
Exodus 19:12 And set markes rounde aboute the people & saye: beware that ye go not vp into the mounte, & that ye touche not the borders of it, for whosoeuer toucheth the mounte, shall surely dye.
Exodus 19:13 There shall not an hande touch it, but that he shall eyther be stoned or els that thorow: whether it be beast or man, it shall not lyue, when the horne bloweth: than let them come vp into the mountayn.
Exodus 19:14 And Moses went doune from the mount vnto the people and sanctified them, & they wasshed their clothes:
Exodus 19:15 And he sayde vnto the people: be redye against the thyrde daye, & se that ye come not at youre wyues.
Exodus 19:16 And the thyrde daye in the mornyng there was thunder, & lightening & a thicke cloude vpon the mounte, & the voice of the horne waxed exceadynge loude, & all the people that was in the hoste was afrayed.
Exodus 19:17 And Moses brought the people out of the tentes to mete with God, & they stode vnder the hyll.
Exodus 19:18 And mounte Sinai was altogether on a smoke: because the Lorde descended doune vpon it in fyre. And the smoke therof ascended vp, as it had bene the smoke of a kylle, & all the mount was exceadyng fearfull.
Exodus 19:19 And the voyce of the horne blewe & waxed louder & louder. Moses spake, & God aunswered hym and that with a voyce.
Exodus 19:20 And the Lorde came doune vpon mounte Sinai, euen in the toppe of the hyll, and called Moyses vp into the toppe of the hyll. And Moyses went vp.
Exodus 19:21 And the Lord sayd vnto Moses: go doune & charge the people that they prease not vp vnto the Lorde for to se hym, & so many of them perish.
Exodus 19:22 And let the priestes also which come to the Lordes presence sanctifye them selfes: lest the Lord smyte them.
Exodus 19:23 Then Moses sayd vnto the Lord: the people can not come vp into the mounte Sinai, for thou chargedest vs saying: set markes about the hyll, & sanctifie it.
Exodus 19:24 And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: awaye, & get the doune: & come vp both thou & Aaron with the. But let not the priestes & the people presume for to come vp vnto the Lorde: lest he smyte them.
Exodus 19:25 And Moyses went donne vnto the people, and tolde them.

CHAPTER: 20

Exodus 20:1 And God spake all these woordes & sayd:
Exodus 20:2 I am the Lorde thy God, which haue brought the out of the lande of Egipte and out of the house of bondage.
Exodus 20:3 Thou shalt haue none other Goddes in my sight.
Exodus 20:4 Thou shalt make the no grauen ymage neyther any similitude that is in heauen aboue either in the earth beneth, or in the water that is beneth the earth.
Exodus 20:5 Se that thou neither bowe thy self vnto them neither serue them: for I the Lord thy God, am a gelouse God, & viset the synne of the fathers vppon the chyldren vnto the thyrd and fourth generacion of them that hate me:
Exodus 20:6 and yet shew mercy vnto thousandes among them that loue me and kepe my commaundementes.
Exodus 20:7 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vayne, for the Lord wil not hold him giltlesse that taketh his name in vayne.
Exodus 20:8 Remembre the Sabbath daye that thou sanctifie it.
Exodus 20:9 Sixe dayes mayst thou laboure and do all that thou hast to do:
Exodus 20:10 but the seuenth day is the Sabbath daye of the Lord thy God, in it thou shalt do no maner worke: nether thou nor thy sonne, nor thy doughter, neither thy man seruaunte nor thy mayde seruaunt, neither thy cattel neither yet the straunger that is within thy gates.
Exodus 20:11 For in sixe dayes the Lord made both heauen & earth & the sea & all that in them is and rested the seuenth day: wherfore the Lord blessed the Sabbath daye and halowed it.
Exodus 20:12 Honour thy father & thy mother, that thy dayes may be longe in the lande which the Lorde thy God geueth the.
Exodus 20:13 Thou shalt not kyll.
Exodus 20:14 Thou shalt not breake wedlocke.
Exodus 20:15 Thou shalt not steale.
Exodus 20:16 Thou shalte beare no false witnesse agaynst thy neyghboure.
Exodus 20:17 Thou shalt not couet thy neighbours house neither shalt couet thy neighbours wyfe, his man seruaunt, his mayde, his oxe, his asse or oughte that is hys.
Exodus 20:18 And all the people sawe the thunder & the lighteninge & the noyse of the horne, & howe the mountayne smoked. And when the people sawe it, they remoued & stode a ferre of
Exodus 20:19 and sayde vnto Moyses: talke thou with vs & we wil heare but let not God talke with vs lest we dye.
Exodus 20:20 And Moses sayd vnto the people fear not, for God is come to proue you, & that his feare maye be among you that ye sinne not.
Exodus 20:21 And the people stode a farre of, & Moses went into the thicke cloude where God was
Exodus 20:22 And the Lord sayde vnto Moses: thus thou shalt saye vnto the children of Israel: Ye haue sene how that I haue talked with you from out of heauen.
Exodus 20:23 Ye shal not make therfore with me goddes of syluer nor goddes of golde: in no wise shal ye do it.
Exodus 20:24 An aulter of erth thou shalte make vnto me and thereon offer thy burntofferynges & thy peace offeringes, and thy shepe and thyne oxen. And in all places where I shall put the remembraunce of my name, thither I will come vnto the & blesse the.
Exodus 20:25 But and if thou wilt make me an aulter of stone, se thou make it not of hewed stone, for if thou lift vp thy tole vpon it, thou shalt polute it.
Exodus 20:26 Moreouer thou shalt not go vp wt steppes vnto myne aulter, that thy nakednesse be not shewed thereon.

CHAPTER: 21

Exodus 21:1 These are the lawes whyche thou shalt set before the.
Exodus 21:2 If thou bye a seruaunt that is an Hebrue, sixe yeres he shall serue, & the seuenth he shal go out fre payng nothing.
Exodus 21:3 If he came alone, he shal go out alone: If he came maried, his wyfe shal goo out with him.
Exodus 21:4 And if his master haue geuen him a wyfe & she haue born him sonnes or doughters: then the wife & her children shalbe her masters & he shall goo out alone.
Exodus 21:5 But & if the seruaunt say I loue my master & my wife & my children, I wil not go out fre.
Exodus 21:6 Then let his master bring him vnto the Goddes and sette hym to the doore or the dorepost & bore his eare thorow with a naule and let hym be his seruaunte for euer.
Exodus 21:7 If a man sell his doughter to be a seruaunt she shal not go out as the men seruauntes doo.
Exodus 21:8 If she please not her master, so that he hath geue her to no man to wife, then shal he let her go fre: to sell her vnto a straunge nacion shall he haue no power, because he despysed her.
Exodus 21:9 If he haue promised her vnto his son to wife, he shal deale with her as men do with their doughters.
Exodus 21:10 If he take him another wife yet her fode, rayment and dutye of mariage shall he not mynyshe.
Exodus 21:11 If he do not these thre vnto her, then shal she goo oute fre and paye no money.
Exodus 21:12 He that smiteth a man that he dye shalbe slain for it.
Exodus 21:13 If a man laie not awayt but God delyuer him into his hand, then I wyll poynte the a place whether he shall fle.
Exodus 21:14 If a man come presumpteously vpon his neyghboure and slea him with gile, thou shalt take him fro myne aulter that he dye.
Exodus 21:15 And he that smyteth hys father or his mother, shall dye for it.
Exodus 21:16 He that stealeth a man & selleth him (if it be proued vpon hym) shalbe slayne for it,
Exodus 21:17 And he that curseth his father or mother, shalbe put to death for it.
Exodus 21:18 If men striue together and one smyte another with a stone or with hys fyste, so that he dye not, but lieth in bedde:
Exodus 21:19 if he ryse agayne and walke withoute vpon hys staffe then shall he that smote hym go quyte: saue only he shall bere his charges whyle he laie in bedde & pay for his healing.
Exodus 21:20 If a man smyte his seruaunt or hys mayde with a staffe that they dye vnder his hand, it shalbe auenged.
Exodus 21:21 But & if they continue a daye or two, it shall not be auenged for they are his money.
Exodus 21:22 When men stryue & smyte a woman with chylde so that her frute departe from her and yet no misfortune foloweth: then shal he be mersed, according as the womans husband will laye to his charge, & he shall paye as the dayes men appoynte hym.
Exodus 21:23 But and if any misfortune folow, then shall he pay lyfe for lyfe,
Exodus 21:24 eye for eye, toth for toth, hande, for hande, fote for fote,
Exodus 21:25 burnyng for burnynge, wounde for wounde, and strype for strype.
Exodus 21:26 If a man smite his seruaunt or his mayde in the eye & put it out, he shal let them go fre for the eyes sake.
Exodus 21:27 Also if he smyte out his seruauntes or his maydes toth, he shal let them go out fre for the tothes sake.
Exodus 21:28 If an oxe gore a man or a woman that thei dye, then the oxe shalbe stoned, & hys flesh shall not be eaten: and hys master shall go quyte.
Exodus 21:29 If the oxe were wont to runne at men in tyme past & it hath bene tolde hys master, & he hath not kept hym, but that he hath killed a man or a woman: then the oxe shalbe stoned and hys master shall dye also.
Exodus 21:30 If he be set to a summe of money, then he shall geue for the deliueraunce of hys lyfe, accordynge to all that is put vnto hym.
Exodus 21:31 And whether he hath gored a sonne or a doughter, he shalbe serued after the same maner.
Exodus 21:32 But if it be a seruaunte or a mayde that the oxe hathe gored, then he shall geue vnto their master the summe of .xxx. siccles, and the oxe shall be stoned.
Exodus 21:33 If a man open a welle, or dygge a pytte, and couer it not, but that an oxe or an asse fal therein,
Exodus 21:34 the owner of the pytte shall make it good and geue money vnto their master, and the dead beast shalbe hys.
Exodus 21:35 If one mans oxe hurte anothers that he dye, then they shal sell the lyue oxe & deuyde the money, & the dead oxe also they shall deuide.
Exodus 21:36 But & if it be knowen that the oxe hathe vsed to pusshe in tymes past, then because his master hath not kept hym, he shall paye oxe for oxe, and the dead shalbe hys owne.

CHAPTER: 22

Exodus 22:1 If a man steale an oxe or shepe & kylle it or selle it, he shall restore .v. oxen for an oxe, & .iiij. shepe for a shepe.
Exodus 22:2 If a thefe be founde breakynge vp & be smytten that he dye, there shal no bloude be shed for hym:
Exodus 22:3 excepte the sunne be vp when he is founde, then there shalbe bloude shed for hym. A thefe shall make restitucion: If he haue not wherwith, he shalbe solde for hys thefte.
Exodus 22:4 If the theft be founde in his hande alyue (whether it be oxe, asse or shepe) he shall restore double.
Exodus 22:5 If a man do hurt felde or vyneyarde so that he put in his beast to fede in another mans felde: of the beste of hys owne felde, & of the best of his owne vyneyarde, shall he make restitucion.
Exodus 22:6 If fyre breake out & catch in the thornes, so that the stakes of corne or the standynge corne or felde be consumed therwith: he that kyndled the fyre shall make restitucion.
Exodus 22:7 If a man deliuer his neyghboure money or stuffe to kepe, & it be stolen out of his house: If the thefe be founde, he shal pay double.
Exodus 22:8 If the thefe be not founde, then the goodman of the house shalbe broughte vnto the goddes & swere, whether he haue put hys hande vnto hys neyghboures good.
Exodus 22:9 And in al maner of trespace, whether it be oxe, asse, shepe, raymente or any maner loste thyng whiche another chalengeth to be hys, the cause of bothe parties shall come before the goddes. And whom the goddes condemne: the same shall paye double vnto his neyghbour.
Exodus 22:10 If a man delyuer vnto his neighbour to kepe, asse, oxe, shepe or what so euer beaste it be and it dye or be hurte or dryuen awaie and no man se it;
Exodus 22:11 then shall an othe of the Lord goo betwene them, whether he haue put hys hand vnto his neyghbours good: & the owner of it shall take the othe, and the other shal not make it good:
Exodus 22:12 If it be stollen from him, then he shall make restitution vnto the owner:
Exodus 22:13 If it be torne with wylde beastes, then let hym brynge recorde of the terynge: & he shall not make it good.
Exodus 22:14 When a man boroweth ought of his neighbour if it be hurte or els dye, and if the owner thereof be not by, he shall make it good:
Exodus 22:15 If the owner thereof be by, he shall not make it good namelye if it be an hyred thyng and came for hyre.
Exodus 22:16 If a man begyle a mayde that is not betrouthed and lie with her, he shall endote her and take her to his wyfe:
Exodus 22:17 If hir father refuse to geue her vnto hym, he shall paye moneye accordynge to the dowrye of virgyns.
Exodus 22:18 Thou shalte not suffer a wytche to lyue.
Exodus 22:19 Whosoeuer lyeth with a beast, shalbe slayne for it.
Exodus 22:20 He that offereth vnto any goddes saue vnto the Lord only, let him die without redemption
Exodus 22:21 Vexe not a straunger nether opresse hym for ye were strangers in the land of Egipt
Exodus 22:22 Ye shal trouble no widdowe nor fatherlesse chylde:
Exodus 22:23 If ye shall trouble them: they shall crye vnto me, and I wyll surelye heare their crye
Exodus 22:24 and then wyl my wrath waxe hote and I wyl kil you with the sweard, and your wiues shalbe widdowes and your chyldren fatherlesse.
Exodus 22:25 If thou lende money to any of my people that is poore by the, thou shalte not be as an vsurer vnto him, nether shalt oppresse him wt vsurye.
Exodus 22:26 If thou take thy neyghboures rayment to pledge, that thou delyuer it vnto him agayne by that the sunne go downe.
Exodus 22:27 For that is hys couerlet onely: euen the raymente for his skynne wherein he slepeth: or els he wyll crye vnto me and I wyl heare him, for I am mercyfull.
Exodus 22:28 Thou shalt not rayle vpon the goddes, nether cursse the ruler of thy people.
Exodus 22:29 Thy frutyes (whether they be drye or moyste) se thou kepe not backe. Thy firste borne sonne thou shalte geue me:
Exodus 22:30 lykewyse shalte thou do of thyne oxen and of thy shepe Seuen dayes it shall be wyth the dame, and the .viij. daye thou shalte geue it me.
Exodus 22:31 Ye shall be holye people vnto me, and therefore shall ye eate no fleshe that is torne of beastes in the felde. But shall caste it to dogges.

CHAPTER: 23

Exodus 23:1 Thou shalt not accepte a vayne tale, nether shalt put thine hand wyth the wycked to be an vnryghteous wytnesse.
Exodus 23:2 Thou shalt not folowe a multitude to do euell: neyther answere in a matter of plea that thou (wouldest to folow manye) turne asyde from the trueth,
Exodus 23:3 neither shalt thou paint a pore mans cause.
Exodus 23:4 When thou metest thine enemies oxe or asse goynge a straye, thou shalt brynge them to him agayne.
Exodus 23:5 If thou se thine enemies asse synke vnder his burthen, thou shalt not passe by and let him alone: but shalt helpe hym to lyfte hym vp againe.
Exodus 23:6 Thou shalt not hinder the right of the poore that are amonge you in their sute.
Exodus 23:7 Kepe the ferre from a false matter, and the Innocente and righteous se thou sley not, for I wil not iustify the wicked.
Exodus 23:8 Thou shalt take no gyftes, for gyftes blynd the seynge and peruerte the wordes of the ryghteous.
Exodus 23:9 Thou shalt not oppresse a straunger, for I knowe the herte of a straunger, because ye were straungers in Egypt.
Exodus 23:10 Sixe yeres thou shalt sowe thy land and gather in the frutes therof:
Exodus 23:11 & the seuenth yere thou shalt let it rest and lye styl, that the poore of thy people may eate, and what they leaue, the beastes of the felde shall eate: In lyke maner thou shalt do wyth thy vineyard and thine oliue tres.
Exodus 23:12 Sixe dayes thou shalt do thy worcke and the seuenth daye thou shalt kepe holye daye, that thyne oxe and thyne asse maye reste and the sonne of thy maide and the stranger may be refreshed.
Exodus 23:13 And in all thinges that I haue said vnto you be circumspecte. And make no rehersall of the names of straunge goddes, nether let anye man heare them oute of youre mouthes.
Exodus 23:14 Thre feastes thou shalt holde vnto me in a yere,
Exodus 23:15 Thou shalt kepe the feaste of swete bread that thou eate vnleuened bread .vij. dayes longe, as I commaunded the in the tyme appoynted of the moneth of Abyb, for in that moneth thou camest out of Egypte: and se that no man apeare before me emptye.
Exodus 23:16 And the feaste of Heruest, when thou reapeste the fyrst frutes of thy laboures whych thou hast sowne in the felde. And the feast of ingatherynge, in the ende of the yere when thou haste gathered in thye laboures oute of the felde.
Exodus 23:17 Thre tymes in a yere shall all thye menchyldren appere before the Lord Iehouah.
Exodus 23:18 Thou shalt not offer the bloude of my sacrifyce wt leuended bread: nether shal the fat of my feast remayne vntyl the mornynge.
Exodus 23:19 The first of the firstfrutes of thy lande thou shalt brynge into the house of the Lorde thye God thou shalt also not sethe a kydd in his mothers mylke.
Exodus 23:20 Beholde, I sende myne aungel before the to kepe the in the waye, & to bryng the into the place whych I haue prepared.
Exodus 23:21 Beware of him & heare his voice and angre him not: for he will not spare youre mysdedes, yea, and my name is in hym.
Exodus 23:22 But & if thou shalt herken vnto hys voyce & kepe all that I shal tel the, then I wilbe an enemy vnto thyne enemies and an aduersary vnto thine aduersaries.
Exodus 23:23 When myne aungel goeth before the & hath brought the in vnto the Amorites, Hethithes, Pherezites, Cananites, Heuites and Iebusites & I shall haue destroyed them,
Exodus 23:24 se thou worship not their goddes neyther serue them, neither do after the workes of them but ouerthrowe them & breake doune the places of them.
Exodus 23:25 And se that ye serue the Lord youre God, & he shall blesse thy bread & thy water and I will take all sickenesses awaye from amonge you.
Exodus 23:26 Moreouer there shalbe no woman chyldlesse or vnfrutefull in thy lande, & the numbre of thy wayes I will fulfyll.
Exodus 23:27 I wil sende my feare before the and will kill all the people whether thou shalt go. And I will make all thyne enemies turne their backes vnto the,
Exodus 23:28 & I will sende hornettes before the, & they shall driue out of the Heuites, the Cananites & the Hethites before the.
Exodus 23:29 I will not cast them out in one yere, lest the lande growe to a wildernesse: & the beastes of the felde multeplye vpon the.
Exodus 23:30 But a litle & a litle I wil dryue them out before the, vntyll thou be increased that thou mayst enheret the lande.
Exodus 23:31 And I wil make thy costes from the red sea vnto the sea of the Philistines and from the deserte vnto the ryuer. I wil deliuer the inhabiters of the lande into thyne hande, & thou shalt dryue them out before the.
Exodus 23:32 And thou shalte make none appoyntment with them nor with their goddes.
Exodus 23:33 Neither shall they dwel in thy lande, lest they make the sinne agaynste me: for if thou serue their goddes it will surely be thy decaye.

CHAPTER: 24

Exodus 24:1 And he sayde vnto Moses: come vnto the Lord: both thou & Aaron, Nadab & Abihu, & the .lxx. elders of Israel, and worship afarre of.
Exodus 24:2 And Moyses went hym selfe alone vnto the Lord, but they came not nye, neyther came the people vp with hym.
Exodus 24:3 And Moses came & tolde the people all the wordes of the Lorde & all the lawes. And all the people aunswered with one voyce & sayd: all the wordes which the Lord hath sayd, will we do.
Exodus 24:4 Then Moyses wrote all the wordes of the Lorde & rose vp early and made an aulter vnder the hyl, & .xij. pyllers according to the numbre of the .xij. trybes of Israell,
Exodus 24:5 and sent yonge men of the children of Israel to sacrifice burntoffringes and to offre peaceoffringes of Oxen vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 24:6 And Moyses toke halfe of the bloude & put it in basens, and the other halfe he sprenkled on the aulter.
Exodus 24:7 And he toke the boke of the appoyntment & red it in the audience of the people. And thei sayd. All that the Lord hath sayd, we wil do and heare.
Exodus 24:8 And Moyses toke the bloude and sprynkeld it on the people and sayd: beholde, this is the bloude of the appointment which the Lorde hath made with you vpon al these woordes.
Exodus 24:9 Then went Moyses & Aaron, Nadad and Abihu and the .lxx. elders of Israell vp,
Exodus 24:10 and sawe the God of Israel, and vnder his feate as it were a brycke worke of Saphir & as it were the facion of heauen when it is cleare,
Exodus 24:11 & vpon the nobles of the chyldren of Israel he set not hys hande. And when they had sene God they ate and dronke.
Exodus 24:12 And the Lord sayde vnto Moyses: come vp to me into the hyll and be there, & I wyll geue the tables of stone and a lawe and commaundementes, which I haue written to teache them.
Exodus 24:13 Then Moyses rose vp & his minister Iosua, and Moyses went vppe into the hyll of God,
Exodus 24:14 & said vnto the elders: tarye ye here vntyll we come agayne vnto you: And beholde here is Aaron & Hur with you. If any man haue any matters to do, let hym come to them.
Exodus 24:15 When Moyses was come vp into the mount a cloude couered the hyll,
Exodus 24:16 and the glory of the Lorde abode vppon mounte Sinai, and the cloude couered it .vi. dayes. And the seuenth daye he called vnto Moyses out of the cloude.
Exodus 24:17 And the facion of the glorie of the Lord was lyke consumynge fyre on the toppe of the hyll in the syghte of the chyldren of Israel.
Exodus 24:18 And Moyses went into the mountayne. And Moyses was in the mounte .xl. dayes. and .xl. nyghtes.

CHAPTER: 25

Exodus 25:1 And the Lord talked with Moses saying:
Exodus 25:2 speake vnto the children of Israel that they geue me an heueoffringe, & of euery man that geueth it willingly with his hert, ye shall take it.
Exodus 25:3 And this is the heueoffringe whiche ye shall take of them: gold, siluer and brasse:
Exodus 25:4 & Iacyncte coloure, scarlette, purpull, bysse, and gootes heere:
Exodus 25:5 rams skynnes that are red, and the skynnes of taxus & sethim wood
Exodus 25:6 oyle for lightes, and spices for anoyntynge oyle and for swete cense:
Exodus 25:7 Onix stones and set stones for the Ephod and for the brestlappe.
Exodus 25:8 And they shall make me a sanctuary that I maye dwell amonge them.
Exodus 25:9 And I shall shewe the the facion of the habitacion and of all the ornamentes therof, euen so se that ye make it in all thinges.
Exodus 25:10 And they shall make an arke of sethim wood .ij. cubites & an halfe long, a cubyte & an halfe breade & a cubyte & an halfe hye.
Exodus 25:11 And thou shalt ouerley it wyth pure gold both wtin & without, & shalt make an hye vpon it a croune of gold round about.
Exodus 25:12 And thou shalt caste .iiij. rynges of golde for it and put them in the .iiij. corners thereof .ij. rynges on the one syde of it and .ij. on the other.
Exodus 25:13 And thou shalt make staues of sethym wood and couer them with golde,
Exodus 25:14 and putte the staues in the rynges alonge by the sydes of the arke, to bere it withall.
Exodus 25:15 And the staues shall abyde in the rynges of the arke, & shall not be taken awaye.
Exodus 25:16 And thou shalt put in the arke, the witnesse which I shal geue the.
Exodus 25:17 And thou shalt make a merciseate of pure golde .ij. cubytes and an half longe and a cubyte and an halfe brode.
Exodus 25:18 And make .ij. cherubins of thycke golde on the two endes of the merciseate:
Exodus 25:19 and set the one cherub on the one ende and the other on the other ende of the mercyseate: so se that thou make them on the two endes thereof.
Exodus 25:20 And the Cherubyns shal stretche theyr wynges abrode ouer an hye, & couer the mercyseate wyth theyr wynges, and theyr faces shal loke one to another: euen to the mercyseate warde, shall the faces of the cherubyns be.
Exodus 25:21 And thou shalte putte the mercyseate aboue vpon the arke, and in the arke thou shalt put the witnesse which I wil geue the.
Exodus 25:22 There I wyll mete the and will comon with the from vpon the mercyseate from betwene the two Cherbyns whiche are vpon the arke of wytnesse, of all thynge whych I wyll geue the in commaundemente vnto the chyldren of Israel.
Exodus 25:23 Thou shalt also make a table of sethym wood of two cubytes longe and one cubyte brode and a cubyte and an halfe hye.
Exodus 25:24 And couer it with pure golde and make there to a croune of golde rounde aboute.
Exodus 25:25 And make vnto that an whope of .iiij. fyngers brode, round about. And make a golden croune also to the whope rounde about.
Exodus 25:26 And make for it .iiij. ringes of golde and put them in the corners that are on the .iiij. fete therof:
Exodus 25:27 euen hard vnder the whope shal the ringes be, to putte in staues to bere the table withall.
Exodus 25:28 And thou shalt make staues of Sethim wood & ouerlaye them with golde, that the table maye be borne with them.
Exodus 25:29 And thou shalt make his disshes, spones, pottes & flat peces to poure out withall, of fyne golde.
Exodus 25:30 And thou shalte sette vppon the table, shewbreade before me allwaye.
Exodus 25:31 And thou shalt make a candelstycke of pure thicke golde with hys shaft, braunches, bolles, knoppes and floures proceadynge there out.
Exodus 25:32 Syxe braunches shall procede oute of the sydes of the candelsticke .iij. out of the one syde and .iij. out of the other.
Exodus 25:33 And there shalbe .iij. cuppes lyke vnto almondes wyth knoppes and floures vpon euerye one of the .vi. braunches that procede out of the candellstycke:
Exodus 25:34 & in the candelstycke selfe .iiij. cuppes lyke vnto almondes with their knoppes and floures:
Exodus 25:35 that there be a knoppe vnder euery .ij. braunches of the syxe that procede oute of the candelstycke.
Exodus 25:36 And the knoppes & the braunches shalbe all together, one pece of pure thycke golde:
Exodus 25:37 And thou shalt make .vij. lampes and put them an hye there on, to geue lighte vnto the other syde that is ouer agaynst it:
Exodus 25:38 wt snoffers & fyre pannes of pure golde.
Exodus 25:39 And an hundred pounde weyghte of fyne golde shall make it wyth al the apparel.
Exodus 25:40 And se that thou make them after the facyon that was shewed the in the mounte.

CHAPTER: 26

Exodus 26:1 And thou shalt make an habitacion wt ten curtaynes of twyned bisse, Iacyncte, scarlet and purpul, & shalt make them wt cherubins of brodered worke.
Exodus 26:2 The lengthe of a curtaine shalbe .xxviiij. cubites & the bredth .iiii. & they shalbe all of one measure:
Exodus 26:3 fiue curtaynes shalbe coupled together one to another: and the other fyue lykewyse shalbe coupled together one to another.
Exodus 26:4 Then shalt thou make loupes of Iacincte coloure, a longe by the edge of the one curtayne euen in the selueege of the couplynge courtayne. And lykewyse shalte thou make in the edge of the vtmost curtaine that is coupled therewyth on the other syde:
Exodus 26:5 Fifty loupes shalte thou make in the one curtaine and fifty in the edge of the other that is coupled therwyth on the other syde: so that the loupes be one ouer agaynste another.
Exodus 26:6 And thou shalte make fyfty buttons of gold, and couple the curtaines to gether with the buttons: that it may be an habytacyon.
Exodus 26:7 And thou shalte make a .xi. curtaynes of gootes here, to be a tent to couer the habitacion.
Exodus 26:8 The length of a curtayne shalbe .xxx. cubites, and the bredth .iiij. and they shalbe all .xi. of one measure.
Exodus 26:9 And thou shalt couple .v. it wyth .iij. pillers, and .iij. sockets: & likewise by them selues, & the other syxe by them selues, and shalt double the sixt in the fore front of that tabernacle.
Exodus 26:10 And thou shalte make fyfty loupes in the edge of the vttermost curtayne on the one side: euen in the couplynge courtayne and as many in the edge of the couplynge curtayne on the other side.
Exodus 26:11 And thou shalt make fiftye buttones of brasse and put them on the loupes, & couple the tent together wyth al, that ther may be one couering.
Exodus 26:12 And the remnaunt that resteth in the curtaynes of the tente: euen the bredeth of halfe a curtayne that resteth, shalbe lefte on the backe sydes of the habitacyon:
Exodus 26:13 a cubyte on the one syde & a cubyte on the other syde, of that that remayneth in the length of the curtaynes of the tabernacle, whych shal remayne of ether side of the habitacion to couer it with al.
Exodus 26:14 And thou shalte make another couerynge for the tente of rams skynnes dyed red: & yet another aboue al of taxus skynnes.
Exodus 26:15 And thou shalt make bordes for the habitacion of sethim wood to stand vp ryght:
Exodus 26:16 ten cubytes longe shal euery borde be, and a cubite & an halfe brode.
Exodus 26:17 Two fete shall one borde haue to couple them together wt all, & so thou shalt make vnto al the bordes of that habitacion.
Exodus 26:18 And thou shalt make .xx. bordes for the habytacion on the south syde,
Exodus 26:19 & thou shalt make .xl. sockets of syluer and put theim vnder the .xx. bordes .ij. sockettes vnder euery borde, for their .ij. fete.
Exodus 26:20 In lyke maner in the north syde of the habitacion there shalbe .xx. bordes
Exodus 26:21 and .xl. sockettes of siluer: two sokettes vnder euery bord.
Exodus 26:22 And for the west ende of the habitacion, shalt thou make syxe bordes
Exodus 26:23 & two bordes mo for the two west corners of the habitacyon:
Exodus 26:24 so that these two bordes be coupled together beneth and lykewyse aboue with clampes. And so shall it be in both the corners.
Exodus 26:25 And so ther shal be .viij. bordes in al & .xvi. sockettes of syluer .ij. sockettes vnder euery bord.
Exodus 26:26 And thou shalt make barres of sethim wood fyue for the bordes of the one syde of the tabernacle, & fyue for the other syde,
Exodus 26:27 and fyue for the bordes of the west ende.
Exodus 26:28 And the mydle barre shall goo alonge thorowe the myddes of the bordes and bar them together from the one ende vnto the other.
Exodus 26:29 And thou shalte couer the bordes with golde and make golden rynges for them to put the barres thorowe, and shalt couer the barres wyth golde also.
Exodus 26:30 And rere vp the habytacyon accordynge to the facyon thereof that was shewed the in the mounte.
Exodus 26:31 And thou shalt make a vayle of Iacynct, of scarlet, purpul and twined bisse, and shalt make it of brodred worcke and ful of Cherubyns.
Exodus 26:32 And hang it vpon .iiij. pillers of sethym wod couered with gold and that their knoppes be couered with golde also & stand vpon .iiij. sockettes of syluer.
Exodus 26:33 And thou shalt hange vp the vayle with rynges, & shalt brynge in within the vayle, the arke of witnes. And the vayle shal deuide the holy from the most holye.
Exodus 26:34 And thou shalt put the mercyseate vpon the arke of wytnesse in the holyest place
Exodus 26:35 And thou shalt put the table without the vail and candelsticke ouer agaynst the table vpon the south side of the habitacion. And put the table on the north syde.
Exodus 26:36 And thou shalt make an hangynge for the doore of the tabernacle: of Iacynte, of scarlet, of purpull and of twyned bysse wrought with nedle worke.
Exodus 26:37 And thou shalte make for the hangynge, fyue pyllers of sethim wodde & couer both them & their knoppes wt golde, & shalt cast fyue sockettes of brasse for them

CHAPTER: 27

Exodus 27:1 And thou shalt make an aulter of sethim wood: fyue cubytes longe & .v. cubytes brode that it be foure square & .iij. cubytes hye.
Exodus 27:2 And make it hornes procedyng out in the .iiij. corners of it, & couerte wyth brasse.
Exodus 27:3 And make hys asshepannes shouels, basens, fleshhokes, fire pannes and al the apparel therof, of brasse
Exodus 27:4 and thou shalt make a grederin also like a net, of brasse: vpon whose .iiij. corners shalbe .iiij. brasen rynges:
Exodus 27:5 and the grederyn shall reache vnto the middes of the altare.
Exodus 27:6 And thou shalt make staues for the altare of sethym wood, and couer them with brasse,
Exodus 27:7 and let them be put in rynges a long by the sydes of the altar to beare it wt al
Exodus 27:8 & make the aulter holow wt bordes: euen as it was shewed the vpon that mount, so let them make it.
Exodus 27:9 And thou shalt make a courte vnto the habytacyon, which shall haue in the south syde hanginges of twined bysse, beinge an hundred cubytes long,
Exodus 27:10 & .xx. pillers therof, with their .xx. sockettes of brasse: but the knoppes of the pyllers and their whopes shalbe syluer.
Exodus 27:11 In lykewyse on the north syde there shalbe hanginges of an hundred cubytes long and .xx. pillers by ther sockettes of brasse, & the knoppes & whopes of syluer.
Exodus 27:12 And in the breadeth of the courte westwarde, there shalbe hangynges of fyfty cubytes long, and .x. pyllers wyth their .x. sockettes.
Exodus 27:13 And in the breadth of the courte eastwarde towarde the rysynge of the sonne, shalbe hangynges of .l. cubytes.
Exodus 27:14 Hangynges of .xv. cubites in the one syde of it with .iij. pyllers & .iij. sockettes:
Exodus 27:15 & likewyse on the other syde shalbe hangynges of .xv. cubytes with .iij. pyllers and, sockettes.
Exodus 27:16 And in the gat of the courte shalbe a vaile of .xx. cubytes of iacincte, scarlet, purpull & twyned bisse wrought with nedle worke, and .iiii. pyllers wyth their .iiij. socketes.
Exodus 27:17 All the pyllers round about the courte shalbe whoped with syluer, & their knoppes of syluer, & their sockettes of brasse.
Exodus 27:18 The length of that court shall be an hundred cubites, & the breadeth .l. & the heygth fyue, and the hangynges shalbe of twyned bysse and the sockettes of brasse.
Exodus 27:19 And al the vessels of the habitacyon to all maner seruyce & the pynnes therof: yea and the pynnes also of the court, shalbe brasse.
Exodus 27:20 And commaund the children of Israel that they geue the pure oyle olyue beaten for the lyghtes to poure all waye into the lampes.
Exodus 27:21 In the tabernacle of witnesse wythout the vayle which is before the wytnesse: & Aaron & hys sonnes shall dresse it both euen & mornyng before the Lorde: and it shalbe a dewty for euer vnto youre generacyons after you to be geuen of the chyldren of Israel.

CHAPTER: 28

Exodus 28:1 And take thou vnto the Aaron thy brother and hys sonnes wyth him, from amonge the children of Israell that he may minister vnto me, both Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar Arons sonnes.
Exodus 28:2 And thou shalt make holye raiment for Aaron thy brother, both honorable and gloryous.
Exodus 28:3 Moreouer, speake vnto all that are wyse harted, which I haue fylled wt the spirite of wysdome: that they make Aarons raymente to consecrate him wt, that he maye mynyster vnto me.
Exodus 28:4 These are the garmentes whyche they shal make: a brestlapp Ephod, a tunycle, a strayte cote, a myter and a gyrdell. And they shall make holye garmentes for Aaron thy brother and his sonnes that he maye mynynister vnto me.
Exodus 28:5 And thei shal take therto gold iacincte, scarlet, purpull and bysse.
Exodus 28:6 And they shall make the Ephod of golde, iacincte, scarlet, purpull and whyte twined bysse with brothered worke.
Exodus 28:7 The two sides shall come together, closed vp in the edges therof.
Exodus 28:8 And the gyrdell of the Ephod shalbe of the same worckemanshyppe and of the same stuffe, euen of golde, iacyncte, scarlette, purpull and twyned bysse.
Exodus 28:9 And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and graue in them the names of the chyldren of Israell:
Exodus 28:10 sixe in the one stone, the other sixe in the other stone: accordynge to the order of their birth.
Exodus 28:11 After the worcke of a stonegrauer euen as signettes are grauen, shalt thou graue the .ij. stones with the names of the chyldren of Israel, and shalt make them to be set in ouches of golde.
Exodus 28:12 And thou shalte put the two stones vpon the two shoulders of the Ephod and they shalbe stones of remembraunce vnto the chyldren of Israel. And Aaron shal beare their names before the Lorde vpon his two shulders for a remembrance.
Exodus 28:13 And thou shalt make hokes of gold
Exodus 28:14 and two cheynes of fine golde: lynkeworke and wrethed, and fasten the wrethed cheyns to the hokes.
Exodus 28:15 And thou shale make the brestlappe of iudgement with brodered worke: euen after the worcke of the Ephod shalte thou make it: of gold, iacincte, sarlet, purple and twined bisse shalt thou make it.
Exodus 28:16 For square it shalbe and double, an hande brede longe and an hande brede brode.
Exodus 28:17 And thou shalt fyll it wyth .iiij. rowes of stones. In the fyrste rowe shalbe a Sardios, a Topas and Smaragdus.
Exodus 28:18 The seconde rowe, a Rubye. Saphir and Diamonde.
Exodus 28:19 The thyrde: Lygurios an Achat and Iaspis.
Exodus 28:20 The fourth: a Turcas, Onix and Iaspis. And they shalbe set in golde in their inclosers,
Exodus 28:21 And the stones shalbe grauen as signettes be grauen: wyth the names of the children of Israell euen wyth .xij. names euerye one wt hys name accordinge to the .xii. tribes
Exodus 28:22 And thou shalt make vpon the brestappe two fastening cheyns of pure gold and wrethen worke. And thou shalt make, lyke wyse vpon, the brestlap two ringes of gold,
Exodus 28:23 & put them on the edges of the brestlap.
Exodus 28:24 & put the .ii. wrethen cheynes of gold in the .ij. rynges which are in the edges of the brestlappe.
Exodus 28:25 And the .ii. endes of the .ij. cheyns thou shalte fasten in the .ij. rynges, and put them vpon the shoulders of the Ephode on the foresyde of it.
Exodus 28:26 And thou shal yet make .ij. rynges of golde, and put them in the .ij. edges of the brestlappe euen in the borders therof towarde the insyde of the Ephod that is ouer agaynst it.
Exodus 28:27 And yet .ij. other rynges of golde thou shalt make, & put them on the .ij. sides of the Ephod, beneth ouer agaynste the brestlappe alowe where the sydes are ioyned together vpon the bordered gyrdel of the Ephod.
Exodus 28:28 And they shall bynde the brestlappe by hys ringes vnto the ringes of the Ephod with a lace of Iacyncte, that it maye lye close vnto the brodered gyrdell of the Ephod, that the brestlappe be not loosed from the Ephod.
Exodus 28:29 And Aaron shal beare the names of the chyldren of Israel in the brestlappe of iudgement vpon hys hert, when he goeth into the holy place for a remembraunce before the Lorde alwaye.
Exodus 28:30 And thou shalt put in the brestlappe of iudgement Vrim & Thumim: that they be euen vpon Aarons hert when he goeth in before the Lord & Aaron shall beare the ensample of the chyldren of Israell vpon his herte before the Lorde alwaye.
Exodus 28:31 And thou shalt make the tunycle vnto the Ephod altogether of Iacyncte.
Exodus 28:32 And there shalbe an hole for the head in the middes of it, and let there be a bonde of wouen worke rounde aboute the coller of it (as it were the coller of a partlet) that it rent not.
Exodus 28:33 And beneth vpon the hemme, thou shalt make pomgranates of Iacyncte, of scarlette, and of purpull rounde about the hemme,
Exodus 28:34 and belles of golde betwene them rounde aboute: that there be euer a golden bell and a pomgranate, a golden bell and a pomgranate rounde aboute vpon the hem of the tunicle.
Exodus 28:35 And Aaron shal haue it vpon him when he ministreth, that the sounde may be herde when he goeth into the holy place before the Lorde and when he cometh out, that he dye not.
Exodus 28:36 And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold and graue theron (as signettes are grauen) The holynes of the Lord,
Exodus 28:37 & put it on a lace of Iacyncte & tye it vnto the mytre, vpon the forefront of it,
Exodus 28:38 that it be vppon Aarons forehead: that Aaron beare the sinne of the holy thinges whiche the chyldren of Israell haue halowed in al their holy giftes. And it shalbe alwayes vppon Aarons forehead, that they maye be accepted before the Lord.
Exodus 28:39 And thou shalt make an albe of bysse, and thou shalt make a mytre of bysse & a gyrdell of nedle worde.
Exodus 28:40 And thou shalt make for Aarons sonnes also cotes, gyrdels and bonettes honourable and glorious,
Exodus 28:41 and thou shalt put them vppon Aaron thy brother and on hys sonnes wyth him & shalt anoynte them & fill their handes and consecrate them that they may ministre vnto me.
Exodus 28:42 And thou shalte make them lynnen breches too couer their preuityes: from the loynes vnto the thyes shall they reach.
Exodus 28:43 And they shalbe vpon Aaron & his sonnes, when they go into the tabernacle of witnesse, or when they go vnto the aultare to ministre in holynes, that they beare no sinne and so dye. And it shalbe a lawe for euer vnto Aaron & his sede after hym.

CHAPTER: 29

Exodus 29:1 This is the thing that thou shalt do vnto them when thou halowest theym to be my priestes. Take one oxe & two rammes that are without blemysh,
Exodus 29:2 and vnleuended bread and cakes of swete bread tempered with oyle & wafers of swete bread anoynted with oyle (of wheten floure shalte thou make them)
Exodus 29:3 & put them in a maunde and bringe them in the maunde with the oxe and the .ij. rammes.
Exodus 29:4 And bryng Aaron & his sonnes vnto the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse, & wash theym with water,
Exodus 29:5 & take the garmentes, & put vpon Aaron: the strayte coote, & the tunycle of the Ephod, & the Ephod & the brestlappe: & gyrd them to him with the brodered gyrdel of the Ephod.
Exodus 29:6 And put the mytre vpon his head & put the holy croune vpon the mytre.
Exodus 29:7 Then take the anoynting oyle & poure it vpon his head & anoynte hym.
Exodus 29:8 And bring his sonnes & put albes vpon them,
Exodus 29:9 & gyrd them with gyrdels: as well Aaron as his sonnes. And put the bonettes on them that the priestes office maye be theirs for a perpetuall lawe. And fyl the handes of Aaron and of hys sonnes,
Exodus 29:10 and brynge the oxe before the tabernacle of witnesse. And let Aaron and hys sonnes put their handes vpon hys head
Exodus 29:11 & kyl hym before the Lord in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Exodus 29:12 And take of the bloude of the oxe and put it vpon the hornes of the alter with thy finger & poure all the bloude vpon the botome of the aulter,
Exodus 29:13 and take all the fat that couereth the inwardes, & the kal that is on the lyuer and the .ij. kydneys with the fat that is vpon them: and burne them vpon the aulter:
Exodus 29:14 But the flesh of the oxe & hys skynne and hys donge shalte thou burne wyth fyre without the host. For it is a synne offerynge.
Exodus 29:15 Then take one of the rammes, & let Aaron & hys sonnes put their handes vpon the head of the ramme,
Exodus 29:16 and cause him to be slaine, and take of hys bloude and sprenkell it rounde aboute vpon the alter,
Exodus 29:17 and cutt the ramme in peces and wash the inwardes of hym and hys legges, and put them vnto the peces and vnto his head,
Exodus 29:18 and burne the hole ram vpon the alter. For it is a burnt offeryng vnto the Lorde, and a swete sauoure of the Lordes sacryfyce.
Exodus 29:19 And take the other ram and let Aaron and his sonnes, put their handes vpon hys head
Exodus 29:20 and lett him than be kylled. And take of hys bloude and put it vpon the tippe of the right eare of Aaron and of hys sonnes, and vpon the thombe of their ryghte handes and vpon the greate too of their ryghte fete and sprenkel the bloude vpon the aulter round abonte.
Exodus 29:21 Then take of the bloude that is vpon the alter and of the anoyntynge oyle, and sprenkell it vpon Aaron and his veltimentes, and vpon his sonnes and vpon their garmentes also. Then is he and his clothes holy and his sonnes and their clothes holye also.
Exodus 29:22 Then take the fatte of the ramme and his rompe and the fat that couereth the inwardes and the kall of the lyuer and the two kidneis and the fat that is vpon them and the ryghte shoulder (for that ram is a fulloffring)
Exodus 29:23 and a symnell of bread, and a cake of oyled breade and a wafer out of the basket of swete bread that is before the Lord,
Exodus 29:24 and put all vpon the handes of Aaron and on the handes of hys sonnes: and waue them in and out, a waueoffrynge vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 29:25 Then take it from of their handes and burne it vpon the alter: euen vpon the burnteofferynge, to be a sauoure of swetnesse before the Lorde. For it is sacryface vnto the Lord.
Exodus 29:26 Then take the brest of the ramme that is Aarons ful offring and waue if a waueoffring before the Lorde, and lette that be thy part.
Exodus 29:27 And sanctify the brest of the waueoffrynge and the shoulder of the heueoffrynge whyche is waued and heued vp of the ram which is the fulloffringe of Aaron and of his sonnes.
Exodus 29:28 And it shalbe Aarons and his sonnes dutye for euer, of the chyldren of Israel, for it is an heueoffeynge. And the heueoffrynge shalbe the Lordes dutye of the children of Israell: euen of the sacrifyce of their peaceofferynges whyche they heue vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 29:29 And the holye garmentes of Aaron shalbe hys sonnes after hym, to anoint them therin, and to fyll to their handes therin.
Exodus 29:30 And that sonne that is priest in his stede after him shall put them on seuen dayes: that he go into the tabernacle of wytnesse, to mynyster in the holy place.
Exodus 29:31 Then take the ram that is the fuloffrynge and seth his flesh in an holy place.
Exodus 29:32 And Aron and his sonnes shall eate the flesh of hym, & the braede that is in the baskette: euen in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Exodus 29:33 And they shall eate them because the attonement was made therwyth to fyll their handes & to sanctify them: but a straunger shall not eate therof because they are holy.
Exodus 29:34 If oughte of the flesh of the ful offeringes or of the bred remayne vnto the mornynge, thou shalt burne it wyth fyre: for it shall not be eaten, because it is holye.
Exodus 29:35 And se thou do vnto Aaron and his sonnes, euen so in al thinges as I haue commaunded the: that thou fyll their handes seuen dayes
Exodus 29:36 and offer euery day an oxe for a sinne offring for to reconcyle wyth al. And thou shalt halow the alter when thou reconcylest it, and shalt anoynte it to sanctyfy it.
Exodus 29:37 Seuen dayes thou shalte reconcile the alter and sanctyfye it, that it may be an alter most holy: so the no man may touch it but thei that be consecrate.
Exodus 29:38 This is that which thou shalt offer vpon the alter .ij. lambes of one yere olde, daye by daye for euer,
Exodus 29:39 the one thou shalte offer in the mornynge and the other at euen.
Exodus 29:40 And vnto the one lambe take a tenthe deale of floure mingled wt the fourth parte of an hinne of beten oyle, & the fourth parte of an hinne of wyne for a drynckeofferyng,
Exodus 29:41 And the other lambe thou shalt offer at euen and shalte doo therto accordyng to the meateofferynge and drinke offerynge in the mornynge, to be an odoure of a swete sauoure of the sacrifice of the Lorde
Exodus 29:42 And it shabe a continuall burntofferynge amonge youre chyldren after you, in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse before the Lorde where I wyll mete you to speake vnto you there.
Exodus 29:43 Ther I wyll mete wyth the chyldren of Israell, and wylbe sanctifyed in myne honoure.
Exodus 29:44 And I wyll sanctifye the tabernacle of wytnesse and the alter: and I wil sanctifie also both Aaron and hys sonnes to be my prestes.
Exodus 29:45 And more ouer I wyll dwell amonge the chyldren of Israel and wylbe their God.
Exodus 29:46 And they shall knowe that I am the Lorde their God that brought them out of the lande of Egypt for to dwell amonge them: euen I the Lorde their God.

CHAPTER: 30

Exodus 30:1 And thou shalt make an alter to burne cense therein, of sethym woode:
Exodus 30:2 a cubite long, and a cubyte brode, euen fouresquare shal it be: and two cubytes hie, wyth hornes procedinge oute of it,
Exodus 30:3 and thou shalt ouerlay it wt fine gold, both the roffe and the walles round about, and his hornes also, & shalt make vnto it a crowne of gold round about
Exodus 30:4 & .ii. golden ringes on ether side: euen vnder the croune, to put staues therin for to beare it wt al.
Exodus 30:5 And thou shalt make the staues of sethym woode & couer them wt gold.
Exodus 30:6 And thou shalt put it before the vaile that hangeth before the arcke of wytnesse, and before the mercyseate that is before the witnesse, wher I will mete the.
Exodus 30:7 And Aaron shall burne theron swete cense euery mornyng when he dresseth the lampes
Exodus 30:8 and lykewyse at euen when he setteth vp the lampes he shall burne cense perpetually before the Lorde thorow oute youre generacyons.
Exodus 30:9 Ye shall put no straunge cense theron, nether burntsacrifyce nor meateoffrynge, nether power any drinkeoffryng theron.
Exodus 30:10 And Aaron shall reconcyle vpon the hornes of it once in a yere, wyth the bloude of the synne offerynge of reconcylynge: euen once in the yere shall he reconcyle it thorow youre generacyons. And so is it most holye vnto the Lord.
Exodus 30:11 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saiyng
Exodus 30:12 when thou takest the summe of the children of Israel and tellest them, they shal geue euery man a reconcylynge of his soule vnto the Lorde that there be no plage amonge them when thou tellest them.
Exodus 30:13 And thus much shall euery man geue that goth in the number: halfe a sycle, after the sicle of the sanctuarye: a sicle is .xx. gears: and an halfe sicle shalbe the heueoffrynge vnto the Lord.
Exodus 30:14 And all that are numbred of them that are .xx. yere olde and aboue shall geue an heueofferynge vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 30:15 The ryche shall not passe, and the poore shall not go vnder halfe a syckle, when they geue an heue offeringe vnto the Lorde for the attonemente of their soules.
Exodus 30:16 And thou shalt take the reconcilynge mony of the children of Israell and shalt put it vnto the vse of the tabernacle of witnesse, and it shall be a memorial of the chyldren of Israell before the Lord, to make an attonement for their soules.
Exodus 30:17 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saiynge:
Exodus 30:18 thou shalt make a lauer of brasse & hys fote also of brasse to wash with all, and shalt put it betwene the tabernacle of witnesse, and the alter and put water therin:
Exodus 30:19 that Aaron and hys sonnes maye wash both their handes & their fete thereoute,
Exodus 30:20 when they goo into the tabernacle of wytnesse, or when they go vnto the altare to minister and to burne the Lordesoffrynge, lest they dye.
Exodus 30:21 And it shalbe an ordinaunce for euer vnto him and his sede amonge youre chyldren after you.
Exodus 30:22 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saiynge:
Exodus 30:23 take principall spices: of pure myrre fyue hundred sycles, of swete cynamon halfe so much two hundred and fiftye sycles:
Exodus 30:24 of swete Calamite, two hundred and .l. of Cassia, two hundred and .l. after the holye sycle, and of oyle oliue an hin.
Exodus 30:25 And make of them holy anointynge oyle euen an oyle compounde after the crafte of the apoticarye.
Exodus 30:26 And noynte the tabernacle of wytnesse therewith, and the arke of wytnesse,
Exodus 30:27 and the table wyth all hys apparell, and the candelsticke wyth al hys ordynaunce, and the alter of incense,
Exodus 30:28 and the alter of burntsacrifyce and all his vessels, and the lauer and his fote.
Exodus 30:29 And sacrifice them that they maye be moste holye: so that no man touche them but they that be halowed.
Exodus 30:30 And anoynte Aaron and his sonnes and consecrate them to minister vnto me.
Exodus 30:31 And thou shalt speake vnto the children of Israell saiynge: thys shalbe an holye oyntynge oyle vnto me, thorowe out youre generations,
Exodus 30:32 No mans flesh shalbe anointed therwith: nether shall ye make any other after the makynge of it for it is holye, se therfore that ye take it for holye:
Exodus 30:33 whosoeuer maketh lyke that, or whosoeuer putteth anye of it vpon a straunger, shall peryshe from amonge hys people.
Exodus 30:34 And the Lorde sayd vnto Moses: take vnto the swete spices: stacte, onycha, swete galbanum and pure frankencens, of etche lyke much:
Exodus 30:35 and make cens of them compound after the crafte of the apoticarye, mingled together, that it may be made pure and holy.
Exodus 30:36 And beate it to powder and put it before the wytnesse in the tabernacle of wytnesse, where I wyll mete the,
Exodus 30:37 but let it be vnto you holye. And se that ye make none after the makyng of that, but let it be vnto you holye for the Lorde.
Exodus 30:38 And whosoeuer shal make lyke vnto that, to smel therto shall perysh from amonge his people.

CHAPTER: 31

Exodus 31:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saiynge:
Exodus 31:2 behold I haue called by name. Bezaleel the sonne of Vrye sonne to Hurre of the trybe of Iuda
Exodus 31:3 And I haue fylled hym wyth the spirite of God, with wysdome, vnderstandynge and knoledge: euen in all maner worke,
Exodus 31:4 to fynd out suttle feaytes, to worcke in golde syluer and brasse
Exodus 31:5 and wyth the crafte to graue stones, to sette and to carue in tymber and to worke in al maner warkemanshype.
Exodus 31:6 And beholde. I haue geueth hym to be his companion Ahaliab the sonne of Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan, and in the hertes of al that are wyse harted I haue put wysdom to make al that I haue commaunded the:
Exodus 31:7 the tabernacle of wytnesse, and the arcke of wytnesse, and the mercyseate that is ther vpon all the ornamentes of the tabernacle,
Exodus 31:8 and the table wyth hys ordinaunce, and the pure candelsticke wt all hys apparell, and the aulter of incens,
Exodus 31:9 and the aulter of burntoffrynges with al his vessels, & the lauer wt his fot
Exodus 31:10 & the vestimentes to mynyster in & the holye garments for Aaron the prest, & the garments of his sons to minister in,
Exodus 31:11 & the anointing oile & swete sense for the sanctuarye: accordynge to all as I haue commaunded the shall they d
Exodus 31:12 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saiynge
Exodus 31:13 speake vnto the chyldren of Israell and saye: in any wyse se that ye kepe my Sabboth, for it shalbe a sygne betwene me and you in youre generacyons for to knowe, that I the Lorde do sanctyfye you.
Exodus 31:14 Kepe my Sabboth therfore, that it be an holye thynge vnto you He that defyleth it shalbe slayne therfore. For whosoeuer worketh therein, the same soule shalbe roted oute from amonge hys people.
Exodus 31:15 Syxe dayes shall men worke, but the seuenth daye is the Sabboth of the holye reste of the Lorde: so that whosoeuer doeth anye worke in the Sabboth daye, shall dye for it:
Exodus 31:16 wherefore lette the children of Israel kepe the Sabboth, that they obserue it thorowe oute their generacyons, that it be an appoyntmente for euer.
Exodus 31:17 For it shalbe a sygne betwene me and the chyldren of Israell for euer. For in sixe daies the Lord made heauen and earth and the seuenth daye he rested and was refreshed,
Exodus 31:18 And when he had made an ende of commenyng wyth Moses vpon the mount Sinai he gaue hym two tables of witnesse: which were of stone and written with the fynger of God.

CHAPTER: 32

Exodus 32:1 And whan the people saw that it was long or Moses came down out of the mountaine, they gathered theym selues together and came vnto Aaron and sayd vnto him. Vp and make vs a God to goo before vs: for of thys Moises the felow that brought vs out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become.
Exodus 32:2 And Aaron sayd vnto them: plucke of the golden earynges whyche are in the eares of youre wyues, youre sonnes and of youre daughters: and brynge them vnto me.
Exodus 32:3 And all the people plucked of the golden earinges that were in their eares, and broughte them vnto Aaron.
Exodus 32:4 And he receiued them of their hands and facyoned it wyth a grauer & made it a calfe of molten metall. And they sayde This is thy God O Israel, which brought the out of the land of Egypte.
Exodus 32:5 And when Aaron sawe that, he made an altare before it, & made a proclamacion saiynge to morrow shalbe holye day vnto the Lorde.
Exodus 32:6 And they rose vp in the mornynge and offred burntoffringes, and brought offrynges of attonemente also. And than they satte them doune to eate and drinke, and rose vp agayne to play.
Exodus 32:7 Then the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: goo get the downe, for thy people whyche thou broughtest oute of the lande of Egypte
Exodus 32:8 haue marred all, they are turned at once out of the waye whihe I commaunded them: and haue made them a calfe of molten metall, & haue worshipped it and haue offred therto & saied Thys is thy God thou Israell, whyche hath brought the out of the lande of Egypte.
Exodus 32:9 And the Lord sayd vnto Moyses: beholde I se this people that it is a styfe necked people,
Exodus 32:10 & and nowe therfore suffer me that my wrath may waxe hote vpon them, and that I may consume them and then wyl I make of the a mightye people.
Exodus 32:11 Then Moyses besoughte the Lorde hys God and sayde: O Lorde, why shoulde thy wrath waxe hote vpon thy people whiche thou hast brought out of the Lande of Egipt wt great power and with a mighty hande?
Exodus 32:12 wherfore shuld the Egyptians speake & say: For a mychefe dyd he brynge them out: euen for to slee them in the mountayns, and to consume them from the face of the earth. Turne from thy fearse wrath, and haue compassion ouer the wickednesse of thy people.
Exodus 32:13 Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel thy seruauntes, to whom thou sworest by thyne owne selfe & saidest vnto them. I wyll multiplye youre seed as the starres of heauen, and all thys lande which I haue sayd, I wyll geue vnto youre seede: and they shal enheret it for euer
Exodus 32:14 And the Lord refrained him selfe from the euil whych he sayed he wold do vnto his people.
Exodus 32:15 And Moses turned hys backe and wente downe from the hyl, and the .ij. tables of witnesse in his hand: which were written on both the leaues
Exodus 32:16 and were the worcke of God, and the wrytynge was the writynge of God grauen vpon the tables.
Exodus 32:17 And when Iosua herde the noyse of the people as they shouted, he said vnto Moses: there is a noyse of warre in the hoste.
Exodus 32:18 And he sayde: it is not the crye of them that haue the masterye, nor of them that haue the worse; but I doo heare the noyse of syngynge.
Exodus 32:19 And as soone as he came nie vnto the host and sawe the calfe and the daunsynge, hys wrath waxed hote, and he cast the tables out of his hande, and brake them euen at the hylle fote.
Exodus 32:20 And he toke the calfe whyche they had made and burned it wyth fyre, and stampte it vnto powder and strawed it in the water & made the children of Israel drynke.
Exodus 32:21 And than Moses sayde vnto Aaron: what dyd thys people vnto the that thou haste broughte so great a synne vpon them.
Exodus 32:22 And Aaron sayde: let not the wrath of my Lorde waxe fearse, thou knowest the people that they are euen sett on myschefe:
Exodus 32:23 they sayde vnto me: make vs a God to go before vs, for we wote not what is become of Moses the felow that brought vs out of the land of Egypte.
Exodus 32:24 And I sayde vnto them: let them that haue golde, take and brynge it me: and I cast it into the fyre, and there of came oute thys calfe.
Exodus 32:25 When Moses sawe that the people were naked (for Aaron had made them naked vnto their shame when they made insurrection)
Exodus 32:26 he went & stode in the gate of the hoste & sayde: If any man pertayne vnto the Lord, let him come to me. And all the sonnes of Leui gathered them selues together and came vnto him.
Exodus 32:27 And he sayd vnto them, thus sayeth the Lorde of Israel put euery man his swerde by hys syde, and go in and out from gate to gate thorow out the hoste: & slee euery man his brother, euery man his frende and euery man his neighbour.
Exodus 32:28 And the chyldren of Leui dyd as Moses had sayde. And there were slayne of the people the same daye, aboute thre thousande men.
Exodus 32:29 Then Moyses said: fyl your handes vnto the Lord thys day, euery man vpon hys sonne & vpon his brother: to brynge vpon you a blessyng this day.
Exodus 32:30 And on the morowe, Moyses sayde vnto the people: Ye haue sinned a great synne. But now I wyll goo vp vnto the Lorde, to wytt whether I can make an attonement for your synne.
Exodus 32:31 And Moses went agayne vnto the Lorde & sayd: Oh, thys people haue synned a great synne & haue made them a god of gold:
Exodus 32:32 Yet forgeue them their synne I praye the: If not wype me out of thy boke which thou hast written.
Exodus 32:33 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: I wyl put hym out of my boke that hath sinned agaynst me.
Exodus 32:34 But go & bryng the people vnto the land which I sayd vnto the: behold, myne angel shall go before the. Neuerthelater in the daye when I vyset. I wyll vyset their synne vpon them.
Exodus 32:35 And the Lord plaged the people, because they made the calf whych Aaron made.

CHAPTER: 33

Exodus 33:1 And the Lorde saide vnto Moses: departe and go hence: both thou & the people whych thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt, vnto the lande which I swore vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob sayinge: vnto thy seed I wyl geue it.
Exodus 33:2 And I wyll sende an angell before the, & wyll cast out the Cananytes, the Amorytes, the Hethites, the Pherezites, the Heuites, & the Iebusytes:
Exodus 33:3 that thou maist go into a land that floweth with mylke and honye. But I wyl not go amonge you my selfe, for ye are a styfnecked people: leste I consume you by the waye.
Exodus 33:4 And when the people herde this euell tydinges, they sorowed: and no man did put on hys best rayment.
Exodus 33:5 And the Lord spake vnto Moses, say vnto the chyldren of Israel: ye are a styfnecked people: I must come once sodenly vpon you, & make an ende of you. But now put youre goodly rayment from you, that I maye wete what to do vnto you.
Exodus 33:6 And the chyldren of Israel layde their goodly rayment from them euen vnder the mount Horeb.
Exodus 33:7 And Moses toke the tabernacle & pytched it without the hoste a ferre of from the hoste, & called it the tabernacle of wytnesse. And al that wold axe any question of the Lorde, went out vnto the tabernacle of wytnesse whyche was without the hoste.
Exodus 33:8 And when Moses went out vnto the tabernacle, all the people rose vp and stode euery man in his tent dore and loked after Moses, vntyll he was gone in to the tobernacle.
Exodus 33:9 And as sone as Moses was entred in to the tabernacle, the clouden pyller descended and stode in the dore of the tabernacle, and he talked with Moses.
Exodus 33:10 And when all the people sawe the clouden piller stande in the tabernacle dore, they rose vp & worshypped: euery man in hys tent dore.
Exodus 33:11 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh vnto hys frende. And when Moses turned agayne in to the hoste, the ladd Iosua his seruaunte the sonne of Nun departed not out of the tabernacle.
Exodus 33:12 And Moses sayde vnto the Lorde: se, thou saydest vnto me: leade thys people forth, but thou shewest me not whom thou wylt sende with me. And hast sayde moreouer: I know the by name and thou hast also founde grace in my syghte:
Exodus 33:13 Now therfore, yf I haue found fauoure in thy sight, then shewe me thy way & let me know the: that I may fynde grace in thy syghte. And loke on thys also, howe that this nacion is thy people.
Exodus 33:14 And he sayde: my presence shal goo wyth the, and I wyll geue the rest.
Exodus 33:15 And he sayde: If thy presence goo not wyth me, carye vs not hence
Exodus 33:16 for how shall it be knowne nowe that both I and thy people haue founde fauoure in thy syghte, but in that thou goest wyth vs: that both I and thy people haue a preemynence before all the people that are vpon the face of the erth.
Exodus 33:17 And the Lord sayd vnto Moses: I wyll do thys also that thou hast sayde, for thou hast founde grace in my syghte, and I knowe the by name.
Exodus 33:18 And he sayde: I beseche the, shewe me thy glorye:
Exodus 33:19 And he sayd: I wyl make al my good god before the, and I wyl be called in thys name Iehouah before the, & wil shew mercy to whom I shewe mercy, and wyll haue compassion on whom I haue compassion.
Exodus 33:20 And he sayed furthermore, thou maiste not see my for there shall no man se me and lyue.
Exodus 33:21 And the Lorde sayed, beholde, there is a place by me, & thou shalt stand vpon a rocke,
Exodus 33:22 and whyle my glory goeth forth I wyll put the in a clyfte of the rocke, & wyll put myne hand vpon the whyle I passe by.
Exodus 33:23 And then I wyl take away myne hande, and thou shalte se my backe partes: but my face shall not be seene.

CHAPTER: 34

Exodus 34:1 And the Lord sayed vnto Moses: hewe the two tables of stone lyke vnto the fyrste, that I may write in them the wordes whyche were in the fyrste two tables, whych thou brakest
Exodus 34:2 and be ready against the mornyng that thou mayst come vp early to the mount of Sinai and stande me there vppon the toppe of the mounte.
Exodus 34:3 But let no man come vp wyth the neither let any man be sene thorowout al the mount, neither let shepe nor oxen fede before the hyll.
Exodus 34:4 And Moses hewed .ij. tables of stone lyke vnto the fyrst, and rose vp earlye in the mornynge and wente vp into the mounte of Sinai as the Lord commaunded him: and toke in hys hand the two tables of stone.
Exodus 34:5 And the Lord descended in the cloud, and stode with hym there: and he called vpon the name of the Lorde.
Exodus 34:6 And when the Lord walked before him, he cried: Lord Lord God full of compassion and mercy, which are not lightly angry but abundaunt in mercy and truth,
Exodus 34:7 and kepest mercye in store for thousandes, & forgeueste wyckednes, trespace, and synne (for there is no man innocent before the) and vysitest the wyckednes of the father vpon the chyldren and vpon chyldrens chyldren, euen vnto the thyrd and fourth generation.
Exodus 34:8 And Moses bowed himselfe to the earth quickly & worshipped
Exodus 34:9 & said: If I haue found grace in thy sight, O Lorde, then let my Lorde go wyth vs (for it is a stubburne people) & haue mercy vpon our wickednes & our sinne, and let vs be thyne enheritaunce.
Exodus 34:10 And he sayd: behold, I make an appoyntment before all thys people, that I wyl doo maruails: such as haue not bene done in all the world, neither among any nation. And all the people among whych thou arte, shall se the worckes of the Lord: for it is a terrible thynge that I wyll do wyth the:
Exodus 34:11 kepe al that I commaund the thys daye, and beholde: I wyll caste out before the the Amorytes, Canaanites, Hethytes, Pherezites, Heuites, and Iebusites.
Exodus 34:12 Take hede to thy selfe, that thou make no compact wyth the inhabiters of the Lande whether thou goest, least it because of ruine among you.
Exodus 34:13 But ouerthrowe their aulters and breake theyr pillars, & cut downe their groues,
Exodus 34:14 for thou shalt worshyp no straunge God. For the Lorde is called gelousee bycause he is a gelouse God:
Exodus 34:15 lest if thou make any agremente wyth the inhabiters of the lande, when they go a whorynge after theyr Gods and do sacrifice vnto theyr Goddes, they cal the and thou eate of theyr sacrifyce:
Exodus 34:16 and thou take of theyr daughters vnto thy sonnes, and when theyr daughters goo a whorynge after theyr Goddes,
Exodus 34:17 they make thy sonnes goo a whoringe after their Goddes also. Thou shalt make the no Gods of metall.
Exodus 34:18 The feast of swete bread shalt thou kepe, & .vij. dayes thou shalt eat vnleauened bread (as I commaunded the) in the time appointed in the moneth of Abib: for in the moneth of Abib thou camest oute of Egypte.
Exodus 34:19 All that breaketh vp the matrice shall be myne, & all that breaketh the matryce among thy cattel, if it be male: whether it be oxe or shepe.
Exodus 34:20 But the fyrst of the asse thou shalt bye out wt a shepe or if thou redeme him not: se thou breake his necke. All the fyrst borne of thy sonnes thou must nedes redeme. And se that no man appeare before me empty.
Exodus 34:21 Sixe dayes thou shalt worcke, & the seuenth thou shalt rest: both from earyng and reaping
Exodus 34:22 Thou shalt obserue the feaste of wekes wt the fyrst fruites of wheate herueste, and the feast ingaderyng at the yeares ende.
Exodus 34:23 Thrise in a yeare shall all youre men chyldren appeare before the Lorde Iehouah God of Israell:
Exodus 34:24 for I wyll caste out the nations before the & wyll enlarge thy costes, so that no man shall desyre thy lande whylse thou goest vp to appeare before the face of the Lorde thy God, thryse in the yeare.
Exodus 34:25 Thou shalt not offer the bloud of my sacrifice wt leuened breade: neither shal oughte of the sacrifice of the feast of passeouer, beleft vnto the morning.
Exodus 34:26 The fyrst of the firstfrutes of thy Lande, thou shalt brynge vnto the house of the Lord thy God. And se, that thou seeth not a kydd in hys mothers milke.
Exodus 34:27 And the Lorde sayed vnto Moses: wryte these wordes, for vpon these wordes I haue made a couenaunt wyth the & wyth the chyldren of Israel.
Exodus 34:28 And he was there wyth the Lorde .xl. dayes & .xl. nightes, and nether ate bred not dranke water. And he wrote in the tables the wordes of the couenaunt: euen ten verses.
Exodus 34:29 And Moses came doune from mount Synay & the .ij. tables of wytnesse in his hande, & yet the wyst not that the skynne of his face shone wyth beames of hys comenyng with hym.
Exodus 34:30 And when Aaron and all the chyldren of Israel loked vpon Moses and sawe that the skynne of his face shone with beames they were afrayde to come nye hym.
Exodus 34:31 But he called them to hym, and then Aaron & all the chefe of the company came vnto him, & Moses talked with them.
Exodus 34:32 And at the last al the chyldren of Israel came vnto him, and he commaunded them all that the Lord had sayde vnto him in mounte Sinai.
Exodus 34:33 And as soone as he had made an ende of comenyng wyth them, he put a coueryng vpon his face.
Exodus 34:34 But when he went before the Lorde to speake wyth him, he toke the coueryng of vntyll he came out. And he came out & spake vnto the chyldren of Israel that whych he was commaunded.
Exodus 34:35 And the chyldren of Israel sawe the face of Moses, that the skynne of hys face shone with beames: but Moses put a coueryng vpon hys face, vntyl he went into comen with hym.

CHAPTER: 35

Exodus 35:1 And Moses gathered al the company of the chyldren of Israell together, and sayd vnto them: these are the thynges whiche the Lord hath commaunded to do:
Exodus 35:2 Syxe dayes ye shall worke, but the seuenth day shal be vnto you the holy Sabboth of the Lordes rest: so that whosoeuer doth any worke therin, shal dye.
Exodus 35:3 Moreouer ye shal kyndle no fyre thorowe out all your habitacions vpon the Sabboth day.
Exodus 35:4 And Moses spake vnto al the multytude of the chyldren of Israel sayinge this is the thynge which the Lord commaunded saying:
Exodus 35:5 Geue from amonge you an heue offeynge, vnto the Lorde. Al that are wyllynge in their hartes, shall brynge heue offeynges vnto the Lord: gold, syluer, brasse,
Exodus 35:6 Iacyncte, scarlet, purpull, bysse and gootes heare:
Exodus 35:7 rams skinnes red and tarus skynnes and Sethim wood:
Exodus 35:8 and oyle for lyghtes & spices for the anoyntynge oyle and for the swete cens:
Exodus 35:9 And Onixstones and stones to be sett for the Ephod and for the brestlappe.
Exodus 35:10 And let al them that are wyseherted among you, come and make all that the Lorde hath commaunded:
Exodus 35:11 the habitacion & the tent therof with his couerynge and his rynges, bordes, barres, pyllers & sockettes:
Exodus 35:12 the arke and the staues therof with the mercyseate & the vayle that couereth it:
Exodus 35:13 the table & hys staues wyth all that pertayneth therto & the shewebred:
Exodus 35:14 the candelstycke of lyghte wyth his apparel and his lampes and the oyle for the lyghtes:
Exodus 35:15 the cens alter & hys staues, the anoyntynge oyle and the swete cens and the hangynge before the tabernacle dore:
Exodus 35:16 the alter of burntsacryfices and his brasen gredyren that longeth therto wyth his staues & all hys ordinaunce and the lauer and his fote:
Exodus 35:17 the hangynges of the courte with his pyllers & their sockettes, and the hangynge to the dore of the courte:
Exodus 35:18 the pynnes of the habitacion and the pynnes of the courte with their boordes:
Exodus 35:19 the mynystrynge garmentes to mynystre wyth in holynesse, and the holy vestymentes of Aaron the preast and the vestimentes of his sonnes to mynystre in.
Exodus 35:20 And all the companye of the chyldren of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.
Exodus 35:21 And they went (as many as their hartes coraged them & as many as their spirites made them wyllynge) and brought heue offringes vnto the Lorde, to the makyng of the tabernacle of wytnesse & for all hys vses & for the holy vestimentes.
Exodus 35:22 And the men came with the wemen (euen as many as were wyllyng harted) and brought bracelettes, earynges, rynges & gyrdels & all maner Iewels of golde. And al the men that waued waue offrynges of golde vnto the Lorde
Exodus 35:23 and euery man wyth whom was found iacincte, scarlet, purpull, bysse or gootes heare or red skynnes of rammes or taxus skynnes, brought it.
Exodus 35:24 And all that haue vp golde or brasse, broughte an heueoffrynge vnto the Lord. And all men wt whom was found sethim wood mete for any maner worke or seruyce, brought it.
Exodus 35:25 And al the wemen that were wyse herted to worke wt their handes, spanne, & brought the sponne worke, both of Iacyncte, scarlet, purpul and bysse.
Exodus 35:26 And all the wemen that excelled in wysdome of herte, spanne the gotes hayre.
Exodus 35:27 And the Lordes brought Onix stones and set stones for the Epod, and for the brest lappe,
Exodus 35:28 and spyce & oyle: both for the lyghtes and for the anoyntynge oyle & for the swete cens.
Exodus 35:29 And the chyldren of Israel brought willynge offrynges vnto the Lorde, both men & wemen: as many as their hartes made them wyllynge to brynge, for all maner workes whych the Lorde had commaunded to make by the hande of Moses.
Exodus 35:30 And Moses sayd vnto the chyldren of Israel: behold the Lorde hath called by name Bezaleel the sonne of Dry the sonne of Hur of the tribe of Iuda,
Exodus 35:31 and hath fylled him wyth the spirite of God wyth wysedome, vnderstandyng and knoweledge, euen in al maner worcke,
Exodus 35:32 & to fynde oute curious worckes, to worcke in gold, siluer, and brasse:
Exodus 35:33 and wyth grauynge of stones to sett, & with keruynge in wodd, and to worcke in al maner of sottle workes.
Exodus 35:34 And he hath put in his hert the grace to teach: both him & Ahaliab the sonne of Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan
Exodus 35:35 hathe he fylled with wisdome of hert, to worke al maner of grauen worke: they are also brotherers and worckers wyth nedle. And Iacyncte, scarlet, purple, and bysse, and are weauers that can make all maner worcke, and can deuise sottle worckes.

CHAPTER: 36

Exodus 36:1 And Bezaliel wrought and Ahaliab and all wyse herted men to whom the Lorde had geuen wisedome and vnderstanding to knowe howe to worcke all maner worcke for the holy seruice, in al that the Lorde commaunded.
Exodus 36:2 And Moses called for Bezaleel Ahaliak and al the wise hered men in whose hertes the Lord had putte wisedome, euen as many as their hertes couraged to come to the worcke to worcke it.
Exodus 36:3 And they receiued of Moses al the heueofferinges which the children of Israel had brought for the worke of the holy seruice to make it withal. And they brought beside that wyllyng offeringes euery morning.
Exodus 36:4 And al the wyse men that wrought all the holy worcke came euery man from his worke whyche they made,
Exodus 36:5 and spake vnto Moses saying: the people bryng to much and aboue that is inough to serue for the worcke whyche the Lord hath commaunded to make.
Exodus 36:6 And then Moses gaue a commaundement, & they caused it to be proclamed thorowoute the hoste sayinge: se that neither man nor woman prepare any more worcke for the holye heueofferynge, and so the people were forbidden to brynge:
Exodus 36:7 for the stuffe they had, was sufficiente for them vnto all the worcke, to make it and to muche.
Exodus 36:8 And al the wyse herted men among them that wroughte in the worcke of the habytacion made: euen .x. cortaines of twined bisse, Iacyncte, scarlet, and purple, and made them full of Cherubyns wt brodered worke.
Exodus 36:9 The lengthe of one curtayne was .xxviij. cubites and the breadth .iiij. and were all of one syse.
Exodus 36:10 And they coupled .v. curtaynes by them selues, and other fiue by them selues.
Exodus 36:11 And they made fyftye louppes of Iacynte alonge by the edge of the vtmoste curtayne: euen in the seluege of the couplyng curtayne.
Exodus 36:12 And lykewyse they made on the syde of the vtmooste couplynge curtayne on the other syde, fiftye loupes they made in the one curtayne, and fyfty in the edge of the couplynge curtayne on the otherside: so that the loupes were one ouer agaynst another.
Exodus 36:13 And they made fifty rynges of gold, and coupled the curtaynes one to an other wyth the rynges: and so was it made a dwellynge place.
Exodus 36:14 And they made a .xi. curtaynes of gotes heer to be a tent ouer the tabernacle
Exodus 36:15 thyrtye cubites longe a pece, and .iiij. cubytes brode, & they all leauen of one cise.
Exodus 36:16 And the coupled .v. by them selues, and .vi. by them selues,
Exodus 36:17 and they made fyftye loupes alonge by the border of the vtmooste couplyng curtayne on the one side, and fyfty in the edge of the couplynge curtayne on the other syde.
Exodus 36:18 And they made fyftye rynges of brasse to couple the tent togyther that it myght be one.
Exodus 36:19 And they made a couerynge vnto the tent of rammes skynnes red, and yet an other of taxus skynnes aboue al.
Exodus 36:20 And they made bordes for the dwellynge place of sethim wod that stode vpright
Exodus 36:21 eueri borde .x. cubites longe & a cubyte & an halfe brode.
Exodus 36:22 And they made .ij. fete to euery borde of the dwellinge place ioynynge one to another.
Exodus 36:23 And they made .xx. bordes for the south syde of the habitation,
Exodus 36:24 & .xl. sockettes of syluer vnder the .xx. bordes .ij. sockettes vnder euery borde, euen for the .ij. fete of them.
Exodus 36:25 And for the other syde of the dwellynge towarde the north, they made other .xx. bordes
Exodus 36:26 wyth .xl. sockettes of siluer .ij. sockettes vnder euery borde.
Exodus 36:27 And be hynde in the ende of the tabernacle towarde they weste, the made syxe boordes,
Exodus 36:28 and two other boordes for the corners of the habitation behynde,
Exodus 36:29 & they were ioyned closse boeth beneth and also aboue wyth clampes and thus they dyd to both the corners:
Exodus 36:30 so they were in al eyght bordes and .xvi. sockettes, vnder euerye boorde two sockettes.
Exodus 36:31 And they made barres of Sethim wod .v. for the bordes of the one syde of the habitation,
Exodus 36:32 & .v. for the other, & fyue for the bordes on the west ende of the habitation.
Exodus 36:33 And they made the myddle barre to shote thorowe the bordes: euen from the one ende to the other,
Exodus 36:34 and ouerlayd the bordes wyth gold, & made them rings of gold to thrust the barrs thorow, and couered the barres wyth gold.
Exodus 36:35 And they made an hanging of Iacinct, of scarlet, purple, & twyned bysse with Cherubins of brodered worke.
Exodus 36:36 And made therunto .iiij. pillers of Sithim wod, & ouerlaid them with gold. Their knoppes were also of gold, & thei cast for them .iiij. sockets of siluer.
Exodus 36:37 And they made an hangyng for the tabernacle dore: of Iacincte, scarlet, purple, & twined bisse of nedle worcke,
Exodus 36:38 & the pyllers of it were fiue wt theyr knoppes, and ouerlayed the heades of them and the whooppes with golde, with their .v. sockettes of brasse.

CHAPTER: 37

Exodus 37:1 And Bezaleel made the arck of sethim wood two cubytes and an halfe long & a cubyte and a halfe brode, and a cubyt and a halfe hye,
Exodus 37:2 & ouerlayde it wyth fyne golde both within & without, & made a crowne of golde to it rounde about,
Exodus 37:3 and cast for it .iiij. rynges of golde for the .iiij. corners of it: two rynges for the one syde & two for the other,
Exodus 37:4 & made staues of Sethym wood, & couered them with golde,
Exodus 37:5 and put the staues in the rynges alonge by the syde of the arcke to bere it wyth all.
Exodus 37:6 And he made the mercyseate of pure gold two cubites & a halfe longe and one cubite & a halfe brode,
Exodus 37:7 and made two cherubyns of thycke golde vpon the two endes of the mercyseate:
Exodus 37:8 One Cherubyn the one ende, & another Cherub on the other ende of the mercyseate.
Exodus 37:9 And the Cherubyns spredde out theyr wynges aboue an hye, & couered the mercyseate therwyth. And their faces were one to another: euen to the mercyseate warde, were the faces of the Cherubyns.
Exodus 37:10 And he made the table of sethim wood two cubytes longe and a cubyte brode, and a cubyte and a halfe hyghe,
Exodus 37:11 and ouerlayd it with fyne golden, & made therto a crowne of golde rounde aboute,
Exodus 37:12 and made therto an whope of an hande brede rounde aboute, and made vnto the whope a crowne of golde rounde aboute,
Exodus 37:13 and cast for it .iiij. rynges of golde & put the rynges in the .iiij. corners by the fete:
Exodus 37:14 euen vnder the whope to put staues in to beare the table with al.
Exodus 37:15 And he made staues of Sethim wood and couered them wyth golde to beare the table with al,
Exodus 37:16 and made the vessels that were on the table of pure gold, the dysshes spones, flatpeces & pottes to poure wyth al.
Exodus 37:17 And he made the candelstick of pure thicke golde: bothe the candelstycke and hys shaft: with braunces, boles, knoppes and floures procedyng out of it.
Exodus 37:18 Sixe braunches procedynge out of the sydes therof .iij. oute of the one syde, & .iij. out of the other.
Exodus 37:19 And on euery braunche were .iij. cuppes like vnto almondes with knoppes & floures thorow out the syxe braunches that proceded out of the candelstycke.
Exodus 37:20 And vpon the candelstycke selfe were .iiij. cuppes after the facyon of almondes wyth knoppes & floures:
Exodus 37:21 vnder euery two braunches a knoppe.
Exodus 37:22 And the knoppes & the braunches proceded out of it, and were alone pece of pure thycke golde.
Exodus 37:23 And he made seuen lampes therto, and the snoffers therof, and fyre pannes of pure golde.
Exodus 37:24 An hundred weyght of pure golde, made bothe it and all that belonged therto.
Exodus 37:25 And he made the cens alter of Sethim wood of a cubit long & a cubyt brode: euen .iiij. square & two cubytes hye with hornes procedynge out of it.
Exodus 37:26 And he couered it with pure golde, both the toppe & the sydes round about
Exodus 37:27 and the hornes of it, & made vnto it a crowne of golde round about. And he made two ringes of golde vnto it, euen vnder the croune vpon ether syde of it, to put staues in for to beare it wyth all:
Exodus 37:28 & made staues of Sethim wood, & ouerlayde them wyth golde.
Exodus 37:29 And he made the holy anoynting oyle & the swete pure incens after the apothecarys crafte.

CHAPTER: 38

Exodus 38:1 And he made the burntoffryng alter of Sethim wood .v. cubytes long & .v. cubytes brode: euen .iiij. square, and .iij. cubytes hye.
Exodus 38:2 And he made hornes in the .iiij. corners of it procedyng out of it, and ouerlayde it wyth brasse.
Exodus 38:3 And he made al the vessels of the alter: the cauldrons, shouels, basyns, fleshokes & colepanues al of brasse.
Exodus 38:4 And he made a brasen gredyren of networke vnto the alter rounde about alowe beneth vnder the compasse of the alter: so that it reached vnto halfe the altare,
Exodus 38:5 & cast .iiij. rynges of brasse for the .iiij. endes of the gredyren to put staues in.
Exodus 38:6 And he made staues of sethym wodd & couered them with brasse,
Exodus 38:7 & put the staues in the rynges alonge by the alter side to bere it with al, and made the alter holowe with bordes.
Exodus 38:8 And he made the lauer of brasse & the fote of it also of brasse in the syghte of them that dyd watch before the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Exodus 38:9 And he made the courte with hangynges of twyned bysse of an hundred cubytes long vpon the southsyde,
Exodus 38:10 & .xx. pillers with .xx. sockettes of brasse: but the knoppes of the pyllers & the whopes were syluer.
Exodus 38:11 And on the northsyde the hanginges were an hundred cubytes long wyth .xx. pyllers and .xx. sockettes of brasse, but the knoppes & the whopes of the pylers were of syluer.
Exodus 38:12 And on the west syde, were hangynges of .l. cubytes long, & .x. pyllers wyth their .x. sockettes, & the knopes & the whopes of the pillers were siluer.
Exodus 38:13 And on the east syde towarde the sonne risyng, were hangynges of .l. cubytes:
Exodus 38:14 the hangynges of the one syde of the gate were fiftene cubytes longe, and their pylers .iij. with their .iij. sockettes.
Exodus 38:15 And of the other side of the court gate were hangynges also of .xv. cubytes longe, and their pillers .iij. with .iii. sockettes.
Exodus 38:16 Now al the hangynges of the court round about, were of twyned bysse,
Exodus 38:17 & the sockettes of the pyllers were brasse: but the knoppes and the whoopes of the pyllers were syluer, and the herdes were ouerlayde with syluer, & all the pillers of the courte were whoped about wt syluer.
Exodus 38:18 And the hangynge of the gate of the courte was nedleworke, of iacyncte, scarlet, purple, & twyned bysse .xx. cubytes long and fyue in the bredth, accordyng to the hangynges of the court.
Exodus 38:19 And the pyllers were .iiij. wyth .iiij. sockettes of brasse, & the knoppes of syluer, & the heedes ouerlayde wyth siluer and whoped aboute with syluer,
Exodus 38:20 & al the pynnes of the tabernacle and of the courte rounde about were brasse.
Exodus 38:21 Thys is the summe of the habitacion of wytnesse, whych was counted at the commaundement of Moses: and was the offyce of the Leuytes by the hand of Ithamar sonne to Aaron the preast.
Exodus 38:22 And Bezaleel sonne of Vri sonne to Hur of the tribe of Iuda, made all that the Lord commaunded Moses,
Exodus 38:23 and wyth hym Ahaliab sonne of Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan, a connynge grauer and a worker of nedle worke in iacincte, scarlet, purple & bysse.
Exodus 38:24 All the golde that was occupyed vpon all the worke of the holy place (whiche was the golde of the waueofferynge) was .xxix. hundred weyght and seuen hundred and .xxx. sycles, accordynge to the holy sycle.
Exodus 38:25 And the summe of syluer that came of the multitude was .v. score hundred weyght & a thousande seuen hundred & .lxxv. sycles of the holy sycle.
Exodus 38:26 Euery man offrynge halfe a sycle after the weyght of the holy sycle among them that went to be nombred from .xx. yere olde & aboue, among .vi. hundred thousande and .iij. thousande and .v. hundred and .l. men.
Exodus 38:27 And the .v. score hundred weight of siluer went to the castynge of the sockettes of the sanctuary & the sockettes of the vayle: an hundred sockettes of the .v. score hundred weight an hundred weyght to euery sockette.
Exodus 38:28 And the thousande seuen hundred & .lxxv. sycles, made knoppes to the pyllers, & ouerlayd the heedes and whoped them.
Exodus 38:29 And the brasse of the waueofferyng was .lxx. hundred weyght and two thousand, and .iiij. hundred sicles.
Exodus 38:30 And therwith he made the sockettes to the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, and the brasen altare, and the brasen gredyren that longeth therto, and all the vessels of the alter,
Exodus 38:31 and the sockettes of the courte round about, and the sockettes of the court gate, and all the pynnes of the habitacion, and all the pynnes of the courte round aboute.

CHAPTER: 39

Exodus 39:1 And of the iacyncte, scarlet, purple & twyned bysse, they made the vestimentes of ministracion to do seruyce in that holy place and made the holy garmentes that pertayned to Aaron, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Exodus 39:2 And they made the Ephod of gold, iacincte scarlet, purple, and twyned bysse.
Exodus 39:3 And they did beate the golde in to thynne plates, & cutte & into wyres: to worke it in the iacincte, scarlet, purple & the bysse, wyth broderd worke.
Exodus 39:4 And they made the sides come to gether, and cloosed them vp by the two edges.
Exodus 39:5 And the brodrynge of the gyrdell that was vpon it, was of the same stuffe and after the same worcke of golde, iacincte, scarlet, purple and twyned bysse, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Exodus 39:6 And they wrought Onix stones cloosed in ouches of golde & graued as sygnettes are grauen with the names of the chyldren of Israel,
Exodus 39:7 & put them on the shoulders of the Ephod that they shulde be a remembraunce of the chyldren of Israel, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Exodus 39:8 And they made the brestlappe of connyng worke, after the worke of the Ephod: euen of golde, iacincte, scarlet, purple and twyned bysse.
Exodus 39:9 And they made it .iiij. square & double, an hande breadeth long & an hande breadeth brode.
Exodus 39:10 And they fylled it wyth .iiij. rowes of stones (the fyrst rowe Sardios, a Topas & Smaragdus:
Exodus 39:11 the second rowe, a Rubye, a Saphir & a Diamonde:
Exodus 39:12 the .iij. rowe, Ligurios an Achat and an Amatist:
Exodus 39:13 the fourth rowe: a Turcas, an onix & a Iaspis) closed in ouches of gold in their inclosers.
Exodus 39:14 And the .xij. stones were grauen as sygnettes with the names of the chyldren of Israel: euery stone wyth hys name, accordyng to the .xij. tribes.
Exodus 39:15 And they made vpon the brestlappe, two fastenyng cheynes of wrethen worcke & pure golde.
Exodus 39:16 And they made two hokes of golde & two golde rynges, & put the two ringes vpon the two corners of the brestlappe.
Exodus 39:17 And they put the two chaynes of gold in the .ij. rynges, in the corners of the brestlappe.
Exodus 39:18 And the two endes of the two chaynes they fastened in the two hokes, and put them on the shoulders of the Ephod vpon the fore front of it.
Exodus 39:19 And they made two other rynges of gold and put them on the two other corners of the brestlappe a longe vpon the edge of it, toward the insyde of the Ephod that is ouer agaynst it.
Exodus 39:20 And they made yet two other gold ringes, & put them on the two sides of the Ephod, beneth on the foresyde of it: euen where the sides go together,
Exodus 39:21 aboue vpon the brodring of the Ephod, & they strayned the brestlappe by his rynges vnto the rynges of the Ephod, wyth laces of iacincte, that it myght lye fast vpon the brodrynge of the Ephod, & shulde not be lowsed from of the Ephod: as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Exodus 39:22 And he made the tunycle vnto the Ephod of wouen worke, and al together of iacincte,
Exodus 39:23 & the heade of the tunicle was in the middest of it as the coller of a partlet, wyth a bonde rounde aboute the coller, that it shoulde not rent.
Exodus 39:24 And they made beneth vpon the hem of the tunycle: pomgranates of iacincte, scarlet, purple & twyned bysse.
Exodus 39:25 And they made lytle belles of pure golde, & put them among the pomgranates rounde aboute vpon the edge of the tunycle a bell & a pomgranate,
Exodus 39:26 a bell & a pomgranate rounde about the hemmes of the tunycle to mynystre in, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Exodus 39:27 And they made cotes of bysse of wouen worcke for Aaron and his sonnes,
Exodus 39:28 & a mytre of bysse, & goodly bonettes of bysse, & lynen breches of twyned bysse,
Exodus 39:29 & a gyrdell of twyned bysse, iacincte, scarlet and purple: euen of nedleworcke, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Exodus 39:30 And they made the plate of the holy croune of fyne golde, & wrote vpon it wyth grauen worke, the holynes of the Lord:
Exodus 39:31 and tyed it to a lace of iacincte to fasten it an hye vpon the mytre, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Exodus 39:32 Thus was al the worke of the habitacion of the tabernacle of witnesse fynysshed. And the chyldren of Israel dyd accordynge to all that the Lorde had commaunded Moses.
Exodus 39:33 And they brought the habitacion vnto Moses: the tent and al his apparel therof: the buttones, boordes, barres, pillers & sockettes:
Exodus 39:34 and the couerynge of rams skynnes red, & the coueryng of taxus skynnes, & the hangyng vayle,
Exodus 39:35 & the arcke of witnesse with the staues therof, and the mercyseate:
Exodus 39:36 the table & al the ordinaunce therof, and the shewbred,
Exodus 39:37 & the pure candelstycke, and the lampes prepared therunto with all the vessels therof, and the oyle for lyghtes,
Exodus 39:38 and the golden altare, and the anoyntynge oyle and the swete cens, and the hangynge of the tabernacle doore,
Exodus 39:39 & the brasen alter, and the gredyren of brasse longyng therunto wyth hys barres and all hys vessels, and the lauer with hys fote,
Exodus 39:40 and the hangynges of the court with his pillers and sockettes, & the hanging to the courte gate, hys boordes & pynnes, & all the ordynaunce that serueth to the habitacion of the takernacle of wytnesse,
Exodus 39:41 and the mynystryng vestymentes to serue in the holy place. and the holy vestymentes of Aaron the preast and hys sonnes raymentes to mynystre in:
Exodus 39:42 accordyng to all that the Lord commaunded Moses: euen so the chyldren of Israel made al the worke.
Exodus 39:43 And Moses beheld al the worke: and se, they had done it euen as the Lord commaunded: and then Moses blessed them.

CHAPTER: 40

Exodus 40:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Exodus 40:2 In the fyrst daye of the fyrst moneth shalt thou sett vp the habitacion of the tabernacle of wytnesse
Exodus 40:3 & put therin the arcke of witnesse, & couer the arcke wt the vayle,
Exodus 40:4 and brynge in the table & apparell it, and brynge in the candelstycke and putte on hys lampes,
Exodus 40:5 and sette the cense aultare of Golde before the arcke of wytnes, and put the hangynge of the doore vnto the habitation.
Exodus 40:6 And sette the burntofferynge aultare before the dore of the tabernacle of witnes
Exodus 40:7 and set the lauour betwene the taberuacle of witnes & the aultare, & put water therein,
Exodus 40:8 and make the courte rounde aboute, and sette vp the hanging of the court gate.
Exodus 40:9 And take the anoyntyng oyle and anoynt the habitation & al that is therein, & hallowe it and all that belongeth therto: that it maye be holy.
Exodus 40:10 And anoynt the aulter of the burntofferynges & all hys vessels, and sanctify the aulter that it may be most holy.
Exodus 40:11 And anoynt also the lauer & his fote, and sanctifye it.
Exodus 40:12 Then brynge Aaron and his sonnes vnto the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and washe them wyth water.
Exodus 40:13 And put vpon Aaron the holy vestementes, and anoynte him & sanctyfye hym that he maye minister vnto me,
Exodus 40:14 n/a
Exodus 40:15 that their annointing may be an euerlasting preasthode vnto them thorowe out theyr generation.
Exodus 40:16 And Moses dyd accordynge to all that the Lord commaunded him.
Exodus 40:17 Thus was the Tabernacle reared vp the fyrst daye in the fyrste moneth in the seconde yere.
Exodus 40:18 And Moses reared vp the tabernacle & fastened his sockettes, and set vp the bordes and put in their barres, & reared vp the pyllers,
Exodus 40:19 & spred abrod the tent ouer the habitation, and put the coueringe of the tente an hye aboue it: as the lord commaunded Moses.
Exodus 40:20 And he toke and put the testimony in the arcke, and set the staues to the arcke, & putte the mercy seate an hye vppon the arcke,
Exodus 40:21 and brought the arcke into the habitation, & hanged vp the vayle, & couered the arcke of witnes as the Lord commanded Moses.
Exodus 40:22 And he put the table in the tabernacle of wytnesse in the north side of the habitation wythout the vayle,
Exodus 40:23 and set the bread in ordre before the Lord, euen as the Lord had commaunded Moses.
Exodus 40:24 And he put the candelsticke in the tabernacle of wytnes ouer agaynste the table in the south syde of the habitation,
Exodus 40:25 and sette vp the lampes before the Lorde: as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Exodus 40:26 And he put the golden altare in the tabernacle of wytnes before the vayle,
Exodus 40:27 and brente swete sence thereon as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Exodus 40:28 And set vp the hangynge in the dore of the habitation,
Exodus 40:29 and set the burnt offering alter before the dore of the tabernacle of wytnes, & offered burnteofferynges and meate offerynges theron as the lord commaunded Moses.
Exodus 40:30 And he set the lauer betwene the tabernacle of witnes and the aultare, and poured water therin to washe wt all.
Exodus 40:31 And both Moses, Aaron & his sonnes washed their handes & their fete therat:
Exodus 40:32 boeth when they went into the tabernacle of wytnes, or when they went to the aultare, as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Exodus 40:33 And he reared vp the courte rounde about the habitation and the aultare & set vp the hangynge of the court gate: and so Moses finished the worcke.
Exodus 40:34 And the cloude couered the tabernacle of wytnes, and the glorye of the Lorde fylled the habitation:
Exodus 40:35 so that Moses coulde not enter into the Tabernacle of wytnesse bycause the cloude abode therin, and the glory of the Lord filled the habitation.
Exodus 40:36 When the cloude was taken vp from of the habitation the children of Israel toke their iourneys as oft as they had iourneyed.
Exodus 40:37 And if the cloude departed not, they iourneyed not tyll it departed:
Exodus 40:38 for the cloud of the Lord was vpon the habitation by daye, and fyre by nyght: in the syght of all the house of Israell in all theyr iourneys.

BOOK: Leviticus

CHAPTER: 1

Leviticus 1:1 And the Lorde called Moses & spak to hym oute of the tabernacle of wytnesse saiyng:
Leviticus 1:2 speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and saye vnto them: who soeuer of you shal brynge a gyfte vnto the Lord, shal brynge it of the catel: euen of the oxen and of the shepe.
Leviticus 1:3 If he brynge a burntoffrynge of the oxen he shall brynge a male wythout blemysh, & shal brynge hym to the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, that he maye be accepted before the Lorde.
Leviticus 1:4 And let hym put hys hand vpon the heed of the burntsacryfice, and fauoure shalbe geuen hym to make an attonement for hym,
Leviticus 1:5 and let hym kyll the oxe before the Lorde. And let the preastes Aarons sonnes bringe the bloud and let them sprynkel it rounde aboute vpon the alter that is before the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse.
Leviticus 1:6 And let the burntoffrynges be strypped and hewed in peces.
Leviticus 1:7 And then let the sonnes of Aaron the preast put fyre vpon the alter,
Leviticus 1:8 & put wood vpon the fyre, & let them laye the peces with the heed and the fatte, vpon the wood that is on the fyre in the alter.
Leviticus 1:9 But the inwardes and the legges shey shall wash in water, and the preast shal burne altogether vpon the alter, that it be a burntsacrifyce & an offring of a swete odoure vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 1:10 Yf he wyl offer a burnt sacrifice of the shepe whether it be of the lambes or of the gootes he shal offer a male wythout blemysh.
Leviticus 1:11 And let hym kyll it on the northsyde of the alter, before the Lord. And let the Preastes Aarons sonnes sprynkle the bloude of it round about vpon the alter.
Leviticus 1:12 And let it be cut in peces: euen wyth hys heed and his fatte, and let the preast put them vpon the wood that lyeth vpon the fyre in the alter.
Leviticus 1:13 But let hym wash the inwardes and the legges wyth water, and than brynge all together and burne it vpon the alter: that is a burntoffryng and a sacrifyce of swete sauour vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 1:14 If he wyl offer a burntoffrynge of the foules he shall offer eyther of the turtyll doues or of the yong pigeons.
Leviticus 1:15 And the Preast shal bryng it vnto the alter, and wrynge the necke a sundre of it, & burne it on the alter, and let the bloude runne out vpon the sydes of the alter,
Leviticus 1:16 and plucke awaye hys croppe & his fethers, & cast them besyde the alter on the east parte vpon the hepe of asshes,
Leviticus 1:17 and breke hys wynges, but plucke them not asundre. And then let the Preast burne it vpon the alter, euen vpon the wood that lyeth vpon the fyre, a burntsacryfyce and an offrynge of a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 2

Leviticus 2:1 If any soule wyl offer a meate offrynge vnto the Lorde, hys offrynge shalbe fyne floure, & he shal poure therto oyle, and put frankencens theron,
Leviticus 2:2 and shall brynge it vnto Aarons sonnes the preastes. And one of them shall take therout hys handfull of the floure, and of the oyle wyth all the franckencens, & burne it for a memoriall vpon the alter: an offryng of a swete sauoure vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 2:3 And the remnaunt of the meatoffring shalbe Aarons & his sonnes as a thynge most holy of the sacryfyces of the Lorde.
Leviticus 2:4 If anye man brynge a meatoffrynge that is baken in the ouen, let hym brynge swete cakes of fyue floure myngled wyth oyle, and vnleuended wafers anoynted wyth oyle.
Leviticus 2:5 If thy meatoffrynge be baken in the fryeng pan, then it shalbe of swete floure myngled wyth oyle.
Leviticus 2:6 And thou shalt mynce it smal, and poure oyle theron: and so it is a meatoffrynge.
Leviticus 2:7 If thy meatofferynge be a thyng broyled vpon the gredyren, of floure myngled wyth oyle it shalbe.
Leviticus 2:8 And thou shalt brynge the meatoffrynge that is made of these thynges vnto the Lorde, & shalt delyuer it vnto the preast, and he shal bryng it vnto the alter,
Leviticus 2:9 and shall heue vp parte of the meatoffrynge for a memoryal, & shal burne it vpon the alter: an offerynge of a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 2:10 And that whyche is left of the meatoffrynge shall be Aarons and hys sonnes, as a thyng that is moost holy of the offrynges of the Lorde.
Leviticus 2:11 Al the meatoffringes which ye shal bringe vnto the Lorde, shalbe made without leuen. For ye shall nether burne leuen nor honye in any offeryng of the Lorde:
Leviticus 2:12 Notwithstandyng ye shal brynge the fyrstlynges of them vnto the Lorde: but they shall not come vpon the alter to make a swete sauoure.
Leviticus 2:13 All thy meat offeringes thou shalt salt wt salt: neither shalt thou suffer the of the couenaunt of thy God to be sackyng from thy meat offeryng: but vpon al thyne offerynges thou shal bryng salt.
Leviticus 2:14 If thou offer a meatofferynge of the fyrste ripe frutes to the Lord, then take that whych is yet grene, & drye it by the fyre and beat it smal & so offer the mete offeryng of thy first rype frutes.
Leviticus 2:15 And then poure oyle therto, and put frankensence theron: & so it is a meatofferynge.
Leviticus 2:16 And the prieste shal burne parte of the beaten corne & parte of the oyle wythall the frankencense, for a remembraunce. That is an offeryng vnto the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 3

Leviticus 3:1 If a man brynge a peace offerynge of the oxen: whether it be male or female, he shal bringe such as is without blemish, before the Lorde:
Leviticus 3:2 and let hym put hys hande vppon the heade of hys offerynge, and kyll it before the dore of the tabernacle of wytnes. And Aarons sonnes the preastes shal sprinkle the bloud vpon the aulter round aboute.
Leviticus 3:3 And they shal offer of the peaceoffering to be a sacrifice vnto the Lord the fatt that couereth the inwardes, and all the fat that is vpon the inwardes:
Leviticus 3:4 & the two kidneys with the fatt that lyeth vpon the loynes: and the kall that is on the lyuer they shall take awaye wyth the kidneyes.
Leviticus 3:5 And Aarons sonnes shall burne them vpon the alter with the burnt sacrifice which is vpon the wodd on the fyre. That is a Sacrifice of a swete sauour vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 3:6 If a man brynge a peace offeryng vnto the Lord from of the flocke, whether it be male or female, it shall be without blemysh.
Leviticus 3:7 If he offer a Lambe, he shall brynge it before the Lord,
Leviticus 3:8 and put his hand vpon his offeringes head, & kyll it in the dore of the Takernacle of wytnesse, & Aarons sonnes shall sprynkle the bloud therof round about the aulter.
Leviticus 3:9 And of the peace offering they shall bryng a sacrifyce vnto the Lorde: the fatt therof & the rompe altogyther, whych they shal take of hard by the backe bone: & the fatt that couereth the inwardes & al the fatt that is vpon the inwardes
Leviticus 3:10 & the two kydneys with the fatt that lyeth vpon them & vpon the loynes, and the kall that is vppon the lyuer he shall take awaye wyth the kydneys.
Leviticus 3:11 And the prieste shall burne them vpon the aulter to fede the Lordes offerynge wyth all.
Leviticus 3:12 If the offeryng be a goote, he shal brynge it before the Lorde,
Leviticus 3:13 & put his hande vpon the head of it, and kyl it before the tabernacle of wytnes, and the sonnes of Aaron shal sprinkle the bloud thereof vpon the aulter round aboute.
Leviticus 3:14 And he shal bryng therof his offring vnto the Lordes sacrifyce: the fatt that couereth the inwardes & all the fatte that is vpon the inwardes
Leviticus 3:15 & the two kydneys & the fatte that lieth vpon them and vpon the loynes, & the kal the is vpon the lyuer he shal take away with the kydneys.
Leviticus 3:16 And the prieste shal burne them vpon the alter to fede the Lordes sacrifice wt all, & to make a swete sauour.
Leviticus 3:17 And thus shall all the fat be the Lordes, and it shall be a lawe for euer amonge youre generations after you in your dwellynge places: that ye eate neyther fat nor bloud.

CHAPTER: 4

Leviticus 4:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 4:2 speake vnto the chyldren of Israell & say: when a soule synneth thorowe ignoraunce, and hath done anye of those thynges whyche the Lord hath forbidden in hys commaundementes to be done:
Leviticus 4:3 If the prieste that is anointed sinne, & make the people do amysse, he shall brynge for hys syn which he hath done: an oxe wythout blemysh vnto the Lord for a syn offeryng.
Leviticus 4:4 And he shall bryng the oxe vnto the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse before the Lorde, & shal put hys hand vpon the oxe heade, and kyll hym before the Lorde.
Leviticus 4:5 And the prieste that is anoynted shall take of the oxe bloude, and bryng it into the tabernacle of wytnes,
Leviticus 4:6 and shal dyp hys fynger in the bloude & sprinkle therof seuen tymes before the Lord: euen before the hanging of the holy place.
Leviticus 4:7 And he shal put some of the blud vpon the hornes of the alter of swete sence before the Lord which is in the tabernacle of wytnes, & shal poure all the bloud of the oxe vpon the bottome of the alter of burntoffrynges which is by the dore of the tabernacle of witnes.
Leviticus 4:8 And he shal take away all the fatte of the oxe that is the synne offering: the fatt that couereth the inwardes and all the fatte that is aboute them,
Leviticus 4:9 & the .ij. kydneys with the fatt that lyeth vpon them & vpon the loynes, and the kall vpon the liuer let them take awaye also wyth the kidneis:
Leviticus 4:10 as it was taken from the oxe of the peace offeringe & let the prieste burne theim vppon the alter of burnt offringes.
Leviticus 4:11 But the skinne of the oxe & al hys flesh wyth his head, hys legges, his inwardes with his dong,
Leviticus 4:12 shal he carye altogither out of the host vnto a clene place: euen wher the ashes are poured out, & burne him on wodd wyth fyre: euen vpon the heape of ashes.
Leviticus 4:13 If the hole comenaltye of the children of Israel sinne thorow ignoraunce, & the thyng be hid from theyr eyes: so that they haue committed any of these thynges which the Lord hath forbydden to be done in his commaundementes & haue offended,
Leviticus 4:14 & the synne which they haue synned be afterward knowne, then shall they offer an oxe for a synne offeryng, & shal bryng him before the tabernacle of witnes,
Leviticus 4:15 and the elders of the multitude shal put theyr handes vpon his head before the Lord.
Leviticus 4:16 And the priest that is anoynted shal bringe of his bloud into the tabernacle of wytnes,
Leviticus 4:17 and shal dype hys fynger in the bloude, and sprinkle it seuen tymes before the Lorde: euen before the vayle.
Leviticus 4:18 And shall put of the bloude vpon the hornes of the alter whych is before the Lorde in the tabernacle of wytnes, and shall poure al the bloud vpon the botome of the alter of burnt offeringes whych is by the dore of the tabernacle of witnes,
Leviticus 4:19 & shal take all hys fatte frome hym, & burne it vpon the alter,
Leviticus 4:20 & shal do wyth hys oxe as he dyd with the synne offerynge oxe. And the priest shall make an atonement for them, and so it shalbe forgeuen them.
Leviticus 4:21 And he shall bring the oxe without the hoste, and burne hym as he burned the fyrst: so is thys the sinneofferynge of the cominalty.
Leviticus 4:22 When a Lorde synneth and commytteth thorow ignoraunce any of these things whiche the lord his God hath forbiden to be done in his commaundementes & hath so offended: when hys synne is shewed vnto him,
Leviticus 4:23 which he hath synned, he shall brynge for hys offerynge an he goote wythoute blemish
Leviticus 4:24 & laye his hand vpon the head of it, and kil it in the place where the burntofferynges are kylled before the Lord: this is a synneoffring.
Leviticus 4:25 Then let the priest take of the bloude of the synneofferyng with hys fynger, and put it vpon the hornes of the burnt offeryng aulter, & poure his bloud vpon the botome of the burntofferyng alter,
Leviticus 4:26 & burne all his fatt vpon the aulter, as he doth the fatt of the peaceoffringes. And the prieste shall make an atonement for hym as concerning his synne, and so it shalbe forgeuen hym.
Leviticus 4:27 If one of the common people of the land sinne thorowe ignoraunce and commit anye of the thynges whych the Lord hath forbydden in hys commaundementes to be done & so hath trespaced,
Leviticus 4:28 when hys synne which he hath sinned is come to hys knowledge, he shal bring for hys offering, a she gote without blemish for hys sinnes whych he hath synned,
Leviticus 4:29 & laye hys hand vpon the head of the synne offering & slea it in the place of burnt offringes
Leviticus 4:30 And the priestes shall take of the bloud wyth hys fynger, & put it vpon the hornes of the burntofferyng alter, and poure al the bloud vpon the botome of the alter,
Leviticus 4:31 and shall take away al his fatt as the fatt of the peaceofferynges is taken awaye. And the priest shall burne it vpon the alter for a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde, and the prieste shall make an atonement for hym, & it shalbe forgeuen hym.
Leviticus 4:32 If he bringe a lambe & offer it for a synne offeryng, he shall bryng a female wythoute blemysh,
Leviticus 4:33 & lay hys hand vpon the head of the synneofferyng, & slea it in the place wher the burntoffringes ar slayne.
Leviticus 4:34 And the priest shal take of the bloud of the synne offeryng wyth his fynger, and put it vpon the hornes of the burntoffring alter, & shal poure al the bloud therof vnto the botome of the alter.
Leviticus 4:35 And he shall take away all the fatt therof, as the fat of the shepe of the peace offringes was taken awaye. And the prieste shall burne it vpon the alter for the Lordes sacrifice, and the prieste shall make an atonement for hys synne, and it shalbe forgeuen hym.

CHAPTER: 5

Leviticus 5:1 When a Soule hath synned and hearde the voyce of cursynge, and is a wytnesse: whether he hath sene or knowne of it, if he haue not vttered it, he shal bere hys synne.
Leviticus 5:2 Eyther when a manne toucheth anye vncleane thynge: whether it be the caryon of an vncleane beast or of vncleane catell or vncleane worme and is not ware of it is also vncleane & hath offended.
Leviticus 5:3 Either when he toucheth any vncleannes of man (whatsoeuer vncleannes it be that a man is defyled wythall) & is not ware of it and afterwarde cometh to the knowelege of it, he is a trespasour.
Leviticus 5:4 Either when a soule sweareth: so that he pronounceth wyth his lyps to do euil or to do good (whatsoeuer it be that a man pronounceth wyth an othe) and the thynge be out of hys mynde & afterwarde cometh to the knowelege of it, then he hath offended in one of these.
Leviticus 5:5 Then when he hath synned in one of these thynges, he shall confesse that wherin he hath synned,
Leviticus 5:6 and shall brynge hys trespaceofferyng vnto the Lorde for hys synne which he hath synned. A female from the flocke whether it be a Lambe or a she goote for a synneofferyng. And the priest shal make an atonement for hym for hys synne.
Leviticus 5:7 But if he be not able to brynge a Shepe, then lette hym bryng for his trespace whych he hath sinned two turtle doues or two yong pygeons vnto the Lord, one for a synne offering and another for a burnt offeryng.
Leviticus 5:8 And he shall bring them vnto the Prieste whyche shall offer the synneoffering fyrst, & wring the necke a sunder of it, but plucke it not cleane of.
Leviticus 5:9 And let hym sprynkle of the bloude of the synneofferynge vpon the syde of the aulter, and let the rest of the bloude blede vpon the bottome of the alter, & then it is a synneofferyng.
Leviticus 5:10 And let hym offer the second for a burntofferinge as the maner is: & so shall the prieste make an atonemente for hym for the synne whych he hath synned, and it shalbe forgeuen him.
Leviticus 5:11 And yet if he be not able to bringe two turtyll doues or two yonge Pygeons, then lette hym bryng hys offeryng for hys synne the tenth parte ef an Epha of fyne floure for a synneofferynge, but putt none oyle therto neyther put any franckencense theron, for it is a synneoffering.
Leviticus 5:12 And let hym bringe it to the prieste, & the priest shall take his handfull of it, and burne it vpon the alter for a remembraunce to be a sacrifice for the Lord: that is a synneoffering.
Leviticus 5:13 And let the prieste make an attonemente for hym for hys synne (whatsoeuer of these he hath synned) and it shall be forgeuen. And the remnaunte shall be the pristes, as it is in the meatofferynge.
Leviticus 5:14 And the Lord comened wt Moses saying:
Leviticus 5:15 When a soule trespaceth & synneth thorowe ignoraunce in any of the holy thynges of the Lorde, he shall brynge for hys trespace vnto the Lorde a ram without blemish out of the flocke valued at two sicles after the sycle of the sanctuarye, for a trespace offerynge.
Leviticus 5:16 And he shal make amendes for the harme that he hath done in the holy thing, and put the fifte part more to, & geue it vnto the prieste. And the priest shall make an atonemente for hym with the ram of the trespace offerynge, & it shal be forgeuen hym.
Leviticus 5:17 When a soule synneth & committeth any of these thynges whyche are forbidden to be done by the commaundement of the Lorde: though he wyst it not, he hath yet offended & is in synne,
Leviticus 5:18 & shal bryng a ram wythout blemyshe out of the flocke that is estemed to be worth a synne offeryng vnto the prieste. And the prieste shall make an atonement for hym for the ignoraunce whych he dyd, & was not ware, and it shal be forgeuen hym.
Leviticus 5:19 This is a trespace offeryng, for he trespaced agaynste the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 6

Leviticus 6:1 And the Lord talked with Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 6:2 when a soule synneth and trespaceth agaynste the Lorde, and denyeth vnto hys neyghboure that whyche was taken hym to keepe, or that was putte vnder hys hande, or that whych he hath violently taken away, or that which he hath deceaued his neighbour of wt soteltie,
Leviticus 6:3 or hathe founde that whych was lost and denyeth it, & sweareth falsly in whatsoeuer thinge it be that a man doth & synneth therin.
Leviticus 6:4 Then when he hath synned or trespaced, he shall restore agayne that he toke violently awaye, or the wrong which he dyd, or that whych was deliuered him to kepe, or the lost thyng whiche he found,
Leviticus 6:5 or whatsoeuer it be about whyche he hath sworne falselye he shall restore it agayne in the whole somme, and shall adde the fyfte part more thereto, and giue it vnto hym to whome it pertayneth, the same daye that he offereth for his trespace,
Leviticus 6:6 & shal bryng for hys trespace offerynge vnto the Lorde a ram wythout blemysh out of the flocke, that is estemed worth a trespace offering vnto the prieste.
Leviticus 6:7 And the prieste shall make an attonemente for hym before the Lorde, and it shall be forgeuen hym, in whatsoeuer thynge it be that a man doth & trespaceth therin.
Leviticus 6:8 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Leviticus 6:9 Commaunde Aaron and his sonnes saying: this is the law of the burntoffring. The burntoffering shal be vpon the harth of the alter all nyght vnto the mornyng, and the fyre of the alter shall burne therin.
Leviticus 6:10 And the prieste shall put on his lynen albe, and his lynen breches vpon hys fleshe, and take awaye the ashes whyche the fyre of the burnt sacrifyce in the aulter hath made, and put theym besyde the aulter,
Leviticus 6:11 and then put of hys rayment and put on other, and cary the ashes out without the host vnto a cleane place.
Leviticus 6:12 The fire that is vpon the alter shal burne therin and not go out. And the priest shal put wodde on the fyre euery mornynge, and put the burnt sacrifice vpon it, and he shal burne thereon the fat of the peaceofferynges.
Leviticus 6:13 The fyre shall euer burne vpon the alter, & neuer go oute.
Leviticus 6:14 This is the law of the meatofferyng: Aarons sonnes shall bryng it before the Lorde, vnto the alter:
Leviticus 6:15 and one of them shall take his hand ful of the floure of the meat offeryng & of the oyle wyth al the frankencens whych is theron, & shall burne it vnto a remembraunce vpon the aultare to be a swete sauoure of the memoriall of it vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 6:16 And the rest therof Aaron & his sonnes shal eate vnleuended: it shal be eaten in the holy place: euen in the court of the tabernacle of wytnes they shall eat it.
Leviticus 6:17 Their part which I haue geuen them of my sacrifice shall not be baken with leuen, for it is most holy, as is the synne offeryng, & trespace offerynge.
Leviticus 6:18 All the males amonge the chyldren of Aaron shall eate of it: and it shall be a dutye for euer vnto youre generacions of the sacrifices of the Lorde, neyther shal any man touch it, but he that is halowed.
Leviticus 6:19 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Leviticus 6:20 this is the offeryng of Aaron and his sonnes whych he shal offer vnto the Lord in the day when they are anoynted: the tenth part of an Epha of flour, which is a daily meatoffring perpetually: halfe in the mornyng & halfe at nyght:
Leviticus 6:21 & in the frying panne it shal be made wyth oyle. And when it is fryed, thou shalte brynge it in as a baken meatofferynge mynsed small, & shalt offer it for a swete sauoure vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 6:22 And that priest of hys sonnes that is anoynted in hys stede shall offer it: & it shalbe the Lordes dutye for euer, & it shall be burnt altogyther.
Leviticus 6:23 For al the meatofferinges of the prestes shal be burnt altogither, & shal not be eaten.
Leviticus 6:24 And the Lord talked wyth Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 6:25 speake vnto Aaron & vnto hys sonnes & say: This is the law of the sinne offring. In the place wher the burnt offring is killed shall the synne offering be killed also before the Lord, for it is moste holy.
Leviticus 6:26 The prieste that offereth it shall eat it in the holye place: euen in the court of the tabernacle of wytnes.
Leviticus 6:27 No man shal touch the flesh therof saue he that is halowed. And if any raimente be sprynkeled therwyth, it shalbe washed in the holy, place,
Leviticus 6:28 & the earthen pot that it is soden in shalbe broken. If it be sodden in brasse then the potte shalbe scoured & rynsed in the water.
Leviticus 6:29 All the males amonge the priestes shall eate thereof for it is mooste holye.
Leviticus 6:30 Notwythstandynge no synne offeryng that hathe hys bloude brought into the tabernacle of wytnesse to reconcyle wythall in the holye place, shall be eaten: but shal be burnt in the fyre.

CHAPTER: 7

Leviticus 7:1 This is the law of the trespace offeryug whych is moste holy.
Leviticus 7:2 In the place where the burnte offering is kylled, the trespace offeryng shall be kylled also: & hys bloud shalbe sprinkeled round about vpon the aultare.
Leviticus 7:3 And all the fat thereof shalbe offered: the rompe and the fatt that couereth the inwardes,
Leviticus 7:4 and the two kydneys wt the fatt that lyeth on them & vpon the loynes & the kall on the liuer shal be taken away wt the kydneys:
Leviticus 7:5 & the prieste shall burne theym vpon the aultare to be an offerynge vnto the Lorde, this is a trespace offeryng.
Leviticus 7:6 Al the males amonge the priestes shall eate therof in the holy place, for it is moste holy
Leviticus 7:7 As the synne offerynge is, so is the trespaceofferyng, one lawe serueth for both: & it shall be the priestes that reconcileth therwyth.
Leviticus 7:8 And the priest that offered a mans burntoffering, shall haue the skynne of the burnt offeryng whych he hath offred.
Leviticus 7:9 And al the meatofferynges that are baken in the ouen, and all that is dressed vppon the gredyren and in fryinge panne, shal be the priestes that offereth them.
Leviticus 7:10 And all the meat offerynges that are myngled wt oyle or drye, shall pertayne vnto all the sonnes of Aaron, & one shal haue as muche as an other.
Leviticus 7:11 Thys is the lawe of the peaceofferinges which shalbe offered to the Lorde.
Leviticus 7:12 If he offer to gyue thanckes, he shal bryng vnto hys thanke offeringe: swete cakes mingled wyth oyle and swete wafers anoynted wyth oyle, & cakes mingled wyth oyle of fyne flower fryed,
Leviticus 7:13 & he shal bring his offeryng vpon cakes made of leuended bread vnto the thankeoffering of his peace offeringes
Leviticus 7:14 and of them al he shal offer one to be an heueofferynge vnto the Lorde, and it shall be the Priestes that sprynkeleth the bloude of the peaceofferynges.
Leviticus 7:15 And the flesh of the thankeoffering of his peaceofferinges shalbe eaten the same day that it is offered, and there shal none of it be layed vp vntil the mornyng.
Leviticus 7:16 If it be a vowe or a fre wyloffringe that he bryngeth, the same daye that he offereth it it shal be eaten, & that which remaineth may be eaten on the morowe:
Leviticus 7:17 but as much of the offered flesh as remaineth vnto the third day shalbe burnt with fyre.
Leviticus 7:18 For if ani of the flesh of the peaceofferynges be eaten in the thirde day, then shal he that offred it optayne no fauour, neyther shall it be rekened vnto hym: but shall be an abhomination, and the soule that eateth of it shal beare the sinne therof.
Leviticus 7:19 The fleshe that toucheth any vncleane thing shall not be eaten, but burnte wyth fyre: & all that be cleane in theyr flesh, may eat flesh.
Leviticus 7:20 If any soule eat of the flesh of the peace offrings that pertaine vnto the Lorde, & his vncleannesse yet vpon hym, the same Soule shal peryshe from amonge hys people.
Leviticus 7:21 Moreouer if a soule touch any vncleane thing, whether it be the vnclennes of man or of any vncleane beast, or of any abhomination that is vnclene and then eat of the fleshe of the peaceofferynges which pertaine vnto the Lord, that soule shal peryshe from his people.
Leviticus 7:22 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Leviticus 7:23 speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and saye: Ye shal eate no maner fatte of oxen, shepe or gotes,
Leviticus 7:24 neuerthelater that fatte of the beast that dyeth alone & the fatt of that whych is torne with wylde beastes, maye be occupied in all maner vses: but ye shall in no wyse eat of it.
Leviticus 7:25 For whosoeuer eateth the fat of the beast of which men bryng an offeryng vnto that Lord, that soule that eateth it shall perish from his people.
Leviticus 7:26 Moreouer ye shall eate no maner of bloud, wherso euer ye dwel, whether it be of foule or of beast.
Leviticus 7:27 Whatsoeuer soule it be that eateth anye maner of bloude the same soule shall perysh from hys people.
Leviticus 7:28 And the Lord talked with Moses saying:
Leviticus 7:29 speake vnto the children of Israel & say: he that offereth his peaceoffring vnto the Lord, shal bryng his gyfte vnto the Lord of hys peaceofferynges,
Leviticus 7:30 hys owne handes shal bring the offeryng of the Lord: euen the fatt vpon the breast he shal bryng with the breast to waue it a waueofferynge before the Lord.
Leviticus 7:31 And the priest shal burne the fatt vpon the alter, & the breast shalbe Aarons & his sonnes.
Leviticus 7:32 And the right shoulder they shal geue vnto the priest, to be an heueoffringe, of their peaceofferinges.
Leviticus 7:33 And the same that offereth the bloude of the peace offerynges and the fatte, amonge the sonnes of Aaron shall haue the ryght shoulder vnto hys parte,
Leviticus 7:34 for the waue breast, & the heue shoulder I haue taken of the chyldren of Israell, euen of theyr peaceofferynges, & haue geuen it vnto Aaron the priest and vnto hys sonnes: to be a dutye for euer of the children of Israel.
Leviticus 7:35 This is the anoyntynge of Aaron & of the sacrifices of the Lord, in the day when they were offered to the priestes vnto the Lorde,
Leviticus 7:36 which the Lord commaunded to be geuen them in the day when he anoynted them, of the children of Israel, & to be a duty for euer amonge theyr generations,
Leviticus 7:37 This is the lawe of burntofferynges, of meateofferynges, of sinne offerynges, of trespace offerynges, of ful offerynges, of peace offeringes,
Leviticus 7:38 which the Lord commaunded Moses in the mount of Sinai, in the day when he commaunded the chyldren of Israel to offer theyr offerynges vnto the Lord in the wyldernes of Sinai.

CHAPTER: 8

Leviticus 8:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Leviticus 8:2 take Aaron and his sonnes wyth hym, and the vestures, and the anointyng oyle and an oxe for a synne offering and two rammes, & a basket of swete bread:
Leviticus 8:3 and gather all the comentye togyther vnto the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnes.
Leviticus 8:4 And Moses dyd as the Lorde commaunded him, & the people gathered them selues togyther vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnes.
Leviticus 8:5 And Moses sayed vnto the people: thys is the thing which the Lord commaunded to do.
Leviticus 8:6 And Moses brought Aaron & his sonnes & washed them with water,
Leviticus 8:7 & put vpon him the albe & gyrded hym wyth a gyrdle, & put vpon hym the tunicle, & put the Ephod theron, and gyrded hym with the brodered gyrdle of the Ephod, and bound it vnto hym therwt.
Leviticus 8:8 And he put the brestlappe theron, and put in the breastlappe Vrim & Thumim.
Leviticus 8:9 And he put the miter vpon his heade, & put vpon the myter euen vpon the forefront of it, the golden plate of the holy crowne, as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Leviticus 8:10 And Moses toke the anoyntyng oyle and anoynted the habitation & al that was therin, and sanctified them,
Leviticus 8:11 & sprinkeled therof vpon the alter seuen tymes, and anoynted the alter & all his vessels, & the lauer wyth his fote, to sanctifye them.
Leviticus 8:12 And he poured of the anoyntynge oyle vpon Aarons heade, & anoynted hym to sanctify hym.
Leviticus 8:13 And he brought Aarons sonnes and put albes vpon them, and gyrded them wyth gyrdelles, and put bonetes vpon theyr heades: as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Leviticus 8:14 And the synne offeryng was brought. And Aaron and his sonns put their handes vpon the head of the oxe of the sinne offering.
Leviticus 8:15 And when it was slaine, Moses toke of the bloude and put it vpon the hornes of the alter round aboute wt hys finger, & purified it, & poured the bloud vnto the botome of the alter, & sanctified it & reconciled it.
Leviticus 8:16 And he toke all the fatt that was vpon the inwardes, & the kall that was on the lyuer and the two kydneys with their fatt, & burned it vpon the alter.
Leviticus 8:17 But the oxe, the hyde, hys flesh and his donge, he burnt with fyre wtout the hoste, as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Leviticus 8:18 And he brought the ram of the burntoffryng & Aaron & hys sonnes put theyr handes vpon the head of the ram,
Leviticus 8:19 & it was killed. And Moses sprynkeled the bloud vpon the alter round aboute,
Leviticus 8:20 and cut the ram in peces & burnt the head, the peces, & the fatte,
Leviticus 8:21 & washed the inwardes & the legges in water, and burnt the ram euery whyt vpon the alter. That was a burnte Sacrifice of a swete sauoure, and an offeryng vnto the Lorde, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Leviticus 8:22 And he brought the other ram that was the fulofferyng, & Aaron & hys sonnes put their handes vpon the head of the ram:
Leviticus 8:23 and when it was slayne, Moses toke of the bloude of it, and put it vpon the typpe of Aarons ryght eare, and vpon the thombe of his right hand & vpon the great too of hys right fote.
Leviticus 8:24 Then were Aarons sonnes broughte, and Moses put of the bloude on the typpe of the ryghte eare of them, and vpon the thombes of their ryght handes, and vpon the greate tooes of theyr right fete, and sprinkled the bloud vpon the alter round about.
Leviticus 8:25 And he toke the fatt and the rompe and al the fatt that was vpon the inwardes, & the kall of the liuer, & the .ij. kidneys with their fatt and theyr right shoulder.
Leviticus 8:26 And out of the basket of swete breade that was before the Lord, he toke one swete cake of oyled breade and one wafer, put them on the fatt and vpon the ryght shoulder:
Leviticus 8:27 & put altogither vpon Aarons handes & vpon his sonnes handes, and waued it a waue offeryng before the Lorde.
Leviticus 8:28 And then Moses toke theym from of theyr handes agayne, and burnte theym vpon the aulter, euen vpon the burnt offeryng: These are the fulofferynges of a swete sauoure & a sacrifice vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 8:29 And Moses toke the breste & waued it a waue offering before the Lorde, of the ram of the fulofferynges: and it was Moses part, as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Leviticus 8:30 And Moses toke the anoyntyng oyle and of the bloud which was vpon the alter, and sprinkled it vpon Aaron & vpon his vestimentes & vpon his sons, & on their vestimentes wyth him, & sanctified Aaron & hys vestures & his sonnes & his sonnes vestures also.
Leviticus 8:31 Then Moses sayd vnto Aaron & his sonnes: boyle the flesh in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnes & there eate it wyth the breade that is in the basket of fulofferyngs, as the Lord commaunded saying: Aaron and hys sonnes shall eate it:
Leviticus 8:32 & that whiche remayneth of the fleshe and of the bread, burne it with fyre.
Leviticus 8:33 And se that ye departe not from the doore of the tabernacle of witnes seuen daies longe vntil the dayes of your ful offerynges be at an ende. For seuen daies must your hands be filled,
Leviticus 8:34 as they were this day: euen so the Lord hath commaunded to do, to reconcyle you with all.
Leviticus 8:35 Se therfore that ye abyde in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnes day & nyght seuen dayes longe, & kepe the watch of the Lorde that ye dye not, for soo I am commaunded.
Leviticus 8:36 And Aaron and hys sonnes dyd all thynges whyche the Lorde commaunded by the hand of Moses.

CHAPTER: 9

Leviticus 9:1 And the .viij. day Moses called Aaron and his sonnes, and the elders of Israel,
Leviticus 9:2 and said vnto Aaron, take a calfe for a synne offeryng, and a Ramme for a burntoffering: both without blemish, & bring them before the Lord.
Leviticus 9:3 And vnto the children of Israel he spake saying: take ye an he gote for a synne offering, & a calfe & a lambe both two of a yere olde, & wythout blemysh for a burnt sacrifice,
Leviticus 9:4 & an oxe & a ram for a peaceofferinges to offer before the lord, & a meatoffering mingled with oile, for to day the Lord wyll appeare vnto you.
Leviticus 9:5 And they broughte that which Moses commaunded to the tabernacle of witnes, & al the people came & stode before the Lorde.
Leviticus 9:6 And Moses said, thys is the thyng whych the Lord commaunded that ye should do, and then the glory of the Lord shal appeare vnto you.
Leviticus 9:7 And Moses said vnto Aaron: go vnto the alter & offer thy synne offeryng, & make an atonemente for the and for the people: and then offer the offeryng of the people, and reconcyle theym also, as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Leviticus 9:8 And Aaron went vnto the aulter, & slewe the calfe that was his sinne offring.
Leviticus 9:9 And the sonnes of Aaron broughte the bloude vnto hym, & he dypt hys fingers in the bloud and put it vpon the hornes of the alter, & poured the bloud vnto the bottome of the alter.
Leviticus 9:10 And the fatte & the two kydneys wyth the kall of the lyuer of the synneofferyng, he burnt vpon the aulter as the Lorde commaunded Moses:
Leviticus 9:11 but the fleshe & the hyde, he burnte with fyre wythout the hoste.
Leviticus 9:12 Afterwarde he slewe the burntoffering, & Aarons sonnes brought the bloud vnto hym, and he sprinkeled it rounde about vpon the aulter.
Leviticus 9:13 And they brought the burntofferyng vnto hym in peces & the head also, and he burnte it vpon the aulter,
Leviticus 9:14 & dyd washe the inwardes and the legges, & burnt them also vpon the burntoffering in the alter.
Leviticus 9:15 And then he brought the peoples offering & toke the goote that was the peoples synne offering, & slewe it & offered it for a sinne offering: as he dyd she fyrst.
Leviticus 9:16 And then brought the burnt offeryng, & offered it as the maner was,
Leviticus 9:17 & brought the meat offering & filled his hand therof, & burnt it vpon the alter, besyde the burnt sacrifice in the morninge.
Leviticus 9:18 Then he slewe the oxe & the ram that were the peoples peaceofferynges, & Aarons sonnes brought the bloud vnto hym, & he sprynkled it vpon the alter round aboute,
Leviticus 9:19 and toke the fatt of the oxe & of the ram: the rompe & the fatt that couereth the inwardes and the kidneyes & the cal of the liuer:
Leviticus 9:20 & put them vpon the breastes & burnt it vpon the alter:
Leviticus 9:21 but the breastes & the ryght shoulders Aaron waued before the Lord, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Leviticus 9:22 And Aaron lyft vp hys hand ouer the people & blessed them, and came down from offering of syn offeringes, burntofferings, & peace offerynges.
Leviticus 9:23 Then Moses & Aaron went into the tabernacle of wytnes and came out agayne and blessed the people, and the glory of the Lord appered vnto al the people.
Leviticus 9:24 And there came a fyre out from before the Lord, & consumed vpon the alter the burntofferyng and the fatt. And all the people sawe it, and showted, and fell on theyr faces.

CHAPTER: 10

Leviticus 10:1 And Nadab and Abihu the Sonnes of Aaron toke eyther of theym hys censor, and putte fyre therin, and put cense vpon and brought straunge fyre before the Lord: which he commaunded them not,
Leviticus 10:2 and ther went a fyre out from the Lord, and consumed them, & they dyed before the Lorde.
Leviticus 10:3 Then Moses sayed vnto Aaron: this is that the Lorde spake saying: I wyl be sanctified in them that come nye me, & before all the people I wil be glorified. And Aaron helde hys peace.
Leviticus 10:4 And Moses called Misael and Elisaphan the sonnes of Oziel the vncle of Aaron, and sayed vnto them: goo and carye youre brethren from the holy place out of the host.
Leviticus 10:5 And they went to theym, and caried them in their albes out of the host, as Moses bade.
Leviticus 10:6 And Moses said vnto Aaron & vnto Eleazar & Ithamar his eldest sonnes: vncouer not your heades, neither rent your clothes, lest ye dye and wrath come vpon all the people, let your brethren the whole house of Israell bewepe the burnynge whyche the Lorde hathe burnt.
Leviticus 10:7 But go ye not out from the dore of the tabernacle of wytnes, least ye dye: for the anoyntyng oyle of the Lord is vpon you. And they dyd as Moses bad.
Leviticus 10:8 And the Lord spake vnto Aaron sayinge:
Leviticus 10:9 dryncke no wyne, no strong drynke, neither thou nor thy sonnes wyth the: when ye go into the tabernacle of wytnes, lest ye dye. And let it be a lawe for euer vnto youre chyldren after you:
Leviticus 10:10 that ye may put difference betwene holy & vnholi, & betwene vncleane & cleane,
Leviticus 10:11 and that ye may teach the chyldren of Israel al the ordinances whych the Lord hath commaunded them by the handes of Moses.
Leviticus 10:12 And Moses sayed vnto Aaron and vnto Eliazar & Ithamer his sons that were lefte: take the meatoffering that remayneth of the sacrifices of the Lorde, and eat it without leuen besyde the alter, for it is most holy:
Leviticus 10:13 eat it therfore in the holye place, because it is thy dutie and thy sonnes dutie of the sacrifice of the Lorde: for so I am commaunded.
Leviticus 10:14 And the wauebrest and heueshoulder eate in a cleane place: both thou, & thy sonnes, & thy daughters with the. For it is thy duty & thy sonnes duty with the, of the peace offerynges of the children of Israel.
Leviticus 10:15 For the heueshoulder & the wauebreast whyche they bryng wyth the sacrifices of the fat to waue it before the Lord shall be thyne and thy sonnes wyth the and be a lawe for euer, as the Lorde hath commaunded.
Leviticus 10:16 And Moses sought for the goote that was the synne offeryng, and se it was burnt. And he was angry wyth Eliazar & Ithamar the sonnes of Aaron, whyche were lefte a lyue saying:
Leviticus 10:17 wherfore haue ye not eaten the sinne offeryng in the holy place, seynge it is moste holy: and for as muche as it is geuen you to beare the sinne of the people, and make agrement for them before the Lord?
Leviticus 10:18 Beholde, the bloude of it was not brought in wythin the holy place, therfore should ye haue eaten it in the holy place as I commaunded.
Leviticus 10:19 And Aaron sayed vnto Moses: beholde thys daye haue they offred theyr sinne offering & their burntoffering before the Lord, and it is chaunced me after thys maner. If I shold eat of the synne offeryng to day, would the Lord be content wythal.
Leviticus 10:20 And when Moses hearde that he was content.

CHAPTER: 11

Leviticus 11:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge,
Leviticus 11:2 speake vnto the children of Israel and say, these are the beastes which shall eate amonge all the beastes that are on the earth:
Leviticus 11:3 whatsoeuer hathe hoofe and deuideth it into two clawes and chewe cudde amonge the beastes that shall ye eate.
Leviticus 11:4 Neuertheles, these shall ye not eate of them that chewe cud and haue hoofes. The camel for he cheweth cud but he deuyded not the hoofe into two clawes, therfore he shall be vncleane vnto you.
Leviticus 11:5 And the cony for he cheweth the cud but deuideth not the hoofe into two clawes, therefore he is vncleane to you.
Leviticus 11:6 And the hare, for he lykewyse cheweth the cud, but deuideth not the hoofe into .ij. clawes, he is therfore vnclene to you.
Leviticus 11:7 And the swyne, for thoughe he deuyde the hooffe into two clawes, yet he cheweth not the cudde, and therfore is vncleane to you.
Leviticus 11:8 Of theyr fleshe se that ye eate not, and theyr carkasses se that ye touche not, for they are vncleane to you.
Leviticus 11:9 These shal ye eate of al that are in the waters: whatsoeuer hath fynnes & skales in the waters, seas, & ryuers, that shal ye eat.
Leviticus 11:10 And all that haue not fynnes & skales in the seas & ryuers of al that moue and lyue in the waters shal ye abhorre.
Leviticus 11:11 Se that ye eate not of theyr flesh, and also that ye abhore theyr carkases:
Leviticus 11:12 for all that haue no fynnes nor scales in the waters, shalbe abhomination vnto you
Leviticus 11:13 These are the foules which ye shal abhorre, & whych shal not be eaten, for they are an abhomination. The egle, the goshauke, the cormoraunte,
Leviticus 11:14 the kyete, the vulture & al his kind
Leviticus 11:15 & all kynde of rauens,
Leviticus 11:16 the estriche, the nightcrowe, the cocow, the sparowhauke, & al the kynde:
Leviticus 11:17 the lytle oule, the storcke, the greate oule,
Leviticus 11:18 the backe, the pellicane, the pye,
Leviticus 11:19 the heron, the iay with the kynd, the lapwyng, and the swalowe.
Leviticus 11:20 And all foules that crepe & go vpon al foure shalbe an abhomination to you.
Leviticus 11:21 Yet these may ye eate of al the foules that moue and go vpon .iiij. fete: euen those that haue no knees aboue vpon theyr fete to lepe wyth al vpon the erth,
Leviticus 11:22 euen these of them ye maye eate: the arbe & al hys kynde: the Selaam with al hys kynde: the Hargol and all the kynde, the Hagab and all hys kynde.
Leviticus 11:23 All other foules that moue & haue .iiij. fete, shalbe abhominacion vnto you.
Leviticus 11:24 In soche ye shalbe vncleane, whosoeuer touche the carkesse of them shalbe vncleane vnto the euen,
Leviticus 11:25 & whosoeuer bereth the carkasse of them, shall washe his clothes, & so shalbe vncleane vntyll euen.
Leviticus 11:26 Among al maner beastes, that haue hoofes and deuide them not in to two clawes or that chewe not the cud, shalbe vncleane vnto you: & all that toucheth them shalbe vncleane.
Leviticus 11:27 And al that goeth vpon hys handes amonge al maner beastes that go on al foure fete are vncleane vnto you: & as many as touch their carkasses, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
Leviticus 11:28 And he that beareth the carkasse of them, shall wasshe hys clothes & be vncleane vntyll the euen, for soche are vncleane vnto you.
Leviticus 11:29 And these are also vncleane to you among the thynges that crepe vpon the erth: the wesell, the mouse, the toode and all hys kynde,
Leviticus 11:30 the hedgehogge, stellio, the lizerte, the snayle and the molle:
Leviticus 11:31 these are vncleane to you amonge all that moue, and all that touche them when they be dead, shalbe vncleane vntyll the euen.
Leviticus 11:32 And what soeuer any of the dead carkasses of them fall vpon, shalbe vncleane: whatsoeuer vessell of wood it be, or rayment, or skynne, or bagge or what soeuer thing it be that any worke is wroughte with all. And they shalbe plunged in the water, & be vncleane vntill the euen, and then they shallbe cleane agayne.
Leviticus 11:33 All maner of erthen vessell wher in to any of them falleth is vncleane with all that there in is: & ye shall breake it.
Leviticus 11:34 All maner meate that is eaten, yf any soche water come vpon it, it shalbe vncleane. And al maner dryncke that is droncke in al maner soche vessels shalbe vncleane.
Leviticus 11:35 And whether it be ouen or kettel it shal be broken. For they are vncleaue and shalbe vncleane vnto you:
Leviticus 11:36 Neuerthelater, yet the fountaines & welles & pondes of water, shalbe cleane styll. But whosoeuer toucheth their carkesses, shal be vncleane.
Leviticus 11:37 If the dead carkasse of any soch fal vpon any seed vsed to sowe, it shall yet be cleane styll:
Leviticus 11:38 but & yf any water be poured vpon the seed and afterward the dead carkesse of them fal theron, then it shalbe vncleane vnto you.
Leviticus 11:39 If any beast of which ye may eate dye, he that toucheth the dead carkasse shalbe vncleane vntyl the euen.
Leviticus 11:40 And he that eateth of any soche dead carkasse, shall wasshe hys clothes & remayne vncleane vntyl the euen. And he also that beareth the carkesse of it, shall wasshe hys clothes, & be vncleane vntyl euen.
Leviticus 11:41 Al that scrauleth vpon the erth, is an abhominacion, and shall not be eaten.
Leviticus 11:42 And whatsoeuer goeth vpon the breast, and whatsoeuer goeth vpon .iiij. or moo fete amonge all that scrauleth vpon the erth, of that se ye eate not: for they are abhominable.
Leviticus 11:43 Make not youre soules abominable wyth nothyng that crepeth, nether make your soules vncleane wt them: that ye shuld be defyled therby.
Leviticus 11:44 For I am the Lord your god, be sanctifyed therfore that ye may be holy, for I am holy: & defyle not your soules with any maner thing that crepeth vpon the erth.
Leviticus 11:45 For I am the Lord that brought you out of the lande of Egypte to be youre God: be holy therfore, for I am holye.
Leviticus 11:46 This is the lawe of beest & foule & of al maner thyng that lyueth and moueth in the water & of all thynges that crepe vpon the erth,
Leviticus 11:47 that ye may put difference betwene vncleane & cleane, & betwene the beastes that are eaten and the beastes that are not eaten.

CHAPTER: 12

Leviticus 12:1 And the Lord spake vnto Moses, & sayde:
Leviticus 12:2 speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and say: when a woman hath conceyued, and hath borne a man chylde, she shalbe vncleane .vij. dayes: euen in lyke maner as when she is put apart in tyme of her natural dysease.
Leviticus 12:3 And in the .viij. daye the flesh of the chyldes foreskynne shalbe cut awaye.
Leviticus 12:4 And she shall contynue in the bloude of her puryfyenge .xxxiij. dayes, she shal touche no halowed thyng nor come into the sanctuary, vntyll the tyme of her, purifyenge be out.
Leviticus 12:5 If she bere a maydechylde, then she shalbe vncleane twoo wekes, as when she hath her naturall dysease. And she shal contynue in the bloude of her purifying .lxvi. dayes.
Leviticus 12:6 And when the daies of her purifiing are out: whether it be a sonne or a doughter, she shal brynge a lambe of one yere olde for a burntoffring and a younge pigeon or a turtyl doue for a synneoffryng vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse vnto the Preast:
Leviticus 12:7 which shal offer them before the Lorde, & make an attonement for her, and so she shalbe purged of her yssue of bloude. Thys is the lawe of her that hath borne a chylde, whether it be male or female.
Leviticus 12:8 But & yf she be not able to brynge a shepe, then let her brynge two turtyls or two younge pygeons: the one for the burntoffrynge, and the other for the sinneoffryng. And the Preast shall make an attonement for her, & she shalbe cleane.

CHAPTER: 13

Leviticus 13:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses & vnto Aaron saying:
Leviticus 13:2 when there appeareth a risyng in any mans flesh ether a scabbe or a glystring whyte: as though the plage of leprosye were in the skynne of hys fleshe, then let hym be brought vnto Aaron the Preaste or vnto one of hys sonnes the Preastes,
Leviticus 13:3 and let the Preast loke on the sore that is in the skynne of hys flesh. If the heyre in the soore be turned vnto white, & the sore also seme to be lower then the skynne of his fleshe, then it is surely a leprosye, & let the Preast loke on hym, & iudge hym vncleane.
Leviticus 13:4 If there be but a whyte plecke in the skynne of his flesh, and seme not to be lower then the other skynne nor the heyre therof is turned vnto whyte: then let the Preast shut him vp seuen daies.
Leviticus 13:5 And let the Preast loke vpon him the .vij. day: yf the sore seme to hym to abyde styl & to go no further in the skynne, then let the Preast shut hym vp yet .vij. dayes moo.
Leviticus 13:6 And let the Preast loke on him agayn the .vij. day. Then yf the soore be waxed blackesh, & is not growen abroode in the skynne, let the Preast make him cleane, for it is but a skyrf. And let hym wasshe his clothes, & then he is cleane.
Leviticus 13:7 But & yf the scabbe growe in the skynne after that he is sene of the Preast agayne.
Leviticus 13:8 If the Preast se that the scabbe be growen abrode in the skynne, let him make him vncleane: for it is surely a leprosye.
Leviticus 13:9 If the plage of leprosie be in a man, let him be brought vnto the Preast,
Leviticus 13:10 & let the Preaste se hym. If the rysyng appeare whyte in the skynne, & haue also made the heyre whyte, & there be rawe flesh in the sore also:
Leviticus 13:11 then it is an old leprosye in the skynne of his flesh. And the Preast shall iudge him vnclene, and shal not shutte hym vp for he is vncleane.
Leviticus 13:12 If a leprosye breake out in the skynne and couer all the skynne from the heed to the foote ouer all whersoeuer the Preast loketh,
Leviticus 13:13 then let the Preast loke vpon hym. If the leprosye haue couered al his fleshe, let hym iudge the dysease clene: for in as moche as he is altogether whyte he is therfore cleane.
Leviticus 13:14 But and yf there be rawe flesh on him when he is sene, then he shalbe vncleane.
Leviticus 13:15 Therfore when the Preast seeth the rawe flesh, let him iudge hym vnclene. For in as moche as hys fleshe is rawe, he is vnclene and it is surely a true leprosye.
Leviticus 13:16 But and yf the rawe flesh departe agayne & chaunge vnto whyte, then let hym come to the prest,
Leviticus 13:17 & let the Preast se hym: If the soore be chaunged vnto whyte, let the Preast iudge the dysease cleane, and then he is cleane.
Leviticus 13:18 When there is a byle in the skynne of any mans flesh and is healed
Leviticus 13:19 & after in the place of the byle there appeare a whyte rysing ether a shynyng whyte somwhat reddysh, let hym be sene of the Preast.
Leviticus 13:20 If when the Preast seyth hym it appeare lower than the other skynne & the heyre therof be chaunged vnto white, let the Preast iudge hym vncleane: for it is a very leprosye, that is broken out in the place of the byle.
Leviticus 13:21 But and yf when the Preast loketh on it there be no whyte heyres therin nether the scabbe lower then the other skynne and be somwhat blackesh, then the Preast shall shutt him aparte .vij. dayes.
Leviticus 13:22 If it sprede abrode in the meane ceason, then let the Preast iudge hym vncleane: for it is a leprosye.
Leviticus 13:23 But and yf the glystrynge whyte abyde styl in one place & go no further, then it is but the prynte of the byle, and the Preast shall iudge hym cleane.
Leviticus 13:24 When the skynne of any mans flesh is burnt with fyre that it be rawe & there appere in the burnyng a glistring whyte that is somwhat reddysh or altogether whyte,
Leviticus 13:25 let the Preast loke vpon it. If the heyre in that bryghtnesse be chaunged to whyte, and it also appeare lower then the other skynne, then it is a leprosye that is broken out of the place of the burning. And the Preast shal iudge him vncleane, for it is a leprosye.
Leviticus 13:26 But and yf (when the Preast loketh on it) he se that there is no whyte heyre in the bryghtenesse, & that it is no lower then the other skynne, & that it is also blackesh, then let the preast shut him vp .vij. dayes.
Leviticus 13:27 And yf (when the Preast loketh on him the .vij. day) it be growen abrode in the skynne, let hym iudge hym vncleane: for it is a leprosye.
Leviticus 13:28 But and yf that bryghtnesse abyde styl in one place & go no further in the skynne & be blackesh, then it is but a rysynge in the place of the burnynge, and the Preast shall make hym cleane: for it is but the prynte of the burnyng only.
Leviticus 13:29 When ether man or woman hath a breakyng out vpon the heed or the beerde, let the preast se it.
Leviticus 13:30 And yf it appeare lower than the other skynne, & ther be therin golden heyres & thyn, let the preast iudge hym vncleane, for it is a breakyng out of leprosye vpon the heed or berde.
Leviticus 13:31 If (when the Preast loketh on the breakynge out) he se that it is no lower then the other skynne & that there are blacke heyres therin, let hym shut hym vp .vij. dayes.
Leviticus 13:32 And let the preast loke on the dysease the .vij. day: & yf the breakyng out be gone no forther nether be any golden heyres therin nether the scabbe be lower then the other skynne,
Leviticus 13:33 then let him be shauen, but let hym not shaue the scabbe: & let the preast shut hym vp .vij. dayes moo.
Leviticus 13:34 And let the preast loke on the breakyng out the .vij. day agayn: If the breakynge out be gone no further in the skynne nor moore lower then the other skynne, then let the preast iudge hym cleane, and let hym wasshe hys clothes, & then he is cleane.
Leviticus 13:35 If the breakyng out growe in the skynne after that he is once iudged cleane,
Leviticus 13:36 let the Preast sea him. If it be growne abrode in dede in the skynne, let the preast seke no further for any golden heyres, for he is vncleane.
Leviticus 13:37 But and yf he se that the scabbe stande styll, & that there is blacke heyre growne vp therin, then the scabbe is healed and he is cleane: & the Preast shal iudge him cleane.
Leviticus 13:38 If there be found in the skynne of the flesh of man or woman a glysteryng whyte,
Leviticus 13:39 let the Preast se it. If there appeare in theyr flesh a glysteryng whyte somwhat blackesh then it is but frekels growen vp in the skinne: and he is cleane.
Leviticus 13:40 If a mans heyre fal of his heed, then he is heed baulde & cleane.
Leviticus 13:41 If his heyre fal before in his foreheed, then he is foreheedbald and cleane.
Leviticus 13:42 If there be in the bauld heed or bauld foreheed a reddish whyte scabbe, then there is leprosye spronge vp in hys baulde heed or baulde foreheede.
Leviticus 13:43 And let the preast se it: and yf the rysyng of the sore be reddysh whyte in his baulde heede or foreheed after the maner of a leprosie in the skynne of the flesh,
Leviticus 13:44 then he is a leper & vncleane: & the Preast shal iudge him vncleane, for the plage of his heed.
Leviticus 13:45 And the leper in whome the plage is, shall haue his clothes rent & his heede bare & hys mouth moffeld, & shalbe called vncleane.
Leviticus 13:46 And as long as the dysease lasteth vpon him, he shalbe vncleane: for he is vncleane, and shall therfore dwel alone, & euen without the host shal hys habitacion be.
Leviticus 13:47 When the plage of leprosye is in a cloth: whether it be lynen or wollen,
Leviticus 13:48 ye & whether it be in the warpe or woofe of the linen or of the wollen: ether in a skynne or any thing made of skynne,
Leviticus 13:49 yf the dysease be pale or somwhat reddysh in the cloth or skynne: whether it be in the warpe or woofe or any thynge that is made of skynne, then it is a very leprosye, & must be shewed vnto the Preast.
Leviticus 13:50 And when the Preast seyth the plage, let hym shut it vp .vij. dayes,
Leviticus 13:51 & let hym loke on the plage the .vij. day. If it be increased in the cloth: whether it be in the warpe or woofe or in a skynne or in any thynge that is made of skynne, then the plage is a freatyng leprosy, and it is vncleane:
Leviticus 13:52 & that cloth shalbe burnt, ether warp or woof, whether it be wollen or lynen or any thynge that is made of skynne where in the plage is, for it is a freating leprosy, & shalbe burnt in the fyre.
Leviticus 13:53 If the preast se that the plage hath freaten no further in the cloth: ether in the warpe or woofe or in whatsoeuer thynge of skynne it be,
Leviticus 13:54 then let the preast commaunde them to wash the thynge wherin the plage is, and let hym shut it vp .vij. dayes moo.
Leviticus 13:55 And let the preast loke on it agayne after that the plage is wasshed. If the plage haue not chaunged hys facion though it be spred no further abrode, it is yet vncleane. And se that ye burne it in the fyre, for it is freat inwarde: whether in parte or in altogether.
Leviticus 13:56 But & yf the preast se that it is somwhat blackysh after that it is washed, let him rent it out of the cloth, or out of the skynne or oute of the warpe or woofe.
Leviticus 13:57 But and yf it appeare any more in the cloth ether in the warpe or in the woofe or in anye thynge made of skynne, then it is a waxyng plage. And se that ye burne that wyth fyre, wherin the plage is.
Leviticus 13:58 Moreouer the cloth ether warpe or woofe or whatsoeuer thynge of skynne it be which thou hast wasshed and the plage be departed from it, shalbe wasshed once agayne: and then it is cleane.
Leviticus 13:59 Thys is the lawe of the plage of leprosye in a cloth whether it be wollen or linen: eyther whether it be in the warpe or woofe, or in any thynge made of skynnes, to iudge it cleane or vncleane.

CHAPTER: 14

Leviticus 14:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 14:2 this is the lawe of a leper when he shalbe clensed: He shalbe brought vnto the Preast,
Leviticus 14:3 & the Preast shall go out wythout the hoste & loke vpon hym. If the plage of leprosye be healed in the leper,
Leviticus 14:4 then shal the Preast commaunde that there be brought for hym that shalbe clensed two lyuynge byrdes that are cleane, and cedar wood, and a pece of purple cloth and ysope.
Leviticus 14:5 And the Preast shall commaunde that one of the byrdes be killed in an erthen vessel wyth renning water.
Leviticus 14:6 And the Preast shall take the lyuyng byrde and the cedar wood and the purple & the ysope, & shall dyppe them and the lyuyng byrde in the bloude of the slayne byrde, & in the renning water
Leviticus 14:7 & sprynkle it vpon him that must be clensed of hys leprosye seuen tymes and clense him, and shal let the lyuyng byrd goo fre in to the feldes.
Leviticus 14:8 And he that is clensed shall wasshe hys clothes and shaue of al hys heyre, and wash him self in water, and then he is cleane. And after that he shall come into the hoste, but shall tarye wythout hys tent seuen dayes.
Leviticus 14:9 When the seuenth day is come, he shal shaue of al hys heyre bothe vpon his heade & hys berde & on hys browes: & euen al the heyre that is on him, shalbe shauen of. And he shal wash hys clothes and his flesh in water, and then he shalbe cleane.
Leviticus 14:10 And when the .viij. day is come, let him take .ij. lambes without blemyshe & a yewe lambe of a yere olde without blemysh, and .iij. tenth deales of fyne floure for a meatoffring myngled wyth oyle, and logge of oyle.
Leviticus 14:11 Than let the Preast that maketh him cleane, bring the man that is made cleane wyth those thinges before the Lorde vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Leviticus 14:12 And let the Preast take one of the lambes & offer hym for a trespace offryng, and the logge of oyle: and waue them before the Lorde.
Leviticus 14:13 And then let hym slee the lambe in the place where the synneoffrynge and the burntoffryng are slayne: euen in the holy place. For as the synneoffring is, euen so is the trespace offryng the Preastes: for it is moost holy.
Leviticus 14:14 Then let the Preast take of the bloude of the trespace offryng, & put it vpon the typpe of the ryght eare of him that is clensed, and vpon the thombe of hys ryght hande, and vpon the great too of hys ryghte fote.
Leviticus 14:15 Then let the Preast take of the logge of oyle, and poure it into the palme of hys lefte hande,
Leviticus 14:16 & dyppe hys ryght fynger in the oyle that is in the palme of hys left hande, and let hym sprynkle it with hys fynger .vij. tymes before the Lord.
Leviticus 14:17 And of the rest of the oyle that is in hys hande, shal the preast put vpon the typpe of the ryghte eare of hym that is clensed, and vpon the thombe of hys ryght hand, and vpon the great too of hys ryght foote: euen vpon the bloud of the trespaceoffryng.
Leviticus 14:18 And the remnaunte of the oyle that is in the Preastes hande, he shal poure vpon the heed of hym that is cleansed: & so shal the Preaste make an attonement for hym before the Lorde.
Leviticus 14:19 Then let the Preast offer the sinneoffring and make an attonement for him that is clensed for his vnclennesse. And then let the burntoffryng be slayne,
Leviticus 14:20 and let the preast put both the burntoffrynge & the meatoffrynge vpon the alter: & make an attonement for him, and then he shalbe cleane.
Leviticus 14:21 If he be poore and can not get so moch, then let hym bryng one lambe for a trespace offring to waue it and to make an attonement for him, and a tenth deale of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meat offryng, and a logge of oyle,
Leviticus 14:22 & two turtyl doues or two yonge pygeons which he is able to get, & let the one be a synneoffrynge and the other a burntoffryng.
Leviticus 14:23 And let him bryng them the .viij. day for hys clensyng vnto the preast to the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse before the Lorde.
Leviticus 14:24 And let the Preast take the lambe that is the trespace offryng & the logge of oyle, and waue them before the Lorde.
Leviticus 14:25 And when the lambe of the trespaceoffrynge is kylled, the Preast shal take of the bloud of the trespace offrynge, and put it vpon the typpe of hys ryghte eare that is clensed, and vpon the thombe of hys ryghte hande, and vpon the greate too of hys ryght fote.
Leviticus 14:26 And the preast shall poure of the oyle into hys ryght hand,
Leviticus 14:27 and shall sprynkle wyth his fynger of the oyle that is in hys left hande seuen tymes before the Lorde.
Leviticus 14:28 And the Preast shall put on the oyle that is in his hand vpon the typpe of the right eare of hym that is clensed, & vpon the thombe of hys ryght hande, & vpon the great too of hys ryght fote: euen in the place where the bloud of the trespaceoffryng was put.
Leviticus 14:29 And the rest of the oyle that is in his hand, he shall poure vpon the heed of hym that is clensed: to make an attonement for him before the Lord.
Leviticus 14:30 And he shall offer one of the turtyl doues or of the young pigeons, soche as he can gett:
Leviticus 14:31 the one for a synne offerynge & the other for a burntoffryng vpon the alter. And so shal the Preast make an attonement for him that is clensed before the Lorde.
Leviticus 14:32 Thys is the lawe of hym that hath the plage of leprosye, whose hande is not able to get that whyche pertayneth to hys clensynge.
Leviticus 14:33 And the Lord spake vnto Moses & Aaron saying:
Leviticus 14:34 when he be come vnto the land of Canaan which I geue you to possesse: yf I put the plage of leprosye in any house of the lande of youre possessyon,
Leviticus 14:35 let hym that oweth the house go & tel the preast sayinge: me thynke that there is as it were a leprosy in the hous
Leviticus 14:36 And the Preast shal commande them to ryd all thyng out of the house, before the Preast go in to se the plage: that he make not al that is in the house vncleane, and then the preast shal go in & se the house.
Leviticus 14:37 If the preast se that the plage is in the walles of the house, and that there be holowe strakes pale or redde which seme to be lower then the other partes of the wall,
Leviticus 14:38 then let the preast go out at the house dores, and shut vp the house for .vij. dayes.
Leviticus 14:39 And let the Preast come agayn the seuenth daye and se it: yf the plage be increased in the walles of the hous
Leviticus 14:40 let the Preast commaunde them to take away the stones in whych the plage is, and let them cast them in a foule place without the cytye,
Leviticus 14:41 and scrape the house wythin round about: & poure oute the dust wythout the cytye in a foule place.
Leviticus 14:42 And let them take other stones, & put them in the places of those stones, and other morter, and plaster the house wyth al.
Leviticus 14:43 If now the plage come agayne & breake out in the house, after that they haue taken away the stones and scraped the house, and after that the house is playstered anewe:
Leviticus 14:44 let the preast come and se it. And yf then he perceyue that the plage hath eaten further in the house, then it is a freting leprosy that is in the house, & it is vncleane.
Leviticus 14:45 Then they shal breake doune the house: both stones, tymbre & al the morter of the house, and carye it out of the citye vnto a foule place.
Leviticus 14:46 Moreouer he that goeth into the house all the whyle that it is shut vp, shalbe vncleane vntyll nyghte.
Leviticus 14:47 And he that slepeth in the house shall wasshe hys clothes and he also that eateth in the house shal wash hys clothes.
Leviticus 14:48 But and yf the Preast come & se that the plage hath sprede no further in the house after that it is new plastered, then let hym make it cleane, for the plage is healed.
Leviticus 14:49 And let hym take to clense the house, wyth all: two byrdes, cedar wood, and purple clothe and ysope.
Leviticus 14:50 And let hym kyll one of the byrdes in an erthen vessel with runnyng water:
Leviticus 14:51 & take the cedar wood, the ysope, the purple and the lyuyng byrde, and dyppe them in the bloude of the slayne byrde and in the runnyng water, and sprinkle vpon the house seuen tymes
Leviticus 14:52 and clense the house wyth the bloude of the byrde and wyth the runnyng water, & wyth the lyuyng byrd, and wyth the cedar wood, and the ysope, and the purple clothe.
Leviticus 14:53 And he shal let the lyuyng byrde flee out of the towne in to the wylde feldes, and so make an attonement for the house, and it shalbe cleane.
Leviticus 14:54 Thys is the lawe of al maner plage of leprosye and breakyng out,
Leviticus 14:55 and of the leprosye of cloth and house:
Leviticus 14:56 and of rysynges, scabbes and glysterynge whyte,
Leviticus 14:57 to teache when a thyng is vncleane or cleane. This is the law of leprosye.

CHAPTER: 15

Leviticus 15:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron saying:
Leviticus 15:2 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israell, & say vnto them: euery man that hath a runnynge yssue in hys flesh, is vncleane by the reason of his yssue. And hereby shal it be knowne when he is vncleane.
Leviticus 15:3 If hys fleshe runne, or yf hys fleshe congele by the reason of hys yssue then he is vncleane.
Leviticus 15:4 Euery couche wheron he lyeth & euery thynge wheron he sytteth shall be vncleane.
Leviticus 15:5 He that toucheth hys couche shal wash hys clothes, & bath hym self with water, & be vncleane vntyl the euen.
Leviticus 15:6 He that sytteth on that wheron he satt, shall wash hys clothes and bathe hym selfe wyth water, and be vncleane vntyll the euenyng.
Leviticus 15:7 And he that toucheth hys flesh shall wasshe hys clothes, and bathe hym selfe in water, & be vncleane vnto the euen.
Leviticus 15:8 If any soche spyt vpon hym that is cleane, he must wash hys clothes, and bath hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vntyll euen.
Leviticus 15:9 And what soeuer sadell that he rydeth vpon, shalbe vncleane.
Leviticus 15:10 And whosoeuer toucheth any thyng that was vnder hym, shalbe vncleane vnto the euen. And he that beareth any soche thynges shall wash hys clothes, and bath hym self in water & be vncleane vnto the euen,
Leviticus 15:11 and whosoeuer he touched (yf he haue not fyrst washed his handes in water) must wash hys clothes & bathe hym selfe in water, and be vncleane vnto the euenynge.
Leviticus 15:12 And yf he touche a vessel of erth it shalbe broken: and all vessels of wood shalbe rynesed in water.
Leviticus 15:13 When he that hath an yssue is clensed of hys yssue, let him numbre .vij. dayes after he is cleane, & wasshe his clothes, and bath hys flesh in runnynge water, & then he is cleane.
Leviticus 15:14 And the .viij. daye let hym take two turtyll doues or two younge pygeons, & come before the Lorde vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, & geue them vnto the Preast.
Leviticus 15:15 And the Preast shal offer them: the one for a synne offrynge, and the other for a burntoffryng: & make an attonement for him before the Lorde as concerning hys yssue.
Leviticus 15:16 If any mans seed departe from him in his slepe, he shall wasshe hys flesh in water & be vncleane vntyll euen.
Leviticus 15:17 And all the clothes or furres wheron suche seed chaunseth shalbe wasshed wt water & be vncleane vnto the euen
Leviticus 15:18 And yf a woman lye wyth soche a one, they shal wash them selues wyth water & be vncleane vntyl euen.
Leviticus 15:19 When a womans naturall course of bloud runneth, she shalbe put aparte .vij. dayes: & whosoeuer toucheth her shalbe vncleane vnto the euen.
Leviticus 15:20 And all that she lyeth or sytteth vpon as longe as she is put a parte shalbe vncleane.
Leviticus 15:21 And whosoeuer toucheth her couche shall wash hys clothes and bath him selfe wyth water and be vncleane vnto the euen.
Leviticus 15:22 And whosoeuer toucheth any thyng that she sat vpon, shal wash his clothes & washe hym selfe also in water, and be vncleane vnto the euen:
Leviticus 15:23 so that whether he touche her couche or any thynge whereon she hath sytten, he shalbe vncleane vnto the euen,
Leviticus 15:24 and yf a man lye wyth her in the meane tyme, he shalbe putte apart as wel as she and shalbe vncleane .vij. daies, & al his couch wherin he slepeth shalbe vncleane.
Leviticus 15:25 When a womans bloud runneth long tyme: out of the tyme of her naturall course: as long as her vnclennesse runneth, she shal be vncleane after the maner as when she is put a parte.
Leviticus 15:26 Al her couches wheron she lyeth (as long as her yssue lasteth) shalbe vnto her as her couche when she is put a parte. And whatsoeuer she sitteth vpon, shalbe vncleane as is her vnclennesse when she is put a parte.
Leviticus 15:27 And whosoeuer toucheth them, shalbe vncleane, and shal wash hys clothes and bath him selfe in water & be vncleane vnto euen.
Leviticus 15:28 But yf she be cleane of her yssue, let her count her seuen dayes, after that she is cleane.
Leviticus 15:29 And the .viij. daye let her take two turtils or two young pygeons & bryng them vnto the preast vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Leviticus 15:30 And the preast shall offer the one for a synneoffryng, and the other for a burntofferyng: and so make an attonement for her before the Lorde, as concernyng her vncleane yssue.
Leviticus 15:31 Make the chyldren of Israel to kepe themselues from their vnclennesse, that they dye not in their vnclennesse when they haue defyled my habitacion that is among them.
Leviticus 15:32 Thys is the law of hym that hath a runnyng sore, & of him whose seed runneth from him in his slepe & is defiled therwith,
Leviticus 15:33 and of her that hath an yssue of bloud as longe as she is put a parte, and of whosoeuer hath a runnyng sore whether it be man or woman, and of hym that slepeth wyth her that is vncleane.

CHAPTER: 16

Leviticus 16:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses after the death of the twoo sonnes of Aaron, when they had offered before the Lorde and dyed: And he sayd vnto Moses:
Leviticus 16:2 speake vnto Aaron thy brother that he goo at all tymes in to the holy place, that is within the vayle that hangeth before the mercyseate which is vpon the arck that he dye not. For I wyl appeare in a clowde vpon the mercyseate.
Leviticus 16:3 But of thys maner shall Aaron goo in to the holy place: with a bullock for a synneofferyng, and a ram for a burntofferyng.
Leviticus 16:4 And he shall put the holy lynen albe vpon hym, and shal haue a lynen breche vpon his flesh, and shal gyrde him with a lynen gyrdel, and put the lynen mytre vpon his heed: for they are holy raymentes. And he shal wasshe hys flesh wyth water, and put them on.
Leviticus 16:5 And he shall take of the multitude of the chyldren of Israell two he gootes for a synneofferyng & a ram for a burntofferyng.
Leviticus 16:6 And Aaron shall offer the bullock for hys synneoffryng & make an attonement for hym and for hys house.
Leviticus 16:7 And he shall take the two gootes & present them before the Lord in the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse.
Leviticus 16:8 And Aaron shall cast lottes ouer the twoo gootes: one lotte for the Lorde, and another for a scapegoote.
Leviticus 16:9 And Aaron shal brynge the goote vpon which the Lordes lotte fel, & offer hym for a synneofferyng.
Leviticus 16:10 But the goote on whych the lotte fell to scape, he shal set alyue before the Lorde to reconcyle wyth and to let hym goo fre in to the wyldernesse.
Leviticus 16:11 And Aaron shall brynge the bullock of hys synneoffryng, and reconcyle for him selfe and for his houshold, and kyl hym.
Leviticus 16:12 And then he shal take a censer ful of burnyng coles out of the alter that is before the Lord, and hys handfull of swete cens beten smal and bryng them within the vayl
Leviticus 16:13 & put the cens vpon the fyre before the Lord: that the cloude of the cens maye couer the mercyseate that is vpon the wytnesse, that he dye not.
Leviticus 16:14 And he shall take of the bloude of the bullock & sprynkle it wyth his fynger before the mercyseate eastwarde: euen .vij. tymes.
Leviticus 16:15 Then shall he kyll the goote that is the peoples synneoffryng, and bryng hys bloud wythin the vayle, and do with hys bloud as he dyd wyth the bloude of the bullock, and let hym sprynkle it toward the mercyseate, & before the mercyseate:
Leviticus 16:16 and reconcile the holy place from the vnclennesse of the children of Israell, and from their trespaces & all theyr synnes. And so let him do also vnto the tabernacle of wytnesse that dwelleth with them, euen among their vnclennesses.
Leviticus 16:17 And there shalbe no body in the tabernacle of wytnesse, when he goeth into make an attonement in the holy place, vntyl he come out agayn. And he shal make an attonement for hym selfe and for hys houshold, and for al the multitude of Israel.
Leviticus 16:18 Then he shall goo out vnto the alter that stondeth before the Lord, and reconcyle it, and shall take of the bloud of the bullock & of the bloude of the goote, & put it vpon the hornes of the altare rounde about,
Leviticus 16:19 and sprynkle of the bloude vpon it wt hys fynger seuen tymes, and clense it, and halowe it from the vnclennesses of the chyldren of Israell.
Leviticus 16:20 And when he hath made an ende of reconcylyng the holy place & the tabernacle of witnesse & the alter, let him brynge the lyue goot
Leviticus 16:21 and let Aaron put both hys handes vpon the heede of the lyue goote, & confesse ouer hym all the mysdeades of the chyldren of Israell, and their trespaces, and al theyr synnes: and let hym put them vpon the heed of the goote & sende him away by the handes of one that is anoynted in the wildernes.
Leviticus 16:22 And the goote shal bere vpon him all their mysdeades vnto the wyldernesse, and he shal let the goote go fre in the wyldernesse.
Leviticus 16:23 And let Aaron goo into the tabernacle of wytnesse & put of the lynen clothes which he put on when he went in into the holy place, & leaue them there.
Leviticus 16:24 And let hym wasshe hys flesh with water in the holy place, & put on hys owne rayment, & then come out and offer his burntofferynge and the burntoffryng of the people, and make an attonement for hym selfe and for the people,
Leviticus 16:25 and the fatt of the synneofferynge let hym burne vpon the alter.
Leviticus 16:26 And let hym that caryed forth the scapegoote, wasshe hys clothes and bathe hys flesh in water, and then come into the hoste agayne.
Leviticus 16:27 And the bullock of the synofferyng & the goote of the synofferyng (whose bloud was brought in to make an attonement in the holy place) let one carye out wythout the hoste & burne wyth fyre: both theyr skynnes, theyr flesh and their donge.
Leviticus 16:28 And let him that burneth them, wasshe hys clothes and bathe his flesh in water, & then come in to the hoste agayn.
Leviticus 16:29 And this shalbe an ordynaunce for euer vnto you. And euen in the tenth day of the seuenth moneth, ye shall humble youre soules and shall do no worke at all: whether it be one of youre selues or a straunger that soiourneth among you,
Leviticus 16:30 for the daye shal an attonement be made for you to clense you from all your synnes before the lord, and ye shal be cleane.
Leviticus 16:31 It shalbe a Sabboth of rest vnto you, and ye shal humble your soules, and it shalbe an ordynaunce foreuer.
Leviticus 16:32 And the preast that is anoynted & whose hande was fylled to mynistre in hys fathers steade, shal make the attonement & shall put on the holy lynnen clothes and holy vestimentes,
Leviticus 16:33 and reconcyle the holy sanctuary and the tabernacle of wytnesse and the alter, & shall make an attonement also for the preastes and for al the people of the congregacion.
Leviticus 16:34 And thys shalbe an euerlastyng ordynaunce vnto you to make an attonement for the chyldren of Israel for al their synnes once a yere: and it was done euen as the Lord commaunded Moses.

CHAPTER: 17

Leviticus 17:1 And the Lorde talked wyth Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 17:2 speake vnto Aaron & vnto hys sonnes and vnto all the chyldren of Israell and saye vnto them, thys is the thynge whyche the Lorde charged sayinge:
Leviticus 17:3 whatsoeuer he be of the house of Israel that kylleth an oxe, lambe or goote in the hoste or oute of the host
Leviticus 17:4 and bryngeth them not vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, to offer an offerynge vnto the Lord before the dwellyng place of the Lord, his bloude shalbe imputed vnto that man, as though he had shed bloude, and that man shal perysh from among hys people.
Leviticus 17:5 Wherfore let the chyldren of Israel bryng theyr offerynges that they offer in the wyde felde, vnto the Lorde: euen vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse and vnto the preast, and offer them for the peaceofferynges vnto the lord.
Leviticus 17:6 And the preast shal sprinkle the bloude vpon the alter of the Lorde in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, & burne the fatt to be a swete sauoure vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 17:7 And let them no moare offer theyr offerynges vnto deuyls, after whom they goo an whooryng. And thys shalbe an ordynance for euer vnto you thorow out youre generacyons.
Leviticus 17:8 And thou shalt saye vnto them: whatsoeuer man it be of the house of Israel, or of the straungers that soiourne amonge you that offereth a burntofferynge or any other offeryng
Leviticus 17:9 and bryngeth it not vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse to offer vnto the Lord, that felow shall perysh from among his people.
Leviticus 17:10 And whatsoeuer man it be of the house of Israel or of the straungers that soiourne amonge you that eateth any maner of bloude, I wyll sett my face agaynst that soule that eateth bloud, and wil destroy him from amonge hys people,
Leviticus 17:11 for the lyfe of the flesh is in the bloud, and I haue geuen it vnto you vpon the alter, to make an attonement for youre soules,
Leviticus 17:12 for bloude shall make an attonement for the soule. And therfore I sayd vnto the chyldren of Israel: se that no soule of you eate bloude, nor yet any straunger that soiourneth amonge you.
Leviticus 17:13 Whatsoeuer man it be of the chyldren of Israell or of the straungers that soiourne amonge you that hunteth and catcheth anye beest or foule that may be eaten, he shal poure out the bloud and couer it wyth erth,
Leviticus 17:14 for the lyfe of all fleshe is in the bloude, therfore I sayd vnto the children of Israel ye shal eate the bloude of no maner of flesh, for the lyfe of all flesh is in hys bloude, and whosoeuer therfore eateth it shall perysh.
Leviticus 17:15 And whatsoeuer soule it be that eateth that whych dyed alone or that whych was torne wyth wylde beastes: whether it be one of youre selues or straunger, he shall wasshe hys clothes and bathe hym selfe in water, & shalbe vncleane vnto the euen, & then is he cleane.
Leviticus 17:16 But and yf he wasshe them not nor wasshe his fleshe he shal beare hys synne.

CHAPTER: 18

Leviticus 18:1 And the Lord talketh with Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 18:2 speake vnto the chyldren of Israel, & saye vnto them, I am the Lorde youre God.
Leviticus 18:3 Wherfore after the doynges of the lande of Egypte wherin ye dwelt, se that ye doo not: nether after the doynges of the lande of Canaan, whether I wyl brynge you, nether walke ye in their ordinaunces
Leviticus 18:4 but do after my iudgementes, & kepe myne ordynaunces, to walke therin: for I am the Lorde youre God.
Leviticus 18:5 Kepe therfore myne ordynaunces, and my iudgementes whyche yf a man doo he shall lyue therby: for I am the Lord.
Leviticus 18:6 Se that ye go to none of youre nyghest kynred for to vncouer theyr secreates, for I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 18:7 The secreates of thy father & thy mother, se thou vnhyll not: she is thy mother, therfore shalt thou not discouer her secreates.
Leviticus 18:8 The secreates of thy fathers wife shalt thou not dyscouer, for they are thy fathers secreates.
Leviticus 18:9 Thou shalt not discouer the preuitie of thi sister, the daughter of thy father or of thy mother: whether she be borne at home or wtout.
Leviticus 18:10 Thou shalt not vncouer the secreates of thy sonnes daughter or thy daughters daughter, for that is thyne awne preuitie:
Leviticus 18:11 Thou shalt not vncouer the secreates of thy fathers wyues daughter, whych she bare to thy father, for she is thy syster:
Leviticus 18:12 thou shalt therfore not discouer her secrettes. Thou shalt not vncouer the secretes of thy fathers syster, for she is thy fathers nexte kynswoman.
Leviticus 18:13 Thou shalt not dyscouer the secrettes of thy mothers syster, for she is thy mothers nexte kynswoman.
Leviticus 18:14 Thou shalt not vncouer the secrettes of thy fathers brother: that is thou shalt not go into hys wyfe, for she is thyne awnte.
Leviticus 18:15 Thou shalt not discouer the secretes of thy daughter in lawe she is thy sonnes wyfe: therfore vncouer not her secrettes.
Leviticus 18:16 Thou shalt not vnhyll the secrettes of thy brothers wyfe, for that is thy brothers pryuyte.
Leviticus 18:17 Thou shalt not dyscouer the preuytes of the wyfe & her daughter also, nether shalt thou take her sonnes daughter or her daughters daughter to vncouer theyr secrettes, they are her next kyn, it were therfore wikidnesse.
Leviticus 18:18 Thou shalt not take a wyfe & her syster therto, to vexe her that thou woldest open her secrettes as long as she lyueth.
Leviticus 18:19 Thou shalt not go vnto a woman to vncouer her pryuitie, as longe as she is put a parte for her vnclennesse.
Leviticus 18:20 Thou shalt not lye wt thy neyghbours wyfe, to defile thy self with her.
Leviticus 18:21 Thou shalt not geue of the seed to offer it vnto Moloch, that thou defyle not the name of thy god, for I am the Lord.
Leviticus 18:22 Thou shalt not lye wyth makynde as wt womankynd, for that is abhominacion.
Leviticus 18:23 Thou shalt lye wt no maner of beeste to defyle thy selfe therwith, nether shal any woman stonde before a beest to lye doune therto, for that is abhominacion.
Leviticus 18:24 Defyle not youre selues in any of these thynges, for wyth all these thynges are these nacions defyled whych I cast out before you
Leviticus 18:25 and the land is defyled, and I wyll vyset the wykednesse therof vpon it, and the land shal spewe out her inhabiters.
Leviticus 18:26 Kepe ye therfore myne ordinaunces and iudgementes, and se that ye commyt none of these abhominacions: nether any of you nor any straunger that soiourneth amonge you
Leviticus 18:27 (for all these abhomynacions haue the men of the land done whyche were there before you, and the lande is defiled)
Leviticus 18:28 lest that the land spewe you out when ye haue defyled it, as it spewed out the nacions that were there before you.
Leviticus 18:29 For whosoeuer shal commyt any of these abhominacions, the same soules that commyt them shall perysh from among their people.
Leviticus 18:30 Therfore se that ye kepe myne ordinannces, that ye commytt none of these abhominable customes which were commytted before you: that ye defyle not youre selues therwyth for I am the Lorde your God.

CHAPTER: 19

Leviticus 19:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Leviticus 19:2 speake vnto al the multytude of the children of Israel, and say vnto them. Be holy for I the Lord youre God am holye.
Leviticus 19:3 Se that ye feare euery man hys father and hys mother, and that ye kepe my Sabothes, for I am the Lord youre God.
Leviticus 19:4 Ye shall not turne vnto ydolles nor make you goddes of metall: I am the Lord your God.
Leviticus 19:5 When ye offre your peaceofferynges vnto the Lord, ye shall offer them that ye maye be accepted.
Leviticus 19:6 And it shalbe eaten the same day ye offer it and on the morowe, but whatsoeuer is lefte on the thyrde daye shalbe burnt in the fyre.
Leviticus 19:7 If it be eaten the thyrde daye, it shalbe vncleane and not accepted.
Leviticus 19:8 And he that eateth it shal bere hys synne, because he hath defyled the halowed thynges of the Lorde, and that soule shal perish from among hys people.
Leviticus 19:9 When ye reape doune the rype corne of your lande, ye shall not repe doune the vtmost borders of youre feldes, nether shalt thou gather that whyche is left behynde in thy haruest.
Leviticus 19:10 Thou shalt not plucke in al thy vyneyarde cleane, nether gather in the grapes that are ouerscaped. But thou shalt leaue them for the poore and straunger. I am the Lord your God.
Leviticus 19:11 Ye shal not steale nether lye, nether deale falsely one with another.
Leviticus 19:12 Ye shal not swere by my name falselye: that thou defylest not the name of thy God, I am the Lord.
Leviticus 19:13 Thou shal not begyle thy neyghbour wyth cauyllacions, nether robbe him violently, nether shall the workmans laboure abyde with the vntyl the mornyng.
Leviticus 19:14 Thou shalt not curse the deaffe, neyther put a stomblynge blocke before the blynd: but shalt feare thy god. I am the Lord.
Leviticus 19:15 Ye shall do no vnryghteousnes in iudgement. Thou shalt uot fauoure the poore nor honoure the myghtye, but shalt iudge thy neygebour ryghteously.
Leviticus 19:16 Thou shalt not goo vp & doune a preuy accusee amonge thy people, nether shalt thou helpe to shedde the bloud of thy neyghbour: I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 19:17 Thou shalt not hate thy brother in thyne hart but shalt in anye wyse rebuke thy neyghboure: that thou bere not synne for hys sake.
Leviticus 19:18 Thou shalt not auenge thy selfe nor bere hate in thy mynde agaynst the chyldren of thy people, but shalt loue thy neyghboure euen as thy selfe I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 19:19 Kepe myne ordinances. Let none of thy catel gendre wt a contrary kynde, nether sowe thy felde wt myngled seed, nether shalt thou put on any garment of lynnen and wollen.
Leviticus 19:20 If a man haue to doo with a woman that is bonde and hath bene medled wythall of another man whyche nether is boughte nor fredome geuen her, there shalbe a payne vpon it: but they shal not dye, because she was not made fre.
Leviticus 19:21 And he shall brynge for hys trespaceofferyng vnto the Lorde: euen vnto the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse, a ram for a trespaceoffryng.
Leviticus 19:22 And the preast shal make an attonement for hym wyth the ram of the trespaceofferyng before the Lorde, for hys synne which he hath done: & it shalbe forgeuen hym, as concernyng the synne whyche he hath done.
Leviticus 19:23 And when ye come to the land and haue planted al maner of trees where of men eate, ye shall holde them vncircumcysed as concernyng theyr frute: euen thre yere shal they be vncircumcysed vnto you and shall not be eaten of,
Leviticus 19:24 and the fourth yere all the frute of them shalbe holy and acceptable to the lord.
Leviticus 19:25 And the fift yere maye ye eate of the frute of them, and gether in the increase of them: I am the Lorde youre God.
Leviticus 19:26 Ye shall eate nothynge wyth the bloude, ye shall vse no wytchcrafte, nor obserue dysmall dayes,
Leviticus 19:27 ye shall not rounde the lockes of your heades, nether shalt thou marre the tuftes of thy bearde.
Leviticus 19:28 Ye shall not rent your fleshe for any soules sake, nor prynte any markes vpon you: I am the Lord:
Leviticus 19:29 Thou shalt not pollute thy daughter, that thou woldest maynteine her to be an whoore: lest the lande fall to whoredome, and waxe ful of wyckednesse.
Leviticus 19:30 Se that ye kepe my Sabbothes and feare my sanctuary: I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 19:31 Turne not to them that work wyth spyrytes, nether regarde them that obserue dysemall dayes: that ye be not defyled by them, for I am the lord youre God.
Leviticus 19:32 Thou shalt ryse vp before the hoorehed, & reuerence the face of the olde man & dread thy god, for I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 19:33 If a straunger soiourne by the in your lande, se that ye vexe hym not:
Leviticus 19:34 But let the straunger that dwelleth wyth you, be as one of youre selues, & loue hym as thy selfe, for ye were straungers in the lande of Egypt. I am the Lorde your God.
Leviticus 19:35 Ye shall do no vnryghteousnes in iudgement nether in meteyearde, weyght or measure.
Leviticus 19:36 But ye shall haue true balances, true weyghtes, A true Epha and a true hyn. I am the Lorde youre God whyche broughte you out of the lande of Egypt,
Leviticus 19:37 that ye shuld obserue all myne ordinaunces and iudgementes and that ye shulde kepe them: I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 20

Leviticus 20:1 And the Lord talked wyth Moses saying:
Leviticus 20:2 tell the chyldren of Israel, whosoeuer he be of the chyldren of Israel or of the straungers that dwell in Israel, that geueth of hys seed vnto Moloch he shall dye for it: the people of the lande shall stone him with stones.
Leviticus 20:3 And I wyl set my face vpon that felowe, and wyll destroy him from among hys people: because he hath geuen of hys seed vnto Moloch, for to defyle my sanctuary & to polute my holy name.
Leviticus 20:4 And thoughe that the people of the lande hyde their eyes from that felowe, when he geueth of hys seed vnto Moloch, so that they kyll hym not:
Leviticus 20:5 yet I wyll put my face vpon that man and vpon hys generacyon, and wyll destroy hym and all that goo a whooryng wyth him and commyt hordome wyth Moloch from amonge their people.
Leviticus 20:6 If any soule turne him to enchaunters or expounders of tokens and goo a whooryng after them, I wyl put my face vpon that soule & wyll destroy him from among his people.
Leviticus 20:7 Sanctifye your selues therfore and be holye for I am the Lord your God.
Leviticus 20:8 And se that ye kepe myne ordinaunces and doo them. For I am the Lord whych sanctifye you.
Leviticus 20:9 Whosoeuer curseth his father or mother shal dye for it, his bloud on his head, because he hath cursed hys father or mother.
Leviticus 20:10 He that breaketh wedlocke with another mans wyfe shall dye for it, because he hath broke wedlocke with his neighbours wyfe, and so shall she lykewyse.
Leviticus 20:11 If a man lye wyth hys fathers wyfe and vncouer hys fathers secreates, they shall both dye for it, their bloud be vpon their headdes.
Leviticus 20:12 If a man lye wyth his daughter in law they shal dye both of them: they haue wrought abhominacion, their bloud vpon their headdes.
Leviticus 20:13 If a man lye wyth mankynde after the maner as with woman kynde, they haue both commytted an abhominacion & shal dye for it. Their bloud be vpon their heades.
Leviticus 20:14 If a man take a wyfe & her mother therto, it is wickednesse. Men shal burne with fyre both hym and them, that there be no wickednesse amonge you.
Leviticus 20:15 If a man lye wyth a beast he shall dye, and ye shal slea the beast.
Leviticus 20:16 If a woman go vnto a beast & lye doune therto: thou shalt kyll the woman and the beast also, they shall dye, and theyr bloud be vpon theyr heades.
Leviticus 20:17 If a man take his syster his fathers daughter or his mothers daughter, & se her secreates, and she se his secreates also: it is a weked thynge. Therfore let them perysh in the syghte of their people, he hath sene his systers secretnesse, he shall therfore beare his synne.
Leviticus 20:18 If a man lye wt a woman in tyme of her natural dysease and vncouer her secrettes and open her fountayne, & she also open the fountayne of her bloud, they shal both peryshe from among the people.
Leviticus 20:19 Thou shalt not vncouer the secrettes of thy mothers syster nor of thy fathers syster, for he that doth so, vncouereth hys nexte kyn: and they shal beare their mysdoyinge:
Leviticus 20:20 If a man lye wt his vncles wife, he hath vncouered his vncles secretes: they shal beare their synne, & shal dye chyldlesse.
Leviticus 20:21 If a man take his brothers wyfe, it is an vncleane thyng, he hath vncouered his brothers secrettes, they shalbe childlesse therfore.
Leviticus 20:22 Se that ye kepe therfore all myne ordinaunces and al my iudgementes, and that ye doo them: that the land whether I bryng you to dwel therin, spewe you not out.
Leviticus 20:23 And se that ye walke not in the maners of the nacions which I cast out before you: For they commytted all these thynges, and I abhorred them.
Leviticus 20:24 But I haue sayde vnto you that ye shall enioye their lande, & that I wyll geue it vnto you to possesse it: euen a land that floweth wyth mylke and hony. I am the Lord your God, which haue separated you from other nacions:
Leviticus 20:25 that ye shulde put difference betwene cleane beastes and vncleane, and betwene vncleane foules and them that are cleane. Make not your soules therfore abhominable with beastes and foules, & with al maner thing that crepeth vpon the ground, whych I haue separated vnto you to holde them vncleane.
Leviticus 20:26 Be holy vnto me, for I the Lorde am holy and haue seuered you from other nacions: that ye shuld be myne.
Leviticus 20:27 If there be a man or woman that worketh with a spryte or that expoundeth tokens they shall dye for it. Men shall stone them wyth stones, & their bloud shalbe vpon them.

CHAPTER: 21

Leviticus 21:1 And the Lord said vnto Moses speake vnto the preastes the sonnes of Aaron and saye vnto them. A preast shal defile hym selfe at the deth of none of hys people,
Leviticus 21:2 but vpon his kynne that is nye vnto him: as his mother, father, sonne, daughter, & brother:
Leviticus 21:3 & on hys syster as longe as she is a mayde & dwelleth nye him & was neuer geuen to man: on her he may defyle him selfe.
Leviticus 21:4 But he shall not make hym selfe vncleane vpon a ruelar of hys people to polute hym selfe wyth all.
Leviticus 21:5 They shal make them no baldnesse vpon their heedes or shaue of the lockes of theyr beardes, nor make any markes in their flesh
Leviticus 21:6 They shal be holy vnto their God, and not polute the name of their God, for the sacrifices of the Lord and the bread of their God they do offer: therfore they must be holy.
Leviticus 21:7 They shall take no wyfe that is an whoore or poluted, or put from her husbande: for a preast is holy vnto his God.
Leviticus 21:8 Sanctifye hym therfore, for he offereth vp the bread of god: he shall therfore, be holy vnto the, for I the Lord which sanctifye you, am holy.
Leviticus 21:9 If a preastes daughter fall to playe the whore, she poluteth her father: therfore she shal be burnt wyth fyre.
Leviticus 21:10 He that is the hye preast among his brethren vpon whose head the anoyntynge oyle was poured & whose hande was fylled to put on the vestimentes, shall not vncouer his head nor rent hys clothes,
Leviticus 21:11 nether shall goo to any dead body nor make hym selfe vncleane: no not on hys father or mother,
Leviticus 21:12 nether shall go out of the sanctuarye, that he polute not the holy place of his God, for the croune of the anoyntyng oyle of God, is vpon him. I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 21:13 He shall take a mayde vnto hys wyfe:
Leviticus 21:14 but no widowe nor deuorsed nor poluted whoore. But he shall take a mayde of his owne people to wyfe,
Leviticus 21:15 that he defyle not his seed vpon his people: for I am the Lord which sanctifye hym.
Leviticus 21:16 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Leviticus 21:17 speake vnto Aaron and saye: No man of thy seed in their generacions that hath any deformitie vpon hym, shall preace for to offer the bread of his god:
Leviticus 21:18 for none that hath any blemysh shall come nere: wether he be blynde, lame, snot nosed, or that hath any mysshapen membre,
Leviticus 21:19 or broken foted, or broken handed,
Leviticus 21:20 or croke backed, or perleyed, or gogeleyed, or maunge, or skaulde, or hath hys stones broken.
Leviticus 21:21 No man that is deformed of the seed of Aaron the preast, shall come nye to offer the sacrifices of the Lorde. If he haue a deformytie, he shal not preace to offer the bred of his God.
Leviticus 21:22 Notwythstandynge he shal eate of the bred of his God: euen as wel of the most holy, as of the holy:
Leviticus 21:23 but shal not go in vnto the vayle nor come nye the alter, because he is deformed that he polute not my sanctuary, for I am the Lord that sanctyfye them.
Leviticus 21:24 And Moses tolde it vnto Aaron and to hys sonnes, & vnto al the chyldren of Israel.

CHAPTER: 22

Leviticus 22:1 And the Lord comened wyth Moses saying:
Leviticus 22:2 byd Aaron & his sonnes that they absteyne from the halowed thinges of the chyldren of Israel, whyche they haue halowed vnto me, that they polute not my holy name: for I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 22:3 Saye vnto them: whosoeuer he be of all youre seed amonge youre generacion after you, that goeth vnto the halowed thynges whyche the chyldren of Israel shall haue halowed vnto the Lorde, hys vnclennes shalbe vpon hym: and that soule shall peryshe from oute of my syghte. I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 22:4 None of the seed of Aaron that is a leper or that hath a runnyng sore, shall eate of the halowed thynges vntyll he be cleane. And whosoeuer toucheth any vncleane soule or man whose seed runneth from him by night,
Leviticus 22:5 or whosoeuer toucheth any worme that is vncleane to hym, or man that is vncleane to hym,
Leviticus 22:6 whatsoeuer vnclennesse he hath: the same soule that hath any soche thyng, shalbe vncleane vntyll euen, and shall not eate of the halowed thynges vntyll he haue wasshed hys flesh wyth water.
Leviticus 22:7 And then when the sunne is doune he shalbe cleane and shall afterwarde eate of the halowed thynges: for they are hys fode.
Leviticus 22:8 Of a beast that dyeth alone or is rent wyth wylde beastes, he shall not eate, to defyle hym selfe therwyth: I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 22:9 But let them kepe therfore myne ordynaunce, lest they lade synne vpon them and dye therin when they haue defyled them selues: for I am the Lorde whych sanctyfye them.
Leviticus 22:10 There shall no straunger eate of the halowed thinges, nether a gest of the preastes, or an hyred seruaunte.
Leviticus 22:11 But yf the preast bye any soule wyth money he may eate of it, and he also that is borne in hys house maye eate of hys bred.
Leviticus 22:12 If the preastes doughter be maryed vnto a straunger, she maye not eate of the halowed heue offringes.
Leviticus 22:13 Notwithstandyng yf the preastes daughter be a widowe or deuorsed & haue no chyld but is returned vnto her fathers house agayne, she shall eate of her fathers bread as well as she dyd in her youth. But there shall no straunger eate therof.
Leviticus 22:14 If a man eate of the halowed thynges vnwyttyngly, he shal put the fyfte part there vnto, & make good vnto the preast the halowed thynge.
Leviticus 22:15 And let the preastes se, that they defyle not the halowed thynges of the chyldren of Israel whych they haue offered vnto the Lorde,
Leviticus 22:16 lest they lade them selues wyth mysdoynge and trespace in eatynge their halowed thynges, for I am the Lorde which halowe them.
Leviticus 22:17 And the lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 22:18 speake vnto Aaron & his sonnes and vnto al the chyldren of Israel & say vnto them, whatsoeuer he be of the house of Israel or straunger in Israell that wyll offer hys offeryng: whatsoeuer vowe or frewyll offerynge it be whych they wyll offer vnto the Lorde for a burntofferyng
Leviticus 22:19 to reconcyle them selues, it must be a male without blemysh of the oxen, shepe or gootes,
Leviticus 22:20 let them offer nothyng that is deformed for they shall gett no fauoure therwyth.
Leviticus 22:21 If a man wil offer a peace offryng vnto the Lord and separate a vowe or a frewyll offeryng of the oxen or the flocke, it must be wtout deformyte, that it may be accepted. There maye be no blemysh therin:
Leviticus 22:22 whether it be blynd, broken, wounded or haue a wen, or be maunge or scabbed, se that ye offre no suche vnto the Lord, nor put an offeryng of any such vpon the alter vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 22:23 An oxe or a shepe that hath any membre out of proporcion, mayst thou offer for a frewyllofferyng: but in a vowe it shall not be accepted.
Leviticus 22:24 Thou shalt not offer vnto the lord that whych is broosed, broken, plucked out or cutt awaye, nether shalt make any soche in youre lande,
Leviticus 22:25 nether of a straungers hand shall ye offer an offeryng to your GOD of any soch. For they marre all in that they haue deformities in them, and therfore can not be accepted for you.
Leviticus 22:26 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Leviticus 22:27 when an oxe, a shepe or a goote is brought forth, it shalbe seuen dayes vnder the damme. And from the .viij. day forth, it shalbe accepted vnto a gyfte in the sacrifyce of the Lord.
Leviticus 22:28 And whether it be oxe or shepe, ye shall not kyl it and her yong both in one day.
Leviticus 22:29 When ye wyll offre a thankofferynge vnto the Lord, ye shal so offre it that ye may be accepted.
Leviticus 22:30 And the same daye it must be eaten vp, so that ye leaue none of it vntyl the morowe.
Leviticus 22:31 For I am the Lorde, kepe nowe my commaundementes and do them, for I am the Lord.
Leviticus 22:32 And polute not my holy name, that I maye be halowed amonge the chyldren of Israel. For I am the Lorde whyche halowe you,
Leviticus 22:33 and brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be youre GOD: for I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 23

Leviticus 23:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Leviticus 23:2 speake vnto the children of Israel, & say vnto them. These are the feastes of the Lorde which ye shall call holy feastes.
Leviticus 23:3 Syxe dayes ye shall worke, and the seuenth is the Sabboth of reast an holy feast: so that ye maye doo no worke therin, for it is the Sabboth of the Lorde, wheresoeuer ye dwell.
Leviticus 23:4 These are the feastes of the Lord which ye shal proclayme holy in their seasons.
Leviticus 23:5 The .xiiij. daye of the fyrst moneth at euen is the Lordes Passeouer.
Leviticus 23:6 And the .xv. daye of the same moneth is the feast of swete bred vnto the Lorde .vij. dayes ye must eate vnleuended bread.
Leviticus 23:7 The fyrst day shalbe an holy feaste vnto you, so that ye maye do no laborious worke therin.
Leviticus 23:8 But ye shall offer sacrifyces vnto the Lorde .vij. dayes, and the .vij. daye also shalbe an holy feast, so that ye maye do no laborious worke therin.
Leviticus 23:9 And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 23:10 speake vnto the chyldren of Israell and saye vnto them: when ye be come into the lande whych I geue vnto you & repe doune youre haruest ye shall brynge a shefe of the fyrst frutes of your haruest vnto the preast,
Leviticus 23:11 and he shal waue the shefe before the Lord to be accepted for you: and euen the morow after the Sabboth the preast shall waue it.
Leviticus 23:12 And ye shal offer that day when he waueth the shefe, a lambe without blemysh of a yere old for a burntoffrynge vnto the Lorde:
Leviticus 23:13 and the meatofferyng therof, two tenth deales of fyne flour mengled with oyle to be a sacrifice vnto the Lord of a swete sauour: & the drynkoffryng therto, the fourth deale of an hyn of wine.
Leviticus 23:14 And ye shal eate nether bread, nor parched corne, nor furmentye of new corne: vntyl the self same day that ye haue brought an offeryng vnto your God. And thys shalbe a lawe for euer vnto your chyldren after you, whersoeuer ye dwell.
Leviticus 23:15 And ye shal count from the morow after the Sabboth: euen from the daye that ye brought the shefe of the waueoffrynge seuen wekes complete:
Leviticus 23:16 euen vnto the morow after the .vij. weke ye shall nombre .l. dayes. And then ye shal brynge a newe meatoffryng vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 23:17 And ye shall brynge out of your habitacions two waue loues made of two tenthdeales of fyne floure leuended and baken, for fyrst frutes vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 23:18 And ye shall brynge wyth the bread seuen lambes without deformite of one yere of age, & one yonge oxe & two rammes, which shall serue for burntoffrynges vnto the Lorde, wt meatoffrynges & drynkofferynges longing to the same, to be a sacrifyce of a swete sauour vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 23:19 And ye shall offer an he goote for a synne offering: and two lambes of one yere old for peace offrynges.
Leviticus 23:20 And the preast shall waue them wyth the bread of the fyrst frutes before the Lord, and wyth the two lambes. And they shalbe holy vnto the Lord, & be the preastes.
Leviticus 23:21 And ye shall make a proclamacion the same day that it be an holy feast vnto you, and ye shall do no laborious worke therin: And it shalbe a lawe for euer thorow out all youre habitacions vnto your chyldren after you.
Leviticus 23:22 When ye repe doune your haruest, thou shalt not make cleane reddaunce of thy feld, nether shalt thou make any aftergatheryng of thy haruest: but shalt leue them vnto the poore and the straunger. I am the lord your God.
Leviticus 23:23 And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 23:24 speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and saye. The fyrst daye of the seuenth moneth shalbe a reast of rembraunce vnto you, to blowe hornes in an holy feast it shalbe,
Leviticus 23:25 and ye shall do no laboryous worke therin, and ye shall offer sacryfice vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 23:26 And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 23:27 also the tenth day of the self seuenth moneth, is a day of an attonement, and shalbe on holy feast vnto you, and ye shal humble youre soules and offer sacrifyce vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 23:28 Moreouer ye shal do no worke the same day, for it is a daye of attonement to make an attonement for you before the Lord your god.
Leviticus 23:29 For whatsoeuer soule it be that humbleth not hym selfe that daye, he shalbe destroyed from amonge hys people.
Leviticus 23:30 And whatsoeuer soule do any maner worke that daye, the same I wyll destroye from among hys people.
Leviticus 23:31 Se that ye do no maner worke therfore. And it shalbe a lawe for euer vnto youre generacyons after you in al youre dwellynges.
Leviticus 23:32 A Sabboth of reste it shalbe vnto you and ye shall humble youre soules. The .ix. daye of the moneth at euen and so forth from euen to euen agayne, ye shall kepe your sabboth.
Leviticus 23:33 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Leviticus 23:34 speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and saye: the .xv. daye of the same seuenth moneth shalbe the feast of tabernacles .vij. dayes vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 23:35 The fyrst day shalbe an holy feast, so that ye shall doo no laborious worke therin.
Leviticus 23:36 Seuen dayes ye shall offer sacryfyce vnto the Lorde, and the .viij. daye shalbe an holy feast vnto you & ye shal offer sacryfyce vnto the Lorde. It is the ende of the feast, and ye shal do no laborious worke therin.
Leviticus 23:37 These are the feastes of the Lord whyche ye shall proclayme holy feastes, for to offer sacryfyce vnto the Lorde, burntofferynges, meatoffrynges and drynkeoffrynges euery daye:
Leviticus 23:38 besyde the sabbothes of the Lord, and besyde your gyftes, and all youre vowes, & al your frewylofferinges which ye shal giue vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 23:39 Moreouer in the .xv. daye of the seuenth moneth after that yee haue gathered in the frutes of the Land, ye shall kepe holye daye vnto the Lord .vij. dayes long. The fyrst day shall be a daye of rest, & the eyght daye shall be a daye of rest.
Leviticus 23:40 And ye shall take you the fyrst day, the frutes of goodly trees and the braunches of palme trees and the bowes of thicke trees, and willowes of the brooke, & shall reioyce before the Lord .vij. dayes.
Leviticus 23:41 And ye shall kepe it holy day vnto the Lorde .vij. dayes in the yere. And it shall be a lawe for euer vnto youre chyldren after you, that ye kepe that feaste in the seuenth moneth.
Leviticus 23:42 And ye shall dwell in boothes seuen dayes: euen all that are Israelites borne, shall dwell in boothes,
Leviticus 23:43 that youre chyldrene after you maye knowe how that I made the chyldren of Israell dwell in boothes, when I brought them out of the lande of Egypt: for I am the Lord your God.
Leviticus 23:44 And Moses tolde all the feastes of the Lord vnto the children of Israel.

CHAPTER: 24

Leviticus 24:1 And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Leviticus 24:2 commaunde the chyldrene of Israell that they brynge vnto the, pure oyle oliue beaten for lyghtes to poure into the lampes alwaye,
Leviticus 24:3 wythout the vayle of wytnes wythin the tabernacle of witnes. And Aaron shall dresse them boeth euenyng and mornynge before the Lorde alwayes. And it shall be a lawe for euer amonge your chyldren after you.
Leviticus 24:4 And he shall dresse the lampes vpon the pure candelstycke before the Lorde perpetually.
Leviticus 24:5 And thou shalt take fyne floure and bake .xij. wastels thereof, two tenthdeales shall euery wastell be.
Leviticus 24:6 And make two rowes of them, sixe on a rowe vpon the pure table before the Lorde,
Leviticus 24:7 and putte pure frankencens vpon the rowes. And it shalbe bread of remembraunce, & an offeryng vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 24:8 Euery Saboth he shall put theym in rowes before the Lorde euermore, geuen of the children of Israel, that it be an euerlastyng couenaunt.
Leviticus 24:9 And they shalbe Aaron and hys sonnes, and they shal eate them in the holy place. For they are most holy vnto hym of the offerynges of the Lord, and shalbe a duty for euer.
Leviticus 24:10 And the son of an Israelitish wyfe whose father was an Egyptian, went out amonge the chyldren of Israel. And this sonne of the Israelitish wyf
Leviticus 24:11 and a man of Israel stroue togyther in the host. And the Israelitish womannes sonne blasphemed the name & cursed, & they brought hym vnto Moses. And hys mothers name was Salomith, the doughter of Dibry of the trybe of Dan:
Leviticus 24:12 and they put hym in warde, that Moses shoulde declare vnto them what the Lorde sayd therto.
Leviticus 24:13 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying,
Leviticus 24:14 brynge hym that blasphemed wythoute the hoste, and lette al that hearde hym, put theyr handes vpon hys head, and let all the multitude stone him.
Leviticus 24:15 And speake vnto the children of Israel sayinge. Whosoeuer curseth his God, shal beare hys synne:
Leviticus 24:16 And he that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, shall dye for it: all the multitude shall stone him to death. And the straunger as well as the Israelyte if he curse the name, shal dye for it.
Leviticus 24:17 He that killeth any manne, shall dye for it
Leviticus 24:18 but he that kylleth a beaste shall paye for it, beast for beast.
Leviticus 24:19 If a man mayne hys neyghboure as he hath done, so shall it be done to hym agayne:
Leviticus 24:20 broke for broke, eye for eye and toth for toth: euen as he hath maimed a man, so shall he be maymed agayne.
Leviticus 24:21 So nowe he that kylleth a beast, shall paye for it: but he that kylleth a man, shall dye for it.
Leviticus 24:22 Ye shall haue one maner of lawe amonge you: euen for the straungers as well for one of youre selues, for I am the Lord your God.
Leviticus 24:23 And Moses told the chyldren of Israell, that they should brynge him that had cursed out of the hoste, and stone hym wyth stones. And the chyldren of Israel dyd as the Lorde commaunded Moses.

CHAPTER: 25

Leviticus 25:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses in mount Sinai, sayinge:
Leviticus 25:2 speake vnto the children of Israel & saye vnto them. When ye be come into the Lande whyche I gyue you, let the Land rest a Sabbothe vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 25:3 Syxe yeres thou shalt sowe thy felde, and syxe yere thou shalt cut thy vynes & gather in thy frutes.
Leviticus 25:4 But the seuenth yeare shall be a Sabothe of rest vnto the lande. The Lordes Saboth it shalbe, and thou shalt neuer sowe thy feylde nor cut thy vynes.
Leviticus 25:5 The corne that groweth by it selfe thou shalt not repe, nether gather the grapes that growe wythout thy dressynge: but it shall be a Saboth of rest vnto the lande.
Leviticus 25:6 Neuerthelesse the Saboth of the Lande shall be meate for you: euen for the and thy seruaunte and for thy mayd and for thy hyred seruaunte and for the straunger that dwelleth with the:
Leviticus 25:7 and for thy cattell and for the beastes that are in thy Lande, shall all the encrease thereof be meate.
Leviticus 25:8 Then numbre seuen wekes of yeres, that is, seuen tymes seuen yere: and the space of the seuen wekes of yeres, wil be vnto the .xlix. yere.
Leviticus 25:9 And then thou shalt make an horne blowe: euen in the tenth daye of the seuenth moneth, which is the day of atonemente.
Leviticus 25:10 And then shal ye make the horne blowe, euen thoroweoute all youre Lande. And ye shall halowe the fyftyeth yere, & proclayme libertye thorowoute the Lande vnto all the inhabyters therof. It shall be a yere of iubelie to you & ye shal returne: euerye man vnto hys possession and euerye man vnto hys kynred agayne.
Leviticus 25:11 A yere of iubilye shall that fyftieth yere be vnto you. Ye shall not sowe neyther repe the corne that groweth by it selfe, nor gather the grapes that growe wythout thy labour.
Leviticus 25:12 For it is a yere of Iubely and shalbe holy vnto you, howebeit, yet ye shall eate of the encrease of the fyelde.
Leviticus 25:13 And in this yere of iubelye ye shall returne, euery man vnto his possession agayne.
Leviticus 25:14 When thou sellest ought vnto thy neyghboure or byest of thy neyghbours hande, ye shall not oppresse one another:
Leviticus 25:15 but according to the numbre of yeres after the iubilye yere thou shalt bye of thy neyghbour, and accordynge to the numbre of frute yeres, he shall sell vnto the.
Leviticus 25:16 Accordyng vnto the multitude of yeres, thou shalt encrease the pryce thereof and accordyng to the fewnes of yeres, thou shalte mynyshe the pryce: for the numbre of fruyte he shall sell vnto the.
Leviticus 25:17 And se that no man oppresse his neyghboure, but feare thy God. For I am the Lord your God.
Leviticus 25:18 Wherfore do after myne ordinaunces and kepe my lawes and do theym, that ye maye dwell in the land and in safety.
Leviticus 25:19 And the land shal giue hyr frute, and ye shall eate your fyll & dwell therin in safety.
Leviticus 25:20 If ye shall saye, what shal we eate the seuenth yere in as much as we shall not sowe nor gather in our encrease.
Leviticus 25:21 I wyll sende my blessyng vpon you in the syxte yeare,
Leviticus 25:22 and it shall brynge forthe fruite for thre yeres: & ye shall sowe the eyghte yeare and eate of olde frute vntyll the .ix. yere, and euen vntyll hyr frutes come, ye shal eat of old store.
Leviticus 25:23 Wherfore the Land shall not be solde for euer, bycause that the land is myne, & ye but straungers and soiourners wyth me:
Leviticus 25:24 and ye shall thorowout all the land of your possession let the land go home fre agayne.
Leviticus 25:25 When thy brother is waxed poore and hath solde away of hys possession, if anye of hys kyn come to redeme it, he shal bye out that whych his brother sold.
Leviticus 25:26 And though he haue no man to redeme it for hym, yet if hys hand can get suffitiente to bye it out agayne,
Leviticus 25:27 then let hym counte howe longe it hathe be solde, and deliuer the reste vnto hym to whome he solde it, & so he shall returne vnto hys possession agayne.
Leviticus 25:28 But and if hys hand can not get sufficient to restore it to hym agayne, then that whyche is solde shall remayne in the hande of hym that hath bought it, vntyll the iubelye, and in the yeare of Iubilye it shall come oute, & he shal returne vnto hys possession agayne.
Leviticus 25:29 If a man sell a dwellyng house in a walled citye, he maye bye it oute agayne anye tyme within a whole yere after it is sold: and that shal be the space in whyche he may redeme it againe.
Leviticus 25:30 But & if it be not bought oute againe within the space of a full yere, then the house in the walled city shal be stablyshed for euer vnto hym that boughte it and to hys successoures after hym and shall not go out in the yere of iubelye.
Leviticus 25:31 But the houses in vyllages which haue no walles rounde aboute theim shalbe counted lyke vnto the feyldes of the countrey, and may be bought out agayne at any season, and shall go out fre in the yeare of iubelye.
Leviticus 25:32 Notwythstandynge the cities of the Leuytes and the housses in the cytyes of theyr possessions the Leuytes maye redeme at all ceasons.
Leviticus 25:33 And if a man purchase ought of the Leuites: whether it be house or city that they possesse the bargayne shal go out in the yere of iubelye for the houses of the cityes of the Leuites, are theyr possessions amonge the children of Israel.
Leviticus 25:34 But the fyldes that lye round about theyr cityes, shall not be boughte: for they are theyr possessions for euer.
Leviticus 25:35 If thy brother be waxed pore and fallen in decay with the, receiue him as a straunger or a soiourner, & let him lyue by th
Leviticus 25:36 And thou shalt take none vsurye of hym, nor yet vantage. But shalt feare thy God, that thy brother maye lyue wt the.
Leviticus 25:37 Thou shalt not lend him thy money vpon vserye, nor lende hym of thy foode to haue aduantage bi it:
Leviticus 25:38 for I am the Lorde youre God whyche broughte you out of the Lande of Egypte, to gyue you the land of Canaan & to be your God.
Leviticus 25:39 If thy brother that dwelleth by the waxe poore and sell hym selfe vnto the, thou shalt not let him labour as a bond seruante doeth:
Leviticus 25:40 but as an hyred seruaunte and as a soiourner he shal be with the, and shal serue the vnto the yere of iubelye,
Leviticus 25:41 & then shall he departe from the: both he and his chyldren wyth him, and shall returne vnto hys owne kynred againe, & vnto the possessions of his fathers:
Leviticus 25:42 for they are my seruauntes which I brought out of the Land of Egypt, and shall not be solde as bondemen.
Leviticus 25:43 Se therefore that thou raygne not ouer hym cruelly, but feare thy God.
Leviticus 25:44 If thou wylte haue bondeseruauntes & maydens, thou shalt bye them of the Heathen that are round about you,
Leviticus 25:45 & of the chyldren of the straungers that ar soiourners among you, & of their generation that are with you whyche they begate in your Lande.
Leviticus 25:46 And ye shall possesse them & gyue them vnto youre chyldren after you, to possesse them foreuer: and they shal be your bondmen. But ouer your brethren the children of Israel, ye shal not raygne one ouer another cruelly.
Leviticus 25:47 When a straunger and a soiourner waxeth ryche by the and thy brother that dwelleth by him waxeth pore, & sel hym selfe vnto the straunger that dwelleth by the or to any of the straungers kynne:
Leviticus 25:48 after that he is solde he may be redemed agayne: one of hys brethren may bye hym oute:
Leviticus 25:49 whether it be hys vncle or his vncles sonne, or any that is nye of kyn vnto him of hys kynred: either if his hand can get so much he may be losed.
Leviticus 25:50 And he shall reken with hym that bought hym, from the yere that he was solde in vnto the yere of iubelye, and the pryce of hys bying shall be accordyng to the numbre of yeres, & he shalbe wyth hym as an hyred seruaunt.
Leviticus 25:51 If there be yet many yeres behynde, accordyng vnto them he shall gyue agayne for hys deliueraunce of the money that he was solde for.
Leviticus 25:52 If ther remayne but few yeres vnto the yere of Iubely, he shal so counte with him & accordyng vnto his yeres giue him again for his redemption,
Leviticus 25:53 & shalbe with him yere by yere as an hyred seruaunte & the other shall not raygne cruellye ouer hym in thy syghte.
Leviticus 25:54 If he be not boughte fre in the meane tyme, then he shal go out in the yere of iubely and his chyldren with him:
Leviticus 25:55 for the children of Israel are my seruauntes whyche I broughte out of the land of Egypt.

CHAPTER: 26

Leviticus 26:1 I am the Lorde your God. Ye shal make you no Idolles nor grauen image, neyther reare you vp anye piller, neyther ye shall sette vppe anye image of stone in your Lande to bowe youre selues therto: for I am the Lorde youre God:
Leviticus 26:2 kepe my Sabothes & feare my sanctuary: for I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 26:3 If ye shall walke in myne ordinaunces & kepe my commaundementes & do them,
Leviticus 26:4 then I wyll send you reyne in the ryght season & youre lande shall yelde hyr encrease and the trees of the fyeld shal gyue thyr fruite.
Leviticus 26:5 And the threshing shal reach vnto wyne heruest, & the wyne heruest shall reach vnto sowyng tyme, and ye shall eate youre breade in plentuousnes, and shal dwell in your lande peasably.
Leviticus 26:6 And I wyl sende peace in youre lande that ye shall slepe, and no manne shal make you a frayde. And I wyll rydde euyll beastes oute of youre Lande, and there shall no swerde goo thorowe out your lande.
Leviticus 26:7 And ye shal chasse youre enemyes, & they shall fall before you vpon the swerd.
Leviticus 26:8 And fyue of you shal chasse an hundred, & an hundred of you shall put .x. thousand to flyghte, and your enemies shall fall before you vpon the swerde.
Leviticus 26:9 And I wyl turne vnto you and encrease you & multyply you, and set vp my testament wyth you.
Leviticus 26:10 And ye shall eate olde store, and cast out the olde for plentuousnes of the newe.
Leviticus 26:11 I wyll make my dwellynge place amonge you, and my Soule shall not loth you.
Leviticus 26:12 And I wyll walke amonge you and wyll be your God, and ye shalbe mi people.
Leviticus 26:13 For I am the Lord your God, whyche broughte you out of the land of the Egiptians, that ye should not be theyr bondemen, and I brake the bowes of your yockes, and made you go vpryght.
Leviticus 26:14 But and if ye will not herken vnto me, nor wyll do all these my commaundementes,
Leviticus 26:15 or if ye shal despise myne ordinaunces either if youre Soule refuse my lawes, so that ye wyl not do al my commaundementes, but shal breake myne appoyntmente:
Leviticus 26:16 then I wyll do this agayne vnto you: I wyl viset you with vexacions, swellinge & feuers, that shall make your eyes dasel, & wt sorowes of herte. And ye shall sowe your seede in vayne, for youre enemyes shall eate it.
Leviticus 26:17 And I wyll sette my face agaynst you & ye shall fal before youre enemyes, & they that hate you shall raygne ouer you, and ye shall flee when no man foloweth you.
Leviticus 26:18 And if ye wyl not yet for all thys herken vnto me, then wil I punyshe you seuen times more for youre synnes,
Leviticus 26:19 and wyll breake the pride of your strength. For I wyll make the heauen ouer you as harde as yron, & youre lande as harde as brasse.
Leviticus 26:20 And so youre labour shall be spent in vayne. For your land shal not gyue hyr encrease, neyther the trees of the land shal gyue their fruites.
Leviticus 26:21 And if ye walke contrarye vnto me and wyll not herken vnto me, I wyll brynge seuen tymes mo plages vpon you accordyng to your synnes.
Leviticus 26:22 I wyl send in wyld beastes vpon you, whyche shall robbe you of your chyldren & destroy your cattell, & make you so fewe in numbre that your hye wayes shal grow vnto a wyldernes.
Leviticus 26:23 And if ye wyll not be learned yet for all thys but shall walke contrary vnto me,
Leviticus 26:24 then wyll I also walke contrarye vnto you and wyll punyshe you yet seuen times for your synnes.
Leviticus 26:25 I wyl send a swerd vpon you, that shall auenge my testament wyth you. And when ye are fledde vnto your cityes, I wyll sende the pestilence amonge you, ye shal be deliuered into the handes of your enemies.
Leviticus 26:26 And when I haue broken the staffe of your bread: that .x. wyues shall bake your breade in one ouen and men shall deliuer you youre bread agayne by wayght, then shall ye eate and not be satisfied.
Leviticus 26:27 And if ye wyll not yet for all thys herken vnto me, but shal walke contrary vnto me,
Leviticus 26:28 then I wyll walke contrarye vnto you also wrathfullye and wyll also chastyce you seuen tymes for youre synnes:
Leviticus 26:29 so that ye shall eate the flesh of your sonnes & the fleshe of youre daughters.
Leviticus 26:30 And I wyll destroy your alters bylt vpon hye hylles, and ouerthrow youre images and caste youre carkasses vpon the bodyes of your idolles, and my soule shall abhorre you.
Leviticus 26:31 And I wyl make your cityes desolate, and brynge your sanctuaries vnto nought, and wyll not smel the sauoures of your swete odoures.
Leviticus 26:32 And I wyl brynge the lande vnto a wyldernesse: so that your enemies whych dwell therin shal wonder at it.
Leviticus 26:33 And I wyl strawe you among the Heathen, and wyl draw out a swerde after you, and youre land shal be waste, and your cityes desolate.
Leviticus 26:34 Then the Lande shall reioyce in hyr Sabbothes, as longe as it lyeth voyde and ye in youre enemyes lande: euen then shal the Lande kepe holy day and reioyce in hir Sabbothes.
Leviticus 26:35 And as longe as it lyeth voyde it shall rest, for that it could not rest in your Sabothes, when ye dwelt therin.
Leviticus 26:36 And vpon them that are left a liue of you I wyl sende a fayntnes into theyr hertes, in all the land of their enemies: so that the sound of a leaf that falleth, shall chase them & they shall flee as though they fled a swerde, and shall fal, no man folowyng them.
Leviticus 26:37 And they shal fal, one vpon another, as it were before a swerde, euen no man folowyng them, and ye shal haue no power to stand before your enemies.
Leviticus 26:38 And ye shall peryshe amonge the Heathen, and the land of your enemies shal eate you vp.
Leviticus 26:39 And they that are lefte of you, shall pyne away in theyr vnryghtuousnes, euen in their enymyes lande, and also in the misdedes of their fathers shall they consume.
Leviticus 26:40 And they shall confesse theyr misdeades and the mysdeades of theyr fathers in theyr trespaces, which they haue trespaced agaynst me, & for that also that they haue walked contrary to me.
Leviticus 26:41 Therfore I also wyl walke contrarye vnto them, and wyl brynge theym into the lande of theyr enemies. And then at the least waye theyr vncircumcised hertes shalbe tamed, & then they shall make an atonement for theyr mysdeades.
Leviticus 26:42 And I wyl remembre my bond with Iacob, and my testament wyth Isaac, and my testament wyth Abraham, and wyll thynke on the lande.
Leviticus 26:43 For the Lande shall be lefte of them and shall haue pleasure in hyr Sabbothes, whyle she lyeth wast wythout them, & they shall make on atonement for theyr misdeades, bicause they despised my lawes and theyr soules refused mine ordinaunces.
Leviticus 26:44 And yet for all that when they be in the Lande of their enemy, I wyll not so cast them away nor my soule shal not so abhorre them, that I wyll vtterlye destroye theym and breake myne appoyntment with them: for I am the Lord theyr God.
Leviticus 26:45 I wyl therfore remembre vnto them the fyrst couenaunte made, when I brought them out of the Lande of Egypte in the syght of the Heathen to be their God: for I am the Lorde.
Leviticus 26:46 These are the ordinaunces, iudgmentes, & lawes whych the Lord made betwene hym and the chyldren of Israell in mount Sinai by the hand of Moses.

CHAPTER: 27

Leviticus 27:1 And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge,
Leviticus 27:2 speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and say vnto them: If any man wyl geue a singuler vowe vnto the Lord accordynge to the value of hys Soule,
Leviticus 27:3 then shall the male from twentye yere vnto .lx. be sette at fyfty sycles of syluer, after the sycle of the sanctuary,
Leviticus 27:4 & the female at .xxx. sicles.
Leviticus 27:5 And from fiue yeares to twenty the male shall be set at twentye sycles, and the female at .x. sycles.
Leviticus 27:6 And from a moneth vnto .v. yere the male shal be set at .v. sycles of syluer, & the female at thre.
Leviticus 27:7 And the man that is .lx. and aboue, shal be valued at .xv. sycles, and the woman at .x.
Leviticus 27:8 If he be to pore so to be set, then let hym come before the prieste: and let the prieste value hym accordinge as the hand of hym that vowed is able to get.
Leviticus 27:9 If it be of the beastes of whych men bring an offeryng vnto the Lord: all that any man geueth of such vnto the lord, shalbe holy.
Leviticus 27:10 He may not alter it nor chaunge it: a good for a bad or a bad for a good. If he chaunge beast for beaste, then both the same beast and it also wherwith it was chaunged shalbe holy.
Leviticus 27:11 If it be any maner of vncleane beaste of which men maye not offer vnto the Lorde, let hym brynge the beaste before the priest
Leviticus 27:12 & lette the priest value it. And whether it be good or badde as the prieste setteth it, so shall it be.
Leviticus 27:13 And if he wyll bye it agayne, lette him giue the fyft part more to that it was set at.
Leviticus 27:14 If any man dedicate his house, it shall be holy vnto the Lord. And the priest shall sette it, whether it be good or bad, & as the prieste hath set it, so it shalbe.
Leviticus 27:15 If he that sanctified it wyll redeme his house, lette hym giue the fift part of the money that it was iudged at therto, and it shalbe hys.
Leviticus 27:16 If a man halow a pece of hys enhereted lande vnto the Lorde, it shalbe set according to that it beareth. If it beare an homer of barlye, it shal be set at fyfty sycles of syluer.
Leviticus 27:17 If he halow his feld immediatly that from the yere of iubely, it shal be worth according as it is estemed.
Leviticus 27:18 But & if he halow his fyeld after the trumpet yere, the priest shall reken the price wyth him accordynge to the yeres that remayne vnto the trumpet yere, and therafter it shalbe lower set.
Leviticus 27:19 If he that sanctified the field wyl redeme it agayne, let him putte the fyfte parte of the pryce that it was set at therunto,
Leviticus 27:20 and it shall be hys, if he wyll not it shall be redemed no more.
Leviticus 27:21 But when the fyelde goeth out in the yere of iubely, it shalbe holy vnto the Lord: euen as a thyng dedicated, and it shal be the priestes possession.
Leviticus 27:22 If a man sanctify vnto the Lorde a field, whych he hath bought and is not of hys enheritaunce,
Leviticus 27:23 then the prieste shall reken wyth him what it is worth vnto the yere of Iubely, & he shal gyue the price that it is set at the same day, and it shall be holy vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 27:24 But in the yere of Iubely, the fyeld shal returne vnto hym of whom he bought it, whose enheritaunce of land it was.
Leviticus 27:25 And al settynges shal be accordyng to the holy sycle. One sycle maketh .xx. Geras.
Leviticus 27:26 But the fyrst borne of the beastes that pertayne vnto the Lorde, maye no man sanctify: whether it be oxe or shepe, for thei are the Lordes already.
Leviticus 27:27 If it be an vncleane beaste, then lett hym redeme it as it is set at, & gyue the fyfte part more therto. If it be not redemed, then let it be sold as it is rated.
Leviticus 27:28 Notwythstandynge no dedicated thynge that a man dedycateth vnto the Lorde, of all his good whether it be man or beast or lande of his enheritaunce, shalbe solde or redemed for all dedicate thynges are moste holy vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 27:29 No dedicate thynge therfore that is dedicate of man, may be redemed, but must nedes dye.
Leviticus 27:30 All these tythes of the Lande, whether it be of the corne of the field or frute of the trees, shalbe holy vnto the Lord.
Leviticus 27:31 If anye man wil redeme ought of hys tythes, lette hym adde the fyfte parte more thereto.
Leviticus 27:32 And the tythes of oxen and sheepe and of all that goeth vnder the heardemans kepynge, shall be holye tythes vnto the Lorde.
Leviticus 27:33 Men shall not loke if it be good or badde nor shall chaunge it. If any man chaunge it, then boeth it and that it was chaunged wythal, shal be holy & maye not be redemed.
Leviticus 27:34 These are the commaundementes whyche the Lorde gaue Moses in charge to giue vnto the chyldren of Israell in mount Sinai.

BOOK: Numbers

CHAPTER: 1

Numbers 1:1 And the Lord spake to Moses in the wyldernes of Sinai in the Tabernacle of witnes, the fyrste daye of the seconde moneth and in the seconde yere after they were come oute of the Lande of Egypte sayinge:
Numbers 1:2 take ye the summe of al the multitude of the chyldren of Israell, in their kynredes and housholdes of theyr fathers and numbre them by name, all that are males, polle by polle,
Numbers 1:3 from .xx. yere and aboue euen all that are able to go forth into warre in Israel, thou and Aaron shall numbre them in theyr armies,
Numbers 1:4 and wyth you shall be of euerye trybe a heade man in the house of hys father.
Numbers 1:5 And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of Ruben, Elizur the sonne of Sedeur:
Numbers 1:6 of Simeon, Selumiel the sonne of Sury Sadai:
Numbers 1:7 of the trybe of Iuda Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab:
Numbers 1:8 of Isachar, Nathanael the sonne of Zuar:
Numbers 1:9 of Zabulon, Eliab the sonne of Helon.
Numbers 1:10 Amonge the chyldren of Ioseph: of Ephraim, Elisama the sonne of Amihud: of Manasse, Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur:
Numbers 1:11 of BenIamin, Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni:
Numbers 1:12 of Dan, Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Sadai:
Numbers 1:13 of Aser, Pagyel the sonne of Ocran:
Numbers 1:14 of Gad, Elisaph the sonne of Deguel:
Numbers 1:15 of Nephthaly, Ahira the sonne of Enan.
Numbers 1:16 These were the councelers of the congregation & Lordes in the tribes of theyr fathers and captaynes ouer thousandes in Israel.
Numbers 1:17 And Moses and Aaron toke these men aboue named
Numbers 1:18 and gathired al the congregation togyther the fyrste day of the seconde moneth, and rekened them after their byrth & kynreds & houses of theyr fathers by name from .xx. yere & aboue head by heade,
Numbers 1:19 as the Lord commaunded Moses, euen so he numbred them in the wyldernes of Sinai.
Numbers 1:20 And the children of Ruben Israels eldest sonne in theyr generations, kynredes and houses of their fathers, when they were numbred euery man by name, all that were males from .xx. yere and aboue, as manye as were able to goo forth in warre
Numbers 1:21 were numbred in the trybe of Ruben .xlvi. thousand and fiue hundred.
Numbers 1:22 Among the children of Simeon: theyr generation in theyr kynredes and houses of theyr fathers (when euery mans name was told) of al the males from .xx. yeres & aboue, whatsoeuer was mete for the warre:
Numbers 1:23 were numbred in the tribe of Simeon .lix. thousand and .iij. hundred.
Numbers 1:24 Amonge the chyldren of Gad: theyr generation theyr kynredes and houshouldes of theyr fathers, when they were tolde by name from twentye yere and aboue, all that were mete for the warre
Numbers 1:25 were numbred in the tribe of Gad .xlv. thousand, sixe hundred and fyftye.
Numbers 1:26 Among the chyldren of Iuda: their generation in theyr kynreds and houses of theyr fathers (by the numbre of names) from .xx. yere and aboue, all that were able to warre,
Numbers 1:27 were tolde in the trybe of Iuda .lxxiiij. thousand and sixe hundred.
Numbers 1:28 Amonge the chyldren of Isachar: theyr generation in theyr kynredes and houses of theyr fathers (when theyr names were counted) from twentye yere and aboue, whatsoeuer was apte for warre,
Numbers 1:29 were numbred in the trybe of Isachar .liiij. thousande and .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 1:30 Amonge the children of Zabulon: their generatyon, in theyr kynredes and houses of theyr fathers (after the numbre of names) .xx. yere and aboue, whosoeuer was mete for the warre:
Numbers 1:31 were counted in the trybe of Zabulon .lvij. thousand and .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 1:32 Amonge the chyldren of Iosephe: fyrste among the children of Ephraim: their generation, in theyr kinredes and houses of their fathers (when the names of all that were apte to warre were tolde) frome .xx. yeares and aboue:
Numbers 1:33 were in numbre in the trybe of Ephraim .xl. thousand, & syxe hundred.
Numbers 1:34 Amonge the chyldren of Manasse: theyr generation, in theyr kynredes and houses of theyr fathers (when the names of all that were apt to warre were tolde) from .xx. and aboue
Numbers 1:35 were numbred in the trybe of Manasse .xxxij. thousande, and two hundred.
Numbers 1:36 Amonge the children of BenIamin: their generation, in their kynredes and houses of their fathers (by the tale of names) from twentye yeare and aboue of all that were mete for ware,
Numbers 1:37 were numbred in the trybe of BenIamin .xxxv. thousaund, and foure hundred.
Numbers 1:38 Amonge the chyldren of Dan: theyr generation in theyr kynredes and houses of theyr fathers (in the summe of names)
Numbers 1:39 of all that was apte to warre from twentye yeare and aboue, were numbred in the tribe of Dan .lxij. thousand and .vij. hundred.
Numbers 1:40 Amonge thr chyldren of Aser: their generacyon, in their kynredes and houses of thir fathers (when they were summed by name) from .xx. yeres and aboue, all that were apte to warre
Numbers 1:41 were numbred in the tribe of Aser .xli. thousande and .v. hundred.
Numbers 1:42 Amonge the chyldren of Nephthali: their generation in their kynredes and houses of their fathers (when ther names were tolde) from .xx. yeres and aboue, what soeuer was mete to warre:
Numbers 1:43 were numbred in the trybe of Nephthali three and fyfty thousande and .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 1:44 These are the numbres whych Moses & Aaron numbred wyth the .xij. princes of Israel: of euerye house of theyr fathers a man.
Numbers 1:45 And all the numbres of the chyldren of Israel in the houses of theyr fathers, from twentye yeare and aboue, whatsoeuer was mete for the warre in Israell,
Numbers 1:46 drewe vnto the summe of syxe hundred and three thousand, fyue hundred and fyfty.
Numbers 1:47 But the Leuites in the tribe of theyr fathers were not numbred amonge them.
Numbers 1:48 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 1:49 onelye se that thou numbre not the trybe of Leuy, neither take the summe of them among the chyldren of Israell.
Numbers 1:50 But thou shalte appoynt the Leuites vnto the habitation of witnesse, and to all the apparell thereof and vnto all that longeth therto. For they shal bear the tabernacle and al the ordinaunce therof, and they shall minister it, and shall pytche theyr tentes rounde about it.
Numbers 1:51 And when the tabernacle goth forth the Leuites shall take it downe: and when the tabernacle is pitched they shal set it vp: for if any straunger come nere, he shal dye.
Numbers 1:52 And the chyldren of Israel shall pytche theyr tentes, euerye man in hys owne company and euery man bi his owne standart thoroweout al theyr hostes.
Numbers 1:53 But the Leuites shall pytche rounde aboute the habitation of witnes, that there fall no wrathe vpon the congregation of the children of Israel, and the Leuites shal wayte vpon the habitation of wytnesse.
Numbers 1:54 And the children of Israel dyd accordyng to al that the Lord commaunded Moses.

CHAPTER: 2

Numbers 2:1 And the Lord spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
Numbers 2:2 The chyldren of Israell shall pitch euerye man by his owne standarte wyth the armes of theyr fathrrs houses, awaye from the presence of the tabernacle of wytnes.
Numbers 2:3 On the East syde toward the rysynge of the Sunne shall they of the standarte of the host of Iuda pytch wyth theyr armes: And Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab shalbe captayne ouer the sonnes of Iuda.
Numbers 2:4 And his host and the numbre of theym .lxxiiij. thousande and .vi. hundred.
Numbers 2:5 And next vnto hym shall the trybe of Izachar pytche and Nathaneell the sonne of Zuar captayne ouer the children of Izachar,
Numbers 2:6 his host and the numbre of them .liiij. thousand .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 2:7 And then the trybe of Zabulon: wt Eliab the sonne of Helon, captayne ouer the chyldren of Zabulon,
Numbers 2:8 and hys host in the numbre of theym .lvij. thousand & .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 2:9 So that all they that pertayne vnto the hoste of Iuda are an hundred thousand .lxxxvi. thousand and .iiij. hundred, in theyr companyes: and these shall go into the forefronte, when they iourney.
Numbers 2:10 And on the southsyde, the standarte of the host of Ruben shall lye wyth theyr companyes & the captayne ouer the sonnes of Ruben Elizur the Sonne of Sedeur,
Numbers 2:11 and hys host and the numbre of them .xlvi. thousand & .v. hundred.
Numbers 2:12 And fast by hym shal the trybe of Symeon pytche, and the captayne ouer the sonnes of Symeon. Salumiel the sonne of Zury Sadai,
Numbers 2:13 and hys host and the numbre of them .lix. thousand and .iij. hundred.
Numbers 2:14 And the trybe of Gad also: And the captaine ouer the sonnes of Gad, Eliasaph the sonne of Deguell
Numbers 2:15 hys hoste and the numbre of them .xlv. thousande sixe hundred and fifty.
Numbers 2:16 Soo that all the numbre that pertayne vnto the hoste of Ruben, are an hundred thousande .li. thousande .iiij. hundred and fyfte wt theyr companyes, and they shall be the seconde in the iourney.
Numbers 2:17 And the tabernacle of wytnesse wyth the host of the Leuites, shall goo in the myddes of the hostes: as they lye in theyr tentes, euen so shall they procede in the iourney, euerye man in hys quarter about the standartes.
Numbers 2:18 On the weste syde the standarte and the host of Ephraim shal lye with their companyes. And the captayne ouer the sonnes of Ephraim Elisama the Sonne of Amihud:
Numbers 2:19 & hys hoste and the numbre of theym .xl. thousand and .v. hundred.
Numbers 2:20 And faste by hym, the trybe of Manasse, and the captayne ouer the Sonnes of Manasse, Gamaleel the sonne of PedaZur
Numbers 2:21 and hys hoste, and the numbre of theym .xxxij. thousand and two hundred.
Numbers 2:22 And the tribe of BenIamin also: and the captayne ouer the sonnes of BenIamin, Abidan the Sonne of Gedeoni,
Numbers 2:23 and hys hoste and the numbre of them .xxxv. thousande & .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 2:24 Al the numbre that pertayned to the host of Ephraim, were an hundred thousand .viij. thousand and an hundred in their hostes: & they shalbe the thyrd in the iourney.
Numbers 2:25 And the standart & the hoste of Dan shall lye on the north syde with theyr companies: and the captayne ouer the chyldren of Dan, Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Sadai:
Numbers 2:26 and hys host & the numbre of them .lxij. thousande and .vij. hundred.
Numbers 2:27 And fast by hym shall the tribe of Aser pytch, & the captaine ouer the sonnes of Aser, Pagiel the sonne of Ocran:
Numbers 2:28 and his host, and the numbre of them .xli. thousand & .v. hundred.
Numbers 2:29 And the tribe of Nepthaly also & the captayne ouer the chyldren of Nephtali: Ahira the sonne of Enan:
Numbers 2:30 and hys hoste and the numbre of them .liij. thousande and .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 2:31 So that the hole numbre of all that pertayned vnto the hoste of Dan, was an hundred thousande .lvij. thousande & .vi. hundred. And they shal be the last in that iourney with theyr standertes.
Numbers 2:32 These are the summes of the chyldren of Israel in the houses of their fathers: euen all the nombres of the hostes with their companyes .vi. hundred thousande .iij. thousand .v. hundred and fifty.
Numbers 2:33 And yet the Leuites were not nombred among the chyldren of Israell, as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Numbers 2:34 And the chyldren of Israel dyd accordyng to all that the Lord commaunded Moses, and so they pitched with their standertes, & so they iourneyd euery man in hys kynred, and in the houshold of hys father.

CHAPTER: 3

Numbers 3:1 These are the generations of Aaron & Moses, when the Lorde spake to Moses in mount Sinai
Numbers 3:2 and these are the names of the sonnes of Aaron: Nadab the eldest sonne, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
Numbers 3:3 These are the names of the sonnes of Aaron whiche were priestes anoynted & theyr handes fylled to minister,
Numbers 3:4 but Nadab and Abihu dyed before the Lorde, as they broughte straunge fyre before the Lord in the wyldernes of Sinai, & had no children. And Eleazar & Ithamar mynystred in the syghte of Aaron theyr father.
Numbers 3:5 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 3:6 brynge the trybe of Leuy, and set them before Aaron the priest, & let them serue hym, & waite vpon hi
Numbers 3:7 & vpon al the multitude, before the tabernacle of witnes, to do the seruyce of the habitation.
Numbers 3:8 And they shall wayte vpon all the apparell of the tabernacle of wytnesse, & vpon the chyldren of Israel, to do the seruise of the habitation.
Numbers 3:9 And thou shal gyue the Leuites vnto Aaron & hys sonnes, for they are geuen vnto him of the children of Israel.
Numbers 3:10 And thou shalt appoynt Aaron and his sonnes to wayte on theyr priestes office: & the straunger that cometh nye, shal dye for it.
Numbers 3:11 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 3:12 behold I haue taken the Leuites from among the children of Israel, for al the fyrstborne that openeth the matrice among the children of Israel, so that the Leuites shall be myne:
Numbers 3:13 bycause al the fyrst borne are myne: for the same day that I smote al the fyrst borne, in the land of Egypt, I halowed vnto me al the fyrstborne in Israel, both man and beaste, & myne they shalbe, for I am the Lord.
Numbers 3:14 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses in the wyldernesse of Sinai sayinge:
Numbers 3:15 Numbre the chyldren of Leuye in the houses of theyr fathers & kinredes, al that are males from a moneth old & aboue.
Numbers 3:16 And Moses numbred them at the worde of the Lorde, as he was commaunded.
Numbers 3:17 And these are the names of the children of Leuy: Gerson, Cahath and Merari.
Numbers 3:18 And these are the names of the children of Gerson in their kynredes: Libni & Semei.
Numbers 3:19 And the sonnes of Cahath in theyr kinredes were Amram, Iezehar, Hebron, & Oziel.
Numbers 3:20 And the sonnes of Merari in theyr kynredes were Maheli and Musi. These are the kynredes of Leuy in the houses of theyr fathers.
Numbers 3:21 And of Gerson came the kinred of the Libnites and the Semeites, whiche are the kynreds of the Gersonites.
Numbers 3:22 And the summe of them (when all the males were tolde) from a moneth olde and aboue, were .vij. thousand and fyue hundred.
Numbers 3:23 And the kynredes of the Gersonytes pitched behynd the habitation westwarde.
Numbers 3:24 And the captaine of the most auncient house amonge the Gersonites, was Eliasaph the sonne of Lael.
Numbers 3:25 And the office of the children of Gerson in the tabernacle of wytnes was to kepe the habitation & the tent with the couerynge therof and the hanginge of the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse,
Numbers 3:26 and the hangynges of the court, and the curtayne of the dore of the courte, whych court went round about the dwelling, and the aulter, & the cordes that pertained vnto al the seruyce therof.
Numbers 3:27 And of Cahath came the kynred of the Amramites and the kinred of the Iezeharites & of the Hebronites and of the Ozielites: And these are the kinreds of the Cahathites.
Numbers 3:28 And the numbre of of all the males from a moneth olde and aboue, was .viij. thousand and sixe hundred which waited on the holy place.
Numbers 3:29 And the kinred of the children of Cahath, pitched on the southside of the dwelling.
Numbers 3:30 And the captayne in the moste auncient house of the kynredes of the Cahathites, was Elisaphan the sonne of Oziel,
Numbers 3:31 & their office was to kepe the arcke, the table, the candilsticke, & the altare & the holye vessels to minister wt & the vayle wyth all that serued thereto.
Numbers 3:32 And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the prieste, was captaine ouer all the captaynes of the Leuites, & had the ouer syghte of them that waited vpon the holy thynges.
Numbers 3:33 And of Merari came the kynredes of the Mahelytes, and of the Musites: and these are the kynredes of the Merarites.
Numbers 3:34 And the numbre of them (when all the males from a moneth olde and aboue was told) drewe vnto .vi. thousande, and two hundred.
Numbers 3:35 And the captaine of the most auncient house among the kynredes of the Merarites, was Zuriel the sonne Abihael whyche pytched on the northsyde of the dwellynge.
Numbers 3:36 And the offyce of the sonnes of merari was to kepe the bordes of the dwellyng & the barres, pyllers wt the sockets therof, and all the instrumentes therof & al that serued therto:
Numbers 3:37 and the pillers of the court rounde aboute & their sockettes with their pynnes & cordes.
Numbers 3:38 But on the forefront of the habitacion & before the tabernacle of wytnesse eastward, shal Moses & Aaron & hys sonnes pytch, & wayte on the sanctuary in the steade of the chyldren of Israel. And the straunger that cometh nye, shal dye for it.
Numbers 3:39 And the whole summe of the Leuites whiche Moses & Aaron numbred, at the commandement of the Lord thorow out their kynredes, euen of all the males of a moneth old & aboue, was .xxij. thousande.
Numbers 3:40 And the Lorde sayd vnto Moses: Nombre all the fyrst borne that are males among the chyldren of Israel, from a moneth olde & aboue and take the nombre of their names.
Numbers 3:41 And thou shalt appoynte the Leuites to me the Lorde, for all the fyrstborne amonge the chyldren of Israel, and the cattel of the Leuites for the fyrst borne of the chyldren of Israel.
Numbers 3:42 And Moses numbred as the Lord commaunded hym, al the fyrstborne of the chyldren of Israel.
Numbers 3:43 And all the fyrstborne males, in the summe of names, from a moneth olde and aboue, were nombred .xxij. thousande .ij. hundred and .lxxiij.
Numbers 3:44 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 3:45 take the Leuites for all the fyrstborne of the chyldren of Israell, and the cattel of the Leuites for their cattel: and the Leuites shalbe myne, which am the Lord.
Numbers 3:46 And for the redemynge of the two hundred and .lxxiij. whych are moo then the Leuites in the fyrstborne of the children of Israel,
Numbers 3:47 take .v. sycles of euery pece, after the sycle of the holy place .xx. geras the sycle.
Numbers 3:48 And geue the money wherwith the odde nombre of them is redemed, vnto Aaron and hys sonnes.
Numbers 3:49 And Moses toke the redempcion money of the ouerplus that were moo then the Leuites,
Numbers 3:50 among the fyrstborne of the chyldren of Israell: and it came to a thousande .iij. hundred and .lxv. sycles, of the holy sycle.
Numbers 3:51 And he gaue that redempcion money vnto Aaron & his sonnes at the word of the Lorde, euen as the Lorde commaunded Moses.

CHAPTER: 4

Numbers 4:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron,
Numbers 4:2 and bad them take the summe of the chyldren of Cahath from among the sonnes of Leui, in their kynredes and houses of their fathers,
Numbers 4:3 from .xxx. yere & aboue vntyl fifty, al that were able to warre for to do the worke in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 4:4 Thys shalbe the offyce of the chyldren of Kahath in the tabernacle of wytnesse whiche is moost holy.
Numbers 4:5 And when the hoste remoueth, Aaron and his sonnes shal come & take doune the vayle, and couer the arcke of wytnesse there wyth,
Numbers 4:6 & shall put theron a coueryng of taxus skynnes, & shal spreide a cloth that is altogether of iacyncte aboue all, and put the staues therof in.
Numbers 4:7 And vpon the shewe table, they shal spreide abrode a cloth of iacincte, and put theron the dyshes, spones, flat peces and pottes to poure wyth, & the dayly bread shalbe theron:
Numbers 4:8 & they shal spreade vpon them a couerynge of purple, and couer the same wyth a coueryng of taxus skynnes, & put the staues therof in.
Numbers 4:9 And they shal take a cloth of iacincte & couer the candelstyck of lyght & her lampes & her snuffers, and fyre pannes, and al her oyle vessels which they occupye aboute it,
Numbers 4:10 & shal put vpon her & vpon all her instrumentes, a coueryng of taxus skynnes, and put it vpon staues.
Numbers 4:11 And vpon the golden alter they shall sprede a cloth of Iacyncte, and put on her staues.
Numbers 4:12 And they shall take all the thynges whych they occupye to minystre wt in the holy place, & put a cloth of Iacyncte vpon them and couer them wyth a couerynge of taxus skynnes and put them on staues.
Numbers 4:13 And they shall take awaye the asshes out of the alter, and spreyde a scarlet clothe theron:
Numbers 4:14 and put aboute it, the fyre pannes, the flesh hokes, the shouels, the basens & all that belongeth vnto the alter, and they shal sprede vpon it a couerynge of taxus skynnes, & put on the staues of it.
Numbers 4:15 And when Aaron and his sonnes haue made an ende of coueryng the sanctuary & al the thinges of the sanctuarye, agaynst that the hoste remoue, then the sonnes of Cahath shall come in for to beare, & so let them not touche the sanctuary least they dye. And thys is the charge of the sonnes of Cahath in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 4:16 And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the preast, shall haue the charge to prepare oyle for the lyghtes & swete incens, & the dayly meatoffrynge & the anoyntynge oyle, and the ouersyghte of all the dwellyng and of all that therin is, both ouer the sanctuary and of al that pertayneth therto.
Numbers 4:17 And the Lord spake vnto Moses & Aaron sayinge:
Numbers 4:18 destroy not the trybe of the kynredes of the Cahathites, from among the Leuites.
Numbers 4:19 But thus do vnto them that they may lyue and not dye, when they go vnto the moost holy place. Aaron and hys sonnes shal go in and put them euery man vnto his seruyce and vnto hys burthen.
Numbers 4:20 But let them not go in to se when they couer the sanctuarye, lest they dye.
Numbers 4:21 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 4:22 Take the summe of the chyldren of Gerson in the houses of their fathers and in theyr kynredes:
Numbers 4:23 from .xxx. yere and aboue, vntyll .l. all that are able to goo forth in warre, for to do seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 4:24 And thys is the seruyce of the kynred of the Gersonites, to serue and to beare.
Numbers 4:25 They shal beare the curtaynes of the dwellyng & the rouffe of the tabernacle of wytnesse and hys couerynge and the couerynge of taxus skynnes that is an hye aboue vpon it, and the hangynge of the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse:
Numbers 4:26 and the hangyng of the court and the hangynge of the gate of the court that is round about the dwellyng and the altare, & the cordes of them, and al the instrumentes that serue vnto them and al that is made for them.
Numbers 4:27 And at the mouth of Aaron and his sonnes, shall all the seruyce of the chyldren of the Gersonites be done, in al their charges, and in all theyr seruyce, & ye shall appoynte them vnto all theyr charges, that they shal wayte vpon.
Numbers 4:28 And thys is the seruyce of the kynred of the chyldren of the Gersonites in the tabernacle of wytnesse, and their wayte shalbe in the hand of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the preast.
Numbers 4:29 And thou shalt nombre the sonnes of Merari in their kynredes and in the houses of their fathers,
Numbers 4:30 from .xxx. yeres and aboue vnto .l. All that is able to go forth in warre, to do the seruyce of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 4:31 And thys is the charge that they must wayte vppon in all that they must serue in the tabernacle of wytnesse. The bordes of the dwellynge, and the barres, pyllers, and sokettes therof,
Numbers 4:32 and the pyllers of the court round about, and their sokettes, pynnes and cordes, wyth al that pertayneth and serueth vnto them. And by name ye shal reaken the thynges that they must wayte vpon to beare.
Numbers 4:33 This is the seruyce of the kynredes of the sonnes of Merari in al theyr seruyce in the tabernacle of witnesse by the hand of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the preast.
Numbers 4:34 And Moses and Aaron and the Princes of the multitude nombred the sonnes of the Cahathites in their kynredes and houses of theyr fathers,
Numbers 4:35 from .xxx. yere and aboue vnto fyftie, al that were able to go forth in the hoste and to do seruyce in the tabernacle of witnesse.
Numbers 4:36 And the nombre of them in theyr kynredes were two thousande, seuen hundred and .l.
Numbers 4:37 These are the nombres of the kynredes of the Cahathytes, of al that dyd seruice in the tabernacle of wytnesse, which Moses and Aaron dyd nombre at the commaundement of the Lord by the hand of Moses.
Numbers 4:38 And the sonnes of Gerson were nombred in theyr kynredes and in the houses of theyr fathers,
Numbers 4:39 from .xxx. yere vp vnto fyftye, all that were able to go forth in the hoste for to do seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 4:40 And the nombre of them in theyr kynredes, and in the houses of theyr fathers, was two thousand syxe hundred and .xxx.
Numbers 4:41 Thys is the nombre of the kynredes of the sonnes of Gerson, of all that dyd seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse, whyche Moses and Aaron dyd nombre at the commaundement of the Lorde.
Numbers 4:42 And the kynredes of the sonnes of Merari were nombred in theyr kynredes and in the houses of theyr fathers,
Numbers 4:43 from .xxx. yere vp vnto fyftye: all that were able to go forth wyth the host, to do seruice in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 4:44 And the nombre of them was in theyr kynredes, thre thousande and two hundred.
Numbers 4:45 Thys is the nombre of the kynredes of the sonnes of Merari, whyche Moses and Aaron nombred at the byddynge of the Lorde, by the hande of Moses.
Numbers 4:46 The whole summe which Moses, Aaron and the Lordes of Israell nombred amonge the Leuites in their kynredes & housholdes of their fathers,
Numbers 4:47 from .xxx. yere vp vnto .l. euery man to do hys offyce and seruyce and to beare his burthen in the tabernacle of wytnesse:
Numbers 4:48 was .viij. thousande, fyue hundred and .lxxx.
Numbers 4:49 whych they nombred at the commaundement of the Lorde by the hande of Moses euery man vnto hys seruyce and burthen: as the Lord commaunded Moses.

CHAPTER: 5

Numbers 5:1 And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Numbers 5:2 commaunde the chyldren of Israel that they put out of the host, al the leapers & all that haue yssues and al that are defyled vpon the dead,
Numbers 5:3 whether they be males or females ye shall put them oute of the hoste, that they defyle not the tentes among whych ye dwell.
Numbers 5:4 And the chyldren of Israel dyd so, and put them oute of the hoste euen as the Lorde commaunded Moses, so dyd the chyldren of Israell.
Numbers 5:5 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 5:6 speake vnto the chyldren of Israell: whether it be man or woman, when they haue synned any maner of sinne which a man doeth where wyth a man trespaseth agaynst the Lord, so that the soule hath done amysse:
Numbers 5:7 then they shall knowledge their synnes whyche they haue done, and restore agayn the hurte that they haue done in the whole, and put the fyft parte of it moare thereto, and geue it vnto hym whom he hath trespased agaynst.
Numbers 5:8 But and yf he that maketh the amendes haue no man to do it to, then the amendes that is made shalbe the Lordes and the Preastes, besyde the ram of the attonement offeryng, wherwith he maketh an atttonement for him self.
Numbers 5:9 And al heaue offerynges of all the halowed thynges which the chyldren of Israel bryng vnto the preaste, shalbe the preastes,
Numbers 5:10 & euery mans halowed thynges shalbe hys awne, but what soeuer any man geueth the preast, it shalbe the preastes.
Numbers 5:11 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 5:12 Speake vnto the chyldren of Israell, and saye vnto them. If any mans wyfe go asyde and trespase agaynste hym,
Numbers 5:13 so that another man lye with her fleshely and the thynge behyd from the eyes of her husbande and is not come to light that she is defyled (for ther is no wytnesse agaynst her) in as moche as she was not taken wyth the maner,
Numbers 5:14 and the sprete of yelousy cometh vpon him and he is ielouse ouer hys wyfe and she defyled, or happely the sprete of ielousye cometh vpon him, and he is ielouse ouer hys wyfe and she yet vndefyled.
Numbers 5:15 Then let her husband brynge her vnto the Preast and brynge an offeryng for her: the tenthe parte of an Epha of barly meele, but shall poure none oyle thereunto, nor put franckencens theron: for it is an offeryng of ielousye, and an offerynge that maketh remembraunce of synne.
Numbers 5:16 And let the preast brynge her and sett her before the Lord,
Numbers 5:17 and let him take holy water in an erthen vessel & of the dust that is in the floore of the habitacyon, and put it in to the water.
Numbers 5:18 And the preast shal set the wife before the Lorde and vncouer her head, and put the memorial of the offering in her handes whiche is the ielousye offeryng, & the preast shal haue bytter and cursyng water in hys hand, and he shal coniure her & shal saye vnto her.
Numbers 5:19 If no man haue lyen wyth the nether haste gone asyde, and defyled thy selfe behynd thy husbande, then haue thou no harme of thys bytter cursyng water.
Numbers 5:20 But and yf thou hast gone asyde behynde thyne husband and art defyled & some other man hath lyen with the besyde thyne husband
Numbers 5:21 (and let the preast coniure her wyth the coniuracion of the curse & say vnto her) the Lord make the a curse and a coniuracion amonge thy people: so that the Lord make thy thygh rotte, and thy bely swel
Numbers 5:22 in this bitter cursing water goo in to the bowels of the, that thy bely swel and thy thygh rotte, and the wyfe shal say Amen Amen.
Numbers 5:23 And the preast shal wrytte thys curse in a byl and washe it out in the bitter water.
Numbers 5:24 And when the cursynge water is in her that it is bytter,
Numbers 5:25 then let the preast take the ielousyeofferyng out of the wyfes hand, & waue it before the Lord, and bring it vnto the alter:
Numbers 5:26 and he shal take an handeful of the memorial offeryng and burne it vpon the alter, and then make her drynke the water
Numbers 5:27 and when he hath made her drynke the water. If she be defyled and haue trespased agaynst her husband, then shal the cursyng water go in to her and be so bytter, that her bely shal swell and her thygh shall rotte, & she shalbe a curse among her people.
Numbers 5:28 And yf she be not defyled but is cleane, then she shal haue no harme, but that she may conceyue.
Numbers 5:29 This is the lawe of ielousye, when a wife goeth asyde behynde her husband and is defyled,
Numbers 5:30 or when the spirite of ielousye cometh vpon a man, so that he is ielouse ouer hys wyfe then he shal bryng her before the Lorde, and the Preast shall ministre all thys lawe vnto her,
Numbers 5:31 and the man shalbe giltlesse, and the wyfe shal beare her synne.

CHAPTER: 6

Numbers 6:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Numbers 6:2 speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and say vnto them: when ether man or woman appoynteth to vowe a vowe of abstinence for to abstein vnto the Lord,
Numbers 6:3 he shall absteyne from wyne & stronge drynke, and shall dryncke no vynagre of wyne or of stronge drynke, nor shal drynke whatsoeuer is pressed out of grapes: & shall eate no fresh grapes nether yet dryed as long as hys abstynence endureth.
Numbers 6:4 Moreouer he shal eate nothyng that is made of the vyne tre no not so moch as the cornels or the huske of the grape.
Numbers 6:5 And as longe as the vowe of his abstynence endureth, there shall no rasure nor sheres come vpon hys heed, vntyl his dayes be out which he fasteth vnto the Lord, and he shalbe holy and shall let the lockes of hys hayre growe.
Numbers 6:6 As long as he absteyneth vnto the Lord he shall come at no dead bodye:
Numbers 6:7 he shall not make hym selfe vncleane at the death of hys father, mother, brother or syster: for the abstynence of hys God is vpon hys head.
Numbers 6:8 And therfore as longe as hys abstynence lasteth, he shalbe holy vnto the Lord.
Numbers 6:9 And yf it fortune that any man by chaunce dye sodenly before him, and defile the heed of hys abstynence, then must he shaue his head the day of his clensyng: euen the seuenth day he shall shaue it.
Numbers 6:10 And the eyght daye he shall brynge .ij. turtels or .ij. younge pigeons to the preast, vnto the dore of the tabernacle of witnesse.
Numbers 6:11 And the preast shall offer the one for a synofferyng & the other for a burntofferyng & make an atoment for him, as concernynge that he synned vpon the dead, and shall also halowe his head the same daye
Numbers 6:12 & he shall absteyne vnto the Lorde the tyme of hys abstinencye, and shall brynge a lambe of an yere old for a trespaceofferynge: but the dayes that were before are lost, because hys abstinencie was defyled.
Numbers 6:13 Thys is the lawe of the absteyner, when the tyme of hys abstynence is out he shalbe brought vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse
Numbers 6:14 & he shal bryng his offeryng vnto the Lorde: an he lambe of a yere old wyth out blemyshe for a burntofferynge & a she lambe of a yere old without blemysh for a synofferynge, a ram without blemysh also for a peaceofferynge,
Numbers 6:15 and a basket of swete bread of fyne floure myngled with oyle and wafers of swete bread anointed with oyle wt meatofferynges and drynkofferynges that longe thereto.
Numbers 6:16 And the preast shal brynge him before the Lord and offer his synofferyng & hys burntofferyng,
Numbers 6:17 and shal offer that ram for a peace offeryng vnto the Lorde wyth the basked of swete bread, and the preast shal offer also hys meatofferyng and hys drynckofferyng.
Numbers 6:18 And the absteyner shal shaue his head in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse and shal take the heare of his sober head & put it in that fyre whych is vnder the peaceoffering.
Numbers 6:19 Then the preast shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram and one swete cake out of the basket and one swete wafer also & put them in the hande of the absteyner after he hath shauen his abstinence of,
Numbers 6:20 and the preast shall waue them vnto the Lord, whych offering shalbe wholy vnto the preast with the wauebrest and heue shoulder: and then the absteiner may drynke wyne.
Numbers 6:21 This is the law of the absteyner whiche hath vowed hys offeryng vnto the Lord for hys abstynence, besydes that hys hande can gett. And accordyng to the vowe whych he vowed, euen so he must do in the lawe of hys abstynence.
Numbers 6:22 And the Lord talked wyth Moses saying
Numbers 6:23 speake vnto Aaron and hys sonnes sayinge: of thys wyse ye shal blesse the chyldren of Israel saying vnto them:
Numbers 6:24 The Lord blesse the and kepe the.
Numbers 6:25 The Lord make his face shyne vpon the and be mercyfull vnto the.
Numbers 6:26 The Lord lyfte vp his countenaunce vpon the, and geue the peace.
Numbers 6:27 For ye shall put my name vpon the chyldren of Israel, that I maye blesse them.

CHAPTER: 7

Numbers 7:1 And when Moyses had ful set vp the habytacyon and anoynted it and sanctified it and al the apparell thereof, and had anointed and sanctyfyed the alter also and all the vessels ther of:
Numbers 7:2 then the prynces of Israell heades ouer the houses of their fathers whyche were the Lordes of the tribes that stode and numbred,
Numbers 7:3 offered and broughte theyr gyftes before the Lorde sixe couered charettes & .xii. oxen: two and two a charette and an oxe euery manne, and they broughte them before the habytation,
Numbers 7:4 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saynge
Numbers 7:5 take it of them & let them be to do the seruyce of the tabernacle of wytnesse, and geue them vnto the Leuites, euery man acordyng vnto his office
Numbers 7:6 And Moses toke the charetes and the oxen, gaue them vnto the Leuytes
Numbers 7:7 .ij. charettes and .iiij. oxen he gaue vnto the sonnes of Gerson acordynge vnto theyr office.
Numbers 7:8 And .iiij. charetes and eyght oxen he gaue vnto the sonne of Merari accordynge vnto theyr offices, vnder the handes of Ithamar the sonne of Aaron the preaste.
Numbers 7:9 But vnto the sonnes of Cahath he gaue none, for the offyce that perteyned to them was holy, & therfore they must beare vpon shoulders.
Numbers 7:10 And the princes offered vnto the dedycatyng of the alter in the daye that it was anoynted, and brought their giftes before the alter.
Numbers 7:11 And the Lord saye vnto Moses: let the princes brynge theyr offerynges, euery daye one prince, vnto the dedicatyng of the alter.
Numbers 7:12 He that offered his offering the fyrst day, was Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab of the trybe of Iuda.
Numbers 7:13 And hys offeryng was: a syluer charger, of an hundred and .xxx. sycles weyght: & a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles of the holy sicle, both of them ful of fyne wheten floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
Numbers 7:14 & a spone of .x. sycles of golde ful of cens:
Numbers 7:15 & a bullock, a ram and a lambe of a yere olde for burntofferynges,
Numbers 7:16 & an he goote for a synofferynge:
Numbers 7:17 and for peaceofferynges .ij. oxen .v. rammes .v. he gootes and .v. lambes of a yere olde: and this was the gyfte of Nahesson the sonne of Aminadab.
Numbers 7:18 The seconde day, dyd Nathanael offer, the sonne of Zuar, captayne ouer Izachar.
Numbers 7:19 And hys offeryng whych he broughte was a syluer charger of an hundred and .xxx. sycles weyght: and a siluer boule of .lxx. sycles of the holy sicle: & both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
Numbers 7:20 and a golden spone of .x. sycles, full of cens.
Numbers 7:21 And a bullock, a ram and a lambe of a yere olde for burntofferynges,
Numbers 7:22 n/a
Numbers 7:23 and for peaceofferynges .ij. oxen .v. rammes, fyue he gootes and fyue lambes of one yere olde. And thys was the offeryng of Nathanael the sonne of Zuar.
Numbers 7:24 The thyrde daye, Eliab the sonne of Helon the chefest among the chyldren of Zabulon, brought hys offerynge.
Numbers 7:25 And hys offerynge was, a siluer charger of an hundred and .xxx. sicles weyghte, and a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles of the holy sicle, & both ful of fine floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferyng:
Numbers 7:26 and a golden spone of .x. sicles full of cens:
Numbers 7:27 and an oxe and a ram and a lambe of a yere olde for burntofferynges,
Numbers 7:28 and an he goote for a synofferyng:
Numbers 7:29 and for peaceofferynges .ij. oxen .v. rammes .v. he gootes and .v. lambes of one yere olde. And this was the offeryng of Eliab the sonne of Helon.
Numbers 7:30 The fourth day, Elizur the sonne of Sedeur, chefe Lord among the chyldren of Ruben broughte his offerynge.
Numbers 7:31 And his gyfte was: a siluer charger of an hundred and .xxx. sycles weyght, and a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles of the holy sycle, & both ful of fyne flour myngled with oyle for a meatofferyng:
Numbers 7:32 and a golden spone of .x. sycles full of cens:
Numbers 7:33 and a bullock, a ram & a lambe of a yere olde for burntofferynges,
Numbers 7:34 & an he goote for a synofferynge:
Numbers 7:35 and for peaceofferynges .ij. oxen .v. rammes .v. he gootes and .v. lambes. of one yere olde. And thys was the offerynge of Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
Numbers 7:36 The fyfth day, Selumiel the sonne of Zuri Sadai, chefe Lord among the chyldren of Symeon, offred,
Numbers 7:37 whose gyfte was: a syluer charger of an hundred & .xxx. sycles weyght: and a syluer boule of .lxx. sicles of the holy sycle: & both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferyng:
Numbers 7:38 & a golden spone of .x. sycles ful of cens.
Numbers 7:39 And a bullock, a ram & a lambe of a yere old for burntoffrynges,
Numbers 7:40 & an he goote for a synofferyng:
Numbers 7:41 and for peaceofferynges .ij. oxen .v. rammes .v. he gootes & .v. lambes of a yere old. And this was the offeryng of Selumiel the sonne of Suri Saday.
Numbers 7:42 The sixte day, Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel the chefe Lord amonge the chyldren of Gad, offered:
Numbers 7:43 whose gifte was, a syluer charger of an hundred and .xxx. sycles weyghte: and a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles of the holye sycle: & both ful of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferyng:
Numbers 7:44 and a golden spone of .x. sycles ful of cens.
Numbers 7:45 And an oxe, a ram & a lambe of a yere olde for burntofferinges,
Numbers 7:46 & an he goote for a synoffering.
Numbers 7:47 And for peaceofferynges two oxen .v. rammes .v. he gootes & .v. lambes of one yere olde. And this was the offerynge of Eliasaph the sonne of Deguel.
Numbers 7:48 The seuenth daye, Elisama the sonne of Amiud, the chefe Lord of the children of Ephraim, offered.
Numbers 7:49 And his gifte was: a syluer charger of an hundred and .xxx. sycles weyght: & a syluer boule of .lxx. sicles of the holy sicle: & both ful of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferyng:
Numbers 7:50 and a golden spone of .x. sicles, full of cens.
Numbers 7:51 And a bullock, a ram & a lambe of a yere olde for burntofferynges,
Numbers 7:52 & an he goote for a synofferyng:
Numbers 7:53 and for peaceofferinges .ij. oxen .v. rammes .v. he gootes & .v. lambes of a yere olde. And this was the offeryng of Elisama the sonne of Amiud.
Numbers 7:54 The .viij. daye, offered Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur, the chefe Lord of the chyldren of Manasse.
Numbers 7:55 And hys gyfte was: a syluer charger of an hundred & .xxx. sycles weyght: and a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles of the holy sicle: & both ful of fyne floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferyng:
Numbers 7:56 and a golden spone of .x. sycles, full of cens.
Numbers 7:57 And a bullock, a ram and a lambe of a yere olde for burntofferynges,
Numbers 7:58 and an he goote for a synofferynge:
Numbers 7:59 & for peaceofferynges two oxen .v. rammes, fyue he gootes and fyue lambes of a yere olde. And thys was the offeryng of Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
Numbers 7:60 The .ix. daye, Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni the chefe lord among the children of Beniamin offered.
Numbers 7:61 And hys gyfte was: a siluer charger of an hundred and .xxx. sycles weyght: and a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles, of the holy sicle, & both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferyng:
Numbers 7:62 and a golden spone of .x. sycles, full of cens:
Numbers 7:63 and a bullock, a ram and a lambe of one yere olde for burntofferynges:
Numbers 7:64 and an he goote for a synofferyng:
Numbers 7:65 & for peaceofferynges two oxen .v. rammes .v. he gootes and .v. lambes of one yere olde. And thys was the offerynge of Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni.
Numbers 7:66 The .x. daye, Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi, Sadai, chefe Lorde among that chyldren of Dan offered.
Numbers 7:67 And hys gyfte was: a syluer charger of an hundred & .xxx. sycles weight: a syluer boule of seuentye sycles of the holy sycle: and both full of fyue floure myngled with oyle for a meatofferynge:
Numbers 7:68 and a golden spone of .x. sycles ful of cens:
Numbers 7:69 and a bullock, a rame and a lambe of a yere olde for burntofferynges,
Numbers 7:70 & an he goote for a synofferynge:
Numbers 7:71 and for peaceofferynges two oxen .v. rammes, fyue he gootes & fyue lambes of a yere olde. And thys was the offryng of Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Sadai.
Numbers 7:72 The .xi. daye, Pagiel the sonne of Ocran the chefe Lorde amonge the chyldren of Aser offered.
Numbers 7:73 And hys gifte was: a siluer charger of an hundred and .xxx. sycles weyghte: a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles of the holye sycle and both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meateofferynge:
Numbers 7:74 and a golden spone of .x. sycles, ful of cens.
Numbers 7:75 And a bullock, a ram and a lambe of one yere olde for burntofferynges
Numbers 7:76 and an he goote for a synneoffering:
Numbers 7:77 and for peaceofferinges: two oxen, fyue rammes .v. he gootes and .v. lambes of one yere olde. And thys was the offeryng of Pagiell the sonne of Ocran.
Numbers 7:78 The .xij. daye, Ahira the sonne of Enan, chefe Lord among the chyldren of Nephthali offered.
Numbers 7:79 And his gyfte was: a syluer charger of an hundred & .xxx. sycles weyght: a syluer boule of .lxx. sycles of the holye sycle, both full of fyne floure myngled wyth oyle for a meatofferynge:
Numbers 7:80 & a golden spone of twentye sycles, ful of cens.
Numbers 7:81 And a bullock, a ram and a lambe of one yere olde for burntofferinges
Numbers 7:82 and an he goote for a synneofferyng:
Numbers 7:83 and for peaceofferynges, two oxen .v. rammes .v. he gootes and .v. lambes of one yere olde. And thys was the offerynge of Ahira, the sonne of Enan.
Numbers 7:84 Of thys maner was the dedicacyon of the alter, when it was anoynted: vnto the whyche was broughte of the prynces of Israell .xij. chargers of syluer .xij. syluer boules and .xij. spones of golde:
Numbers 7:85 euery charger contaynynge an hundred and .xxx. sycles of syluer, & euery boule .lxx. so that al the syluer of all the vessels, was twoo thousande and .iiij. hundred sycles of the holy sycle.
Numbers 7:86 And the .xij. golden spones whych were full of cens, contayned ten sycles a pece of the holy sycle: so that all the golde of the spones, was an hundred and .xx. sycles.
Numbers 7:87 All the oxen that were broughte for the burntofferynges were .xij. and the rammes .xij. & the lambes .xij. of a yere old a pece, wyth the meateofferynges: wyth he gootes for synneofferynges.
Numbers 7:88 And al the oxen of the peaceofferynges were .xxiiij. the rammes .lx. the gootes .lx. and lambes of a yere olde a pece .lx. & thys was the dedicacyon of the alter, after that it was anoynted.
Numbers 7:89 And when Moses was gone in to the tabernacle of wytnesse to speke with hym, he harde the voyce of one speakyng vnto him from of the mercyseate that was vpon the arck of wytnesse: euen from betwene the two cherubyns he spake vnto hym.

CHAPTER: 8

Numbers 8:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Numbers 8:2 speake vnto Aaron and say vnto him: when thou puttest on the lampes se that they lyght al seuen vpon the forefront of the candelstyck.
Numbers 8:3 And Aaron did euen so, and put the lampes vpon the forefront of the candelstycke, as the Lord commaunded Moses,
Numbers 8:4 & the worke of the candelstyck was of styffe golde: both the shaft and the floures therof. And accordyng vnto the visyon whyche the Lord had shewed Moses euen so he made the candelstyck.
Numbers 8:5 And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Numbers 8:6 take the Leuites from amonge the chyldren of Israel, and cleanse them.
Numbers 8:7 And this do vnto them when thou cleansest them, sprynkle water of purifyenge vpon them and make a rasure to runne alonge vpon all the fleshe of them, and let them washe theyr clothes, and then they shal be cleane.
Numbers 8:8 And let them take a bullocke and hys meatofferyng, fyne floure myngled with oyle: & another bullocke shalt thou take to be a synneofferyng.
Numbers 8:9 Then bryng the Leuites before the tabernacle of wytnesse and gether the whole multitude of the chyldren of Israel together.
Numbers 8:10 And bryng the Leuites before the Lorde, and let the chyldren of Israell put their handes vpon the Leuites.
Numbers 8:11 And let Aaron heaue the Leuites before the Lorde, for an heaueofferynge geuen of the chyldren of Israel, and then let them be appoynted to wayte vpon the seruyce of the Lorde.
Numbers 8:12 And let the Leuytes put theyr handes vpon the heades of the bullockes, & then offer them: the one for a synneofferyng and the other for a burntofferyng vnto the Lorde, to make an attonement for the Leuites.
Numbers 8:13 And make the Leuites stande before Aaron and hys sonnes, & heaue them to be an heaueofferyng vnto the Lorde.
Numbers 8:14 And thou shalt separate the Leuites from among the chyldren of Israel, that they be myne:
Numbers 8:15 and after that let them goo and do the seruice of the tabernacle of wytnesse. Cleanse them & waue them,
Numbers 8:16 for they are geuen vnto me from among the chyldren of Israel for I haue taken them vnto me for all the fyrst borne that open any matryce amonge the chyldren of Israel.
Numbers 8:17 For al the fyrstborne among the children of Israel are myne both man & beast: because the same tyme that I smote the fyrstborne in the lande of Egypte, I sanctyfyed them for my selfe:
Numbers 8:18 and I haue taken the Leuites for al the fyrstborne among the chyldren of Israell,
Numbers 8:19 and haue geuen them vnto Aaron and hys sonnes from amonge the chyldren of Israel to do the seruyce of the chyldren of Israell in the tabernacle of witnesse and to make an attonement for the chyldren of Israell, that there be no plage among the chyldren of Israel, yf they come nye vnto the sanctuary.
Numbers 8:20 And Moses and Aaron and all the congregacyon of the chyldren of Israel did vnto the Leuytes accordynge vnto all that the Lord commaunded Moses.
Numbers 8:21 And the Leuites puryfyed them selues, and washed their clothes. And Aaron waued them before the Lord, and made an attonement for them to cleanse them.
Numbers 8:22 And after that they went in, to do theyr seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnesse, before Aaron & hys sonnes. And acordyng as the Lord had commaunded Moses as concernyng the Leuites, euen so they dyd vnto them.
Numbers 8:23 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 8:24 thys shalbe the maner of the Leuites: from .xxv. yere vpwarde they shall go in to wayte vpon the seruice in the tabernacle of witnesse,
Numbers 8:25 & at fyfty they shal ceasse waytyng vpon the seruyce therof, and shall laboure no moare:
Numbers 8:26 but shal mynistre vnto their bretheren in the tabernacle of wytnesse, and there wayte, but shall do no moare seruyce. And se that thou do after thys maner vnto the Leuites in their waytyng tymes.

CHAPTER: 9

Numbers 9:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses in the wildernesse of Sinai, in the fyrste moneth of the seconde yere after they: were come out of the lande of Egypt sayinge:
Numbers 9:2 let the chyldren of Israell offre Passeouer in hys season:
Numbers 9:3 euen the .xiiij. daye of thys moneth at euen, they shall kepe it in hys season, accordynge to all the ordinaunces and maners therof.
Numbers 9:4 And Moses bad the chyldren of Israell that they shoulde offer Passeouer,
Numbers 9:5 and they offered Passeouer the .xiiij. daye of the fyrst moneth at euen in the wyldernesse of Sinai: and dyd accordynge to all that the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Numbers 9:6 And it chaunced that certayne men whych were defyled wt a dead corse that they might not offer Passeouer the same daye, came before Moses and Aaron the same tyme,
Numbers 9:7 and sayde: We are defyled vpon a dead corsse, wherfore are we kepte backe that we maye not offer an offerynge vnto the Lorde in the due season, amonge the chyldren of Israell?
Numbers 9:8 And Moses sayde vnto them: tary, that I may here what the Lorde wylle commaunde you.
Numbers 9:9 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 9:10 speake vnto the chyldren of Israell and saye. If any man amonge you or youre children after you be vncleane by the reason of a corse or is in the waye ferre of, then lett hym offer Passeouer vnto the Lorde:
Numbers 9:11 the .xiiij. day of the seconde moneth at euen, and eate it wyth swete bread and soure herbes,
Numbers 9:12 & let them leaue none of it vnto the mornynge nor breake any boone of it. And accordynge to all the ordinaunce of the Passeouer let them offer it.
Numbers 9:13 But yf a man be cleane & not let in a iourney, and yet was neglygent to offer Passeouer the same soule shall perysh from hys people, because he brought not an offerynge vnto the Lorde in his due season: and he shal bere hys synne.
Numbers 9:14 And when a straunger dwelleth amonge you and wyll offer Passeouer vnto the Lord accordynge to the ordinaunce of Passeouer and maner therof shal he offre it. And ye shall haue one lawe both for the straunger & for him that was borne at home in the land.
Numbers 9:15 And the same day that the habitacion was reared vp, a cloude couered it an hye vpon the tabernacle of witnesse: and at euen there was vpon the habitacion, as it were the symilitude of fyre vntyll the mornyng.
Numbers 9:16 And so it was allway, that the cloude couered it by day, and the symylitude of fyre by nyght.
Numbers 9:17 And when the cloude was taken vp from of the tabernacle, then the chyldren of Israell iourneyed: and where the cloud abode there the chyldren of Israell pitched theyr tentes.
Numbers 9:18 At the mouthe of the Lorde the chyldren of Israel iourneyed, and at the mouth of the Lorde they pitched. And as long as the cloude abode vpon the habitacion, they lay styl.
Numbers 9:19 and when the cloude taryed styll vpon the habitacyon longe tyme, the chyldren of Israell wayted vpon the Lord and iourneyed not.
Numbers 9:20 If it chaunced that the cloude abode any space of tyme vpon the habitacion, then they kepte their tentes at the mouth of the Lord: and they iourneyed also at the commaundement of the Lord.
Numbers 9:21 And yf it happened that the cloude was vpon the habitacion from euen vnto mornynge and was taken vp in the mornynge then they iourneyed. Whether it was by daye or by nyght that the cloude was taken vp, they iourneyed.
Numbers 9:22 But when the cloude taryed two dayes or a moneth or a long season vpon the habitacion, as longe as it taryed theron, the chyldren of Israell kepte theyr tentes and iourneied not. And as soone as the cloude was taken vp, they iourneied.
Numbers 9:23 At the mouth of the Lord they reastyd, & at the commaundement of the Lord they iourneyed. And thus they kepte the watche of the Lord, at the commaundement of the Lorde by the hande of Moses.

CHAPTER: 10

Numbers 10:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 10:2 Make the two trompettes of beaten syluer, that thou mayst vse them to call the congregacion together, & when the hoste shal iourney.
Numbers 10:3 When they blowe wt them, al the multitude shal resorte to the, vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 10:4 If but one trumpet blowe onlye, then the princes which are heades ouer the thousandes of Israel shal come vnto the.
Numbers 10:5 And when ye trompe the fyrst tyme, the hostes that lye on the east partes shal go forward.
Numbers 10:6 And when ye trompe the seconde tyme, then the hostes that lye on the south syde shal take their iourney: for they shal trompe when they take their iourneyes.
Numbers 10:7 And in getheryng the congregacion together, ye shall blowe and not trompe.
Numbers 10:8 And the sonnes of Aaron the preastes shal blowe the trompettes & shal haue them and it shalbe a lawe vnto you for euer and amonge youre chyldren after you.
Numbers 10:9 And when ye shall go to warre in youre lande agaynst your enemyes that wexe you, ye shall trompe with the trompettes and ye shalbe remembred before the Lord your God and saued from youre enemyes.
Numbers 10:10 Also when ye be mery in your feast dayes and in the fyrst dayes of your monethes, ye shall blowe the trompettes ouer your burnt sacryfyces and peaceofferynges, that it maye be a remembraunce of you before your GOD. I am the Lord youre God.
Numbers 10:11 And it came to passe the .xx. daye of the seconde moneth in the seconde yere, that the cloude was take vp from of the habitacion of witnesse.
Numbers 10:12 And the chyldren of Israel toke their iourney out of the deserte of Sinai, and the cloude rested in the wyldernesse of Pharan.
Numbers 10:13 And they fyrst toke their iourney at the mouth of the Lord, by the hand of Moses:
Numbers 10:14 euen the standerte of the hoste of Iuda remoued first with their armyes whose captayne was Nahason the sonne of Aminadab.
Numbers 10:15 And ouer the hoste of the trybe of the chyldren of Isachar was Nathanael the sonne of Zuar.
Numbers 10:16 And ouer the hoste of the trybe of the chyldren of Zabulon, was Eliab the sonne of Helon.
Numbers 10:17 And the habitacion was taken doune: and the sonnes of Gerson and Merari went forth bearinge the habitacion.
Numbers 10:18 Then the standert of the hoste of Ruben went forth wyth theyr armyes, whose captayne Elizur the sonne of Sedeur.
Numbers 10:19 And ouer the host of the trybe of the chyldren of Simeon, was Salamiel the sonne of Surisaddai.
Numbers 10:20 And ouer the hoste of the trybe of the chyldren of Gad was Eliasoph the sonne of Deguel.
Numbers 10:21 Then the Cahathites went forward and bare the holy thynges, and the other dyd set vp the habitacion agaynst they came.
Numbers 10:22 Then the standert of the hoste of the chyldren of Ephraim went forth wt their armies whose captayne was Elisama the sonne of Amiud.
Numbers 10:23 And ouer the hoste of the trybe of the sonnes of Manasse, was Gamaliel the sonne of Pedazur.
Numbers 10:24 And ouer the hoste of the trybe of the sonnes of Beniamin, was Abidan the sonne of Gedeoni.
Numbers 10:25 And hyndmost of al the hoste came the standert of the hoste of the chyldren of Dan wyth theyr armyes: whose captayne was, Ahiezer the sonne of Ammi Saddai.
Numbers 10:26 And ouer the hoste of the trybe of the chyldren of Aser, was Pagiell the sonne of Ochran.
Numbers 10:27 And ouer the hoste of the trybe of the chyldren of Nephthali, was Ahira the sonne of Enan,
Numbers 10:28 of thys maner were the iourneies of the children of Israel, with theyr armyes when they remoued.
Numbers 10:29 And Moses said vnto Hobab the sonne of Raguell the Madianyte, Moses father in lawe: we goo vnto the place of whych the Lord sayd I wyll geue it you. Go with vs & we wyl doo the good, for the Lord hath promysed good vnto Israell.
Numbers 10:30 And he sayd vnto hym: I wyl not: but wyll go to myne awne land and to my kynred.
Numbers 10:31 And Moses sayd oh nay, leaue vs not, for thou knowest where is best for vs to pitch in the wildernesse: & thou shalt be oure eyes.
Numbers 10:32 And yf thou go with vs, loke what goodnesse the Lord sheweth vpon vs, the same we wyl shewe vpon the.
Numbers 10:33 And they departed from the mounte of the Lord .iij. dayes iourney, and the arcke of the testament of the Lorde went before them in the .iij. dayes iourney to serche out a resting place for them.
Numbers 10:34 And the cloude of the Lorde was ouer them by day, when they went out of the tentes.
Numbers 10:35 And when the arcke went forth, Moses sayde: Ryse vp Lorde and let thyne enemies be scatered, and let them that hate the flee before the.
Numbers 10:36 And when the arcke rested, he sayde retourne Lorde vnto the many thousandes of Israell.

CHAPTER: 11

Numbers 11:1 And the people complayned & it displeased the eares of the Lorde. And when the lord heard it he was wroth, and the fyre of the Lorde burnt amonge them and consumed the vttermost of the hoste.
Numbers 11:2 And the people cryed vnto Moses, and he made intercessyon vnto the Lord & the fyre quenched.
Numbers 11:3 And they called the name of the place Thaberah because the fyre of the Lord burnt among them.
Numbers 11:4 And the rascall people that was amonge them fell a lustynge. And the chyldren of Israel also went to and wepte and sayde: who shal geue vs flesh to eate?
Numbers 11:5 we remembre the fysh whych we should eate in Egypt for noughte and of the Cucumbers and melouns, lekes, onyouns and garleke.
Numbers 11:6 But now oure soules ar dryed a waye, for oure eyes loke on nothyng els, saue vpon Manna.
Numbers 11:7 The Manna was as it had bene coriander seed, and to se to lyke Bedellion.
Numbers 11:8 And the people went aboute and gathered it, & grounde it in milles or bet it in morters and baked it in pannes and made kakes of it. And the tast of it was lyke vnto the tast of an oyle kake.
Numbers 11:9 And when the dewe fell aboute the hoste in the nyghte, the Manna fel therwith.
Numbers 11:10 And when Moses herde the people wepe in their housholdes euery man in the dore of his tent, then the wrath of the Lorde waxed whott excedynglye: & it greued Moses also.
Numbers 11:11 And Moses sayde vnto the Lorde: wherfore dealest thou so cruelly wyth thy seruaunte? wherfore do I not fynde fauoure in thi sight seynge that thou puttest the weyght of thys people vpon me?
Numbers 11:12 haue I conceyued all thys people, or haue I begotte them, that thou shouldest saye vnto me, carye them in thy bosome (as a nurse beareth the suckyng chyld) vnto the land whych thou swarest vnto their fathers?
Numbers 11:13 where shoulde I haue flesh to geue vnto al this people? For they wepe vnto me sayinge: geue vs fleshe that we maye eate.
Numbers 11:14 I am not able to bere all this people alone, for it is to heuy for me.
Numbers 11:15 Wherfore yf thou deale thus with me, kyl me, I pray the, If I haue found fauoure in thy syght and let me not se my wrechednesse.
Numbers 11:16 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: gether vnto me .lxx. of the elders of Israel, which thou knowest that they are the elders of the people and offycers ouer them, & brynge them vnto the tabernacle of wytnesse, and let them stande there with the.
Numbers 11:17 And I wil come doune and talke wyth the there, and take of the spirite which is vpon the and put vpon the and vpon them and they shall bere wyth the in burthen of the people, and so shalt thou not beare alone.
Numbers 11:18 And say vnto the people: halowe your selues against to morow that ye may eate flesh for ye haue whyned in the eares of the Lord saying: who shal geue vs flesh to eate, for we were happye when we were in Egypt? therfore the Lord wil geue you flesh, and ye shal eate:
Numbers 11:19 Ye shall not eate one daye onlye ether two or fyue dayes, ether .x. or .xx. dayes:
Numbers 11:20 but euen a moneth longe, and vntyl it come oute at the nostrels of you, that ye be ready to parbrake: because that ye haue cast that Lorde asyde whyche is among you, and haue wepte before hym sayinge: why came we oute of Egypte.
Numbers 11:21 And Moses saide: syxe hundred thousand fotemen are there of the people, among whiche I am. And thou hast sayde: I wyll geue them flesh and they shall eate a moneth longe.
Numbers 11:22 Shal the shepe and the oxen be slayne for them to fynde them, ether shal al the fysh of the sea be gathered together to serue them?
Numbers 11:23 And the Lord sayd vnto Moses: is the Lordes hande waxed shorte. Thou shalt se whether my worde shall come to passe vnto the or not.
Numbers 11:24 And Moses went out and tolde the people the saying of the Lorde, and gethered the .lxx. elders of the people, and set them round aboute the tabernacle.
Numbers 11:25 And the Lorde came doune in a cloude & spake vnto him, and toke of the sprete that was vpon him, and put it vpon the .lxx. elders. And as the spirite rested vpon them, they prophecied & dyd nought els.
Numbers 11:26 But there remayneth .ij. of the men in the host: the one called Eldad, & the other Medad And the spirite rested vpon them for they were of them that were wrytten, but they went not out vnto the tabernacle: and they prophecyed in the hoste.
Numbers 11:27 And there ran a younge man & told Moses and saied: Eldad & Medad do prophecye in the hoste.
Numbers 11:28 And Iosua the sonne of Nun the seruaunte of Moses which he had chosen out answered and sayed: master Moses, forbyd them.
Numbers 11:29 And Moses sayed vnto hym: enuyest thou for my sake? wold God that al the Lordes people coulde prophecye, & that the lord wolde put his spyrite vpon them.
Numbers 11:30 And then both Moses & the elders of Israel, gat them into the hoste.
Numbers 11:31 And there went forth a wynde from the Lord and brought quayles from the sea and let them fal about the hoste, euen a daies iourney rounde about on euery syde of the hoste and .ij. cubites hye vpon the erth.
Numbers 11:32 And the people stode vp all that day and all that nyghte and on the morow, & gethered quayles. And he that gethered the lest, gethered .x. homers full. And they kylled them rounde aboute the hoste.
Numbers 11:33 And whyle the flesh was yet betwene their teeth, yeare it was chewed vp, the wrath of the Lord waxed whott vpon the people, and the Lord slewe of the people an exceading mightye slaughter.
Numbers 11:34 And they called the name of the place kibrath hathauah: because thei buried the people that lusted there.
Numbers 11:35 And the people toke theyr iourney from kibrath hathauah vnto hazeroth, and bode at hazeroth.

CHAPTER: 12

Numbers 12:1 And Myriam & Aaron spake agaynst Moses, because of hys wyfe of Inde which he had taken: for he had taken to wife one of Inde.
Numbers 12:2 And they sayde doth the Lorde speake only thorowe Moses? doth he not speake also by vs? And the Lorde hearde it.
Numbers 12:3 But Moses was a very make man aboue al the men of the erth.
Numbers 12:4 And the lord spake attonce vnto Moses vnto Aaron and Miriam: come out ye .iij. vnto the tabernacle of wytnesse: and they came out al thre.
Numbers 12:5 And the Lord came doune in the piller of the cloude and stode in the dore of the tabernacle & called Aaron and Myriam. And they went out both of them.
Numbers 12:6 And he sayed heare my wordes If there be a prophet of the Lordes among you, I wyl shewe my selfe vnto him in a visyon & wyll speake vnto hym in a dreame.
Numbers 12:7 But my seruaunt Moses is not so, which is faithful in al mine house.
Numbers 12:8 Vnto him I speake mouth to mouth and he seith the syght & the facion of the Lord, & not thorowe rydels. Wherfore then were ye not afraied to speake agaynst my seruaunt Moses?
Numbers 12:9 And the Lord was angrye with them and went his way,
Numbers 12:10 and the cloud departed from of the tabernacle. And beholde, MyrIam was become leprous, as it were snowe. And when Aaron loked vpon MirIam and saw that she was leprous,
Numbers 12:11 he sayde vnto Moses: Oh I beseche the my Lord, put not the synne vpon vs which we haue folishly committed and synned.
Numbers 12:12 Oh, let her not be as one that came dead out of hys mothers wombe: for halfe her flesh is eaten away.
Numbers 12:13 And Moses cryed vnto the Lord sayinge: Oh God, heale her.
Numbers 12:14 And the Lord sayd vnto Moses: If her father had spitte in her face should she not be ashamed .vii. dayes, let her be shutte out of the hoste .vij. dayes, and after that let her be receyued in agayne.
Numbers 12:15 And MirIam was shut out of the hoste .vij. dayes and the people remoued not, tyll she was broughte in agayne.
Numbers 12:16 And afterward they remoued from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wyldernesse of Pharan.

CHAPTER: 13

Numbers 13:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 13:2 Sende men out to serche the lande of Canaan, whyche I geue vnto the chyldren of Israel: of euery trybe of their fathers a man and let them all be soche as are ruelars among them.
Numbers 13:3 And Moses at the commaundement of the Lorde sent forth out of the wyldernesse of Pharan: soche men as were all heades among the chyldren of Israell, whose names are these.
Numbers 13:4 In the trybe of Ruben, Sammua the sonne of Zacur:
Numbers 13:5 In the trybe of Symeon, Saphat the sonne of Hori.
Numbers 13:6 In the trybe of Iuda Caleph the sonne of Iephune.
Numbers 13:7 In the trybe of Isachar, Igeal the sonne of Ioseph.
Numbers 13:8 In the trybe of Ephraim, Hosea the sonne of Nun.
Numbers 13:9 In the trybe of Beniamin, Palthy the sonne of Raphu.
Numbers 13:10 In the trybe of Zabulon, Gadiel the sonne of Sodi.
Numbers 13:11 In the trybe of Ioseph: that was of Manasse, Gaddi the sonne of Susi.
Numbers 13:12 In the trybe of Dan, Amiel the sonne of Gemali.
Numbers 13:13 In the trybe of Aser, Sethur the sonne of Micheel.
Numbers 13:14 In the trybe of Nephthali Nahebi the sonne of Vaphsi.
Numbers 13:15 In the trybe of Gad, Guel the sonne of Machi.
Numbers 13:16 These are the names of the men whych Moses sent to spye out the lande. And Moses called the name of Hosea the sonne of Nun, Iosua.
Numbers 13:17 And Moses sent them forth to spye out the land of Canaan, & sayd vnto them: gett you southward and go vp in to the hye contrey,
Numbers 13:18 and se the lande what maner thyng it is and the people that dwelleth therin: whether they be strong or weake, ether fewe or many,
Numbers 13:19 and what the lande is that they dwel in whether it be good or bad, and what maner of cyties they dwel in whether they dwel in tentes or walled townes,
Numbers 13:20 and what maner of lande it is: whether it be fatt or leane, and whether there be trees therin or not. And be of a good courage, and brynge of the frutes of the land. And it was aboute the tyme that grapes are fyrst rype.
Numbers 13:21 And they went vp & searched out the land from the wyldernesse of Zin vnto Rehob, as men go to Hemath,
Numbers 13:22 & they ascended vnto the south & came vnto Hebron, where Ahiman was & Sesai and Thalmani the sonnes of Enacke. Hebron was bylt .vij. yere before Zoan in Egypt.
Numbers 13:23 And they came vnto the riuer of Escol & they cut doune there a braunch wt one clouster of grapes & bare it vpon a staffe betwene twayne, and also of the pomgranates and of the fygges of the place.
Numbers 13:24 The ryuer was called Nehell Escoll, because of the clouster of grapes whych the children of Israel cut doune there.
Numbers 13:25 And they turned backe agayn from searchynge the land, at .xl. dayes ende.
Numbers 13:26 And they went and came to Moses and Aaron & vnto all the multitude of the chyldren of Israell, vnto the wyldernesse of Pharan: euen vnto Cades, and broughte them worde and also vnto all the congregation, and shewed them the frute of the lande.
Numbers 13:27 And they tolde hym sayinge: we came vnto the land wether thou sendest vs, and surelye it is a lande that floweth wyth milke and honye and here is of the frute of it.
Numbers 13:28 Neuerthelesse the people be strong that dwell in the lande, and the Cytyes are walled and exceadynge greate, and moreouer, we sawe the chyldren of Enack ther.
Numbers 13:29 The Amaleckes dwell in the south contre, & the Hethytes, Iebusites and the Amorites dwel in the mountaynes, and the Cananites dwell by the sea and a longe by the costet of Iordan.
Numbers 13:30 And Caleb stylled the murmure of the people agaynst Moses saynge: let vs go vp and conquere it, for we be able to ouercome it.
Numbers 13:31 But the men that went vp wyth hym, sayde: We be not able to go vp agaynste the people for they are stronger then we:
Numbers 13:32 And they brought vp an euel reporte of the land whych they had searched, vnto the chyldren of Israel saiynge: The lande whyche we haue gone throwe to searche it out, is a lande that eateth vp the inhabiters therof, and the people that we sawe in it are men of stature.
Numbers 13:33 And there we sawe also gyauntes, the chyldren of Enack whych are of the gyauntes. And we semed in oure syght as it were greshoppers and so we dyd in their syght.

CHAPTER: 14

Numbers 14:1 And al the multitude cryed out, and the people wepte thorowe out that nyght,
Numbers 14:2 and all the chyldren of Israell murmured agaynst Moses and Aaron. And the whole congregacion sayde vnto them: wolde God that we had dyed in the land of Egypt, eyther we wold that we had dyed in thys wyldernesse.
Numbers 14:3 Wherfore hath the Lorde brought vs vnto thys lande to fall vpon the swerde, that both oure wyues, and also our chyldren shoulde be a praye? is it not better that we retourne vnto Egypt agayne?
Numbers 14:4 And they sayd one to an other: let vs make a captayne and retourne vnto Egypt agayn.
Numbers 14:5 And Moses and Aaron fel on theyr faces before al the congregacion of the multitude of the children of Israel.
Numbers 14:6 And Iosua the sonne of Nun, & caleb the sonne of Iephune whych were of them that serched the land rent their clothes
Numbers 14:7 and spake vnto all the companye of the chyldren of Israell sayinge: The lande which we walked thorowe to serche it, is a very good land.
Numbers 14:8 If the Lorde haue lust to vs he wyl brynge vs in to thys land and geue it vs, whyche is a lande that floweth wyth mylke and hony.
Numbers 14:9 But in any wyse rebell not agaynst the Lorde, Moreouer feare ye not the people of the land, for they are but bread for vs. Theyr shyeld is departed from them, and the Lorde is wyth vs: feare them not therfore.
Numbers 14:10 And all the whole multitude bade stone them with stones. But the glory of the Lord appeared in the tabernacle of witnesse, vnto all the chyldren of Israel.
Numbers 14:11 And the Lorde sayde vnto Moses: Howe longe shall thys people rayle vpon me, & how long wyll it be yer they beleue me, for all my sygnes whiche I haue shewed amonge them?
Numbers 14:12 I wyll smyte them wyth the pestilence and destroy them, & wyll make of the a greater nacion & a myghtier then they.
Numbers 14:13 And Moses sayd vnto the Lorde: then the Egyptians shall heare it, for thou broughtest thys people wyth thy myghte from among them.
Numbers 14:14 And it wylbe told to the inhabiters of thys land also, for they haue heard likewyse, that thou the Lord arte among thys people, & that thou art sene face to face, and that thy cloude standeth ouer them & that thou goest before them by day tyme in a pyller of a cloud and in a pyller of fire by night.
Numbers 14:15 If thou shalt kyl al thys people as they were but one man then the nacions which haue herde the fame of the, wyl speake saying:
Numbers 14:16 because the Lorde was not able to brynge in thys people in to the land which he sware vnto them, therfore he slewe them in the wyldernesse.
Numbers 14:17 So nowe let the power of my Lorde be greate, acordyng as thou hast spoken saying:
Numbers 14:18 the Lord is longe year he be angrye, and ful of mercy, and suffereth synne and trespace, and leaueth no man innocent, and vysyteth the vnrighteousnesse of the fathers vpon the chyldren, euen vpon the thyrd and fourth generacion,
Numbers 14:19 be mercyfull I beseche the therfore vnto the synne of thys people according vnto thy greate mercy, and accordyng as thou hast forgeuen thys people from Egypt euen vnto thys place.
Numbers 14:20 And the Lorde sayde: I haue forgeuen it, accordyng to thy request.
Numbers 14:21 But as trulye as I lyue, al the erth shalbe fylled wt my glorye.
Numbers 14:22 For of al those men which haue sene my glorye & my miracles which I did in Egypte & in the wyldernesse, & yet haue tempted me now this .x. tymes & haue not herkened vnto my voyce,
Numbers 14:23 there shall not one se the lande which I sware vnto their fathers nether shal any of them that rayled vpon me, se it.
Numbers 14:24 But my seruaunt Caleb: because there is another maner spirite with him, and because he hath folowed me vnto the vtmost: him I wil bryng into the lande whyche he hath walked in, & hys seed shall conquere it,
Numbers 14:25 and also the Amaleckites and Cananites whych dwell in the lowe contryes. To morowe turne you & get you into the wyldernesse: euen the waye toward the redd sea.
Numbers 14:26 And the Lord spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
Numbers 14:27 how longe shal thys euyll multitude murmure agaynst me?
Numbers 14:28 I haue hearde the murmurynges of the chyldren of Israell whych they murmure against me. Tel them that the Lorde sayeth. As truely as I lyue, I wyl do vnto you euen as ye haue spoken in myne eares.
Numbers 14:29 Your carkesses shal lye in thys wyldernesse, nether shal any of these nombres whych were nombred from .xx. yere & aboue of you which haue murmured agaynste me
Numbers 14:30 come into the land ouer which I lyfted mine hande to make you dwel therin, saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune, and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
Numbers 14:31 And your children which ye said should be a praye, them I wyl bryng in, and they shall knowe the lande which ye haue refused,
Numbers 14:32 and youre carkesses shall lye in this wyldernesse
Numbers 14:33 And your chyldren shall wandre in this wildernesse .xl. yeres and suffer for your whoredome vntil your carkesses be wasted in the wildernesse,
Numbers 14:34 after the nombre of the daies in which ye serched out the land .xl. daies, & euery daye a yere: so that they shall beare your vnryghteousnes .xl. yere, & ye shal fele my vengeaunce
Numbers 14:35 I the Lorde haue sayed that I wyll do it vnto all thys euyll congregacyon that are gethered together agaynst me: euen in thys wyldernesse ye shalbe consumed, and here ye shal dye.
Numbers 14:36 And the men which Moses sent to serche the lande, & which (when they came agayn) made al the people to murmure against it in that they broughte vp a sclaunder vpon the lande:
Numbers 14:37 dyed for theyr bryngyng vp that euyll sclaunder vpon it, & were plaged before the Lorde.
Numbers 14:38 But Iosua the sonne of Nun and Caleb the sonne of Iephune which were of the men that went to serche the lande, lyued styll.
Numbers 14:39 And Moses tolde these sayinges vnto al the chyldren of Israell, and the people toke great sorowe.
Numbers 14:40 And they rose vp yerly in the mornyuge & gatt them vp into the toppe of the mountayne sayinge: lo we be here, & wyll go vp vnto the place of which the Lorde sayed, for we haue synned.
Numbers 14:41 And Moses sayed: wherfore wyll ye go on thys maner beyonde the worde of the Lorde? it wyll not come well to passe
Numbers 14:42 go not vp for the Lorde is not amonge you, that ye be not slayne before your enemyes.
Numbers 14:43 For the Amaleckytes and the Cananites are there before you, and ye wyll fal vpon the swerde because ye are tourned awaye from the Lorde, and therfore the Lorde wyll not be wyth you.
Numbers 14:44 But they were blynded to go vp in to the hyll toppe: Neuer the latter, the arcke of the testament of the Lord and Moses departed not out of the hoste.
Numbers 14:45 Then the Amaleckytes & the Cananites which dwelt in that hyl, came doune and smote them and hewed them: euen vnto Horma.

CHAPTER: 15

Numbers 15:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 15:2 speake vnto the children of Israell & saye vnto them: when ye be come into the land of youre habitacion whiche I geue vnto you,
Numbers 15:3 & wyl offre an offering vpon the fyre vnto the Lord, whether it be a burntofferyng or a specyall vowe or frewyllofferyng or yf it be in your pryncipall feastes to make a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde, of the oxen or of the flocke.
Numbers 15:4 Then, let him that offereth hys offerynge vnto the Lord, brynge also a meatofferynge of a tenth deale of floure myngled wyth the fourth parte of an hin of oyle,
Numbers 15:5 and the fourth parte of an hin of wine for a drynkofferynge and offer with the burntofferyng or any other offeryng when it is a lambe.
Numbers 15:6 And vnto a ram thou shalt offer a meatofferyng of two tenth deales of floure, myngled wyth the thyrde parte of an hin of oyle,
Numbers 15:7 and to a drynckofferynge thou shalt offer the thyrde parte of an hin of wyne, to be a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde.
Numbers 15:8 When thou offeryst an oxe to a burntofferynge or in any speciall vowe or peaceofferyng vnto the Lord,
Numbers 15:9 then thou shalt brynge vnto an oxe, a meatofferyng of .iij. tenth deales of floure mingled wt an hyn of oyle. And thou shalt brynge for a drynkeofferinge halfe an hyn of wyne,
Numbers 15:10 that is an offeryng of a swete sauoure vnto the Lord.
Numbers 15:11 Thys is the maner that shall be done vnto one oxe, one ram a lambe or a kyd.
Numbers 15:12 And accordynge to the numbre of suche offerynges, thou shalte encrease the meate offerynges, & the drinckofferings.
Numbers 15:13 All that are of youre selues, shall do these thynges after thys maner, when he offereth an offering of swete sououre vnto the Lorde
Numbers 15:14 And if there be a straunger wyth you or be amonge you in your generations, and wyll offer an offeryng of a swete sauour vnto the Lorde: euen as ye do, so he shall do.
Numbers 15:15 One ordinaunce shall serue boeth for you of the congregation, and also of the straunger. And it shall be an ordinaunce foreuer among your children after you, that the straunger and ye shalbe lyke before the Lord.
Numbers 15:16 One lawe and one maner shall serue, boeth for you and for the straunger that dwelleth wyth you.
Numbers 15:17 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 15:18 speake vnto the chyldren of Israell and saye vnto them: When ye be come into the lande whyther I wyl bryng you,
Numbers 15:19 then when ye will eate of the bread of the land, ye shall giue an heueofferynge vnto the Lorde.
Numbers 15:20 Ye shal geue a cake of the fyrste of youre dowe vnto an heue offeryng, as ye do the heueofferinge of the barne,
Numbers 15:21 euen so shall ye heue it. Of the fyrste of youre dowe ye muste giue vnto the Lorde an heueofferynge thorowe out youre generations.
Numbers 15:22 If ye ouer se youre selues, & obserue not al these commaundementes which the Lord hath spoken vnto Moses,
Numbers 15:23 & all that the Lord hath commaunded you by the hand of Moses from the fyrst daye forward that the Lorde commaunded among your generation:
Numbers 15:24 when ought is commytted ignorantlye before the eyes of the congregation, then all the multitude shall offer a calfe for a burnt offerynge to be a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde, & the meat offeryng and the drynke offering therto, accordynge to the maner: and an he gote for a synne offryng.
Numbers 15:25 And the priest shal make an atonement for al the multitude of the children of Israel, & it shalbe forgeuen them for it was ignoraunce. And they shall brynge theyr giftes vnto the offeringe of the Lorde and their synne offeryng before the Lorde for theyr ignoraunce.
Numbers 15:26 And it shalbe forgeuen vnto al the multitude of the children of Israel, & vnto the straunger that dwelleth amonge you: for the ignorauncye pertayneth vnto all the people.
Numbers 15:27 If any one soule sinne thorowe ignoraunce, he shall brynge a she gote of a yere olde for a synneofferynge.
Numbers 15:28 And the prieste shall make an attonemente for the soule that synned ignorauntly wyth the sinofferynge before the Lord, and reconcyle hym, and it shalbe forgeuen hym.
Numbers 15:29 And both thou that art borne one of the chyldren of Israel & the straunger that dwelleth among you shal haue both one law, if ye synne thorow ignorancy.
Numbers 15:30 And the soule that doeth ought presumptously, whether he be an Israelite or a straunger, the same hath despised the Lorde. And that soule shal be destroied from among his people
Numbers 15:31 bycause he hathe despised the worde of the Lorde and hath broken his commaundementes, that soule therfore shal peryshe & his synne shalbe vpon him.
Numbers 15:32 And whyle the children of Israel were in the wyldernesse, they found a man gatherynge styckes vpon the Sabothe daye.
Numbers 15:33 And they that founde hym gatherynge styckes, brought hym vnto Moses and Aaron & vnto all the congregation:
Numbers 15:34 and they put him in warde, for it was not declared what should be done vnto hym.
Numbers 15:35 And the Lorde saied vnto Moses: the man shal dye: let al the multitude stone him with stones without the host.
Numbers 15:36 And all the multitude brought hym wythout the host and stoned hym wyth stones, & he dyed as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Numbers 15:37 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 15:38 speake vnto the children of Israell and byd them, that they make them gardes vpon the quarters of theyr garmentes thoroweoute theyr generations, and lette theym make the gardes of rybandes of Iacyncte.
Numbers 15:39 And the garde shall be vnto you to loke vpon it, that ye remembre all the commaundementes of the Lord and do them: that ye seke not a way after your owne hertes & after youre owne eyes, for to goo a whorynge after them:
Numbers 15:40 but that ye remembre, & do do all my commaundementes and be holye vnto youre God,
Numbers 15:41 for I am the Lord your God whiche brought you out of the land of Egypt for to be your god. I am the Lord God.

CHAPTER: 16

Numbers 16:1 And Corah the sonne of Iezehar the sonne of Cahath the sonne of Leui and Dathan & Abiram the sonnes of Eliab, and On, the sonne of Peleth, the sonne of Ruben:
Numbers 16:2 stode vp before Moses, wyth other of the chyldren of Israell .ij. hundred and fyftye heades of the congregation and councelours, and men of fame,
Numbers 16:3 and they gathered them selues togyther agaynst Moses and Aaron and sayed vnto them: ye haue done inough. For all the, multitude are holy euery one of them & the Lorde is amonge them. Why therefore heaue we our selues vp aboue the congregaon of the Lorde.
Numbers 16:4 When Moses hearde it, he fell vpon his face
Numbers 16:5 and spake vnto Corath and vnto al his company sayinge: to morow the Lorde wyll shewe who is hys and who is holy, and wil take theim vnto hym, and whom soeuer he hath chosen, he wyl cause to come to hym.
Numbers 16:6 Thys do: take firepannes, thou Corah and all thy company,
Numbers 16:7 & do fyre therin and putte cense therto before the Lorde to morrowe. And then whomsoeuer the Lorde hath chosen, the same is holy. Yea, make inough to do ye chyldren of Leuy.
Numbers 16:8 And Moses sayed vnto Corah: heare ye chyldren of Leui,
Numbers 16:9 Semeth it but a smal thinge vnto you, that the God of Israel hath seperated you from the multitude of Israel to brynge you to hym, to do the seruyce of the dwellynge place of the Lorde, and to stande before the people to minister vnto theim?
Numbers 16:10 he hath taken the to him, and al thy brethren the sonnes of Leui with the, & ye seke the offyce of the priest also.
Numbers 16:11 For which cause both thou and all thy companye are gathered togither agaynst the Lord: for what is Aaron, that ye shoul murmure agaynst him.
Numbers 16:12 And Moses sente to call Dathan & Abiram the sonnes of Eliab, and they answered we wyl not come.
Numbers 16:13 Semeth it a smale thynge vnto the, that thou hast brought vs out of a lande that floweth wyth mylke and hony, to kyl vs in the wyldernes. But that thou shouldest raygne ouer vs also?
Numbers 16:14 More ouer thou haste brought vs vnto no land that floweth wyth mylke and hony, neyther haste geuen vs possessions of feldes, or of vines. Eyther wilt thou pull out the eyes of these men? we wyl not come.
Numbers 16:15 And Moses waxed very angry and sayd vnto the Lord. Turne not vnto their offeringes, I haue not taken so much as an asse from them, neyther haue vexed any of them.
Numbers 16:16 Then Moses said vnto Corah: Be thou and all thy company before the Lord: both thou they, and Aaron to morowe.
Numbers 16:17 And take euery man his censer and putte cense in them, and come before the Lord euery man with his censer: two hundred and fiftye censers, and Aaron wyth hys censer.
Numbers 16:18 And they toke euerye man his censer and put fyre in them & layed cense thereon, and stode in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, and Moses and Aaron also.
Numbers 16:19 And Corah gathered all the congregation agaynste them vnto the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse. And the glory of the Lord appeared vnto all the congregation.
Numbers 16:20 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses and Aaron sayinge:
Numbers 16:21 seperate your selues from thys congregation, that I may consume them at once.
Numbers 16:22 And they fel vpon theyr faces and sayd O most myghty God of the spirites of al fleshe, one man hath sinned, and wilt thou be wroth with al the multitude?
Numbers 16:23 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge,
Numbers 16:24 speake vnto the congregation and saye: Get you awaye from aboute the dwellynge of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.
Numbers 16:25 And Moses rose and wente vnto Dathan and Abiram, & the elders of Israel folowed him.
Numbers 16:26 And he spake vnto the congregation saying: depart from the tentes of these wicked men & touche nothynge of theyrs: lest ye peryshe in al theyr synnes.
Numbers 16:27 And they gate them from the dwellynge of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram on euerye syde. And Dathan and Abiram came oute and stode in the dore of theyr tentes wyth theyr wyues, theyr sonne and theyr children.
Numbers 16:28 And Moses sayed hereby ye shall knowe that the Lorde hath sente me, to do all these worckes, & that I haue not done them of mine own mynd:
Numbers 16:29 If these men dye the commen death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men, then the Lorde hathe not sent me.
Numbers 16:30 But and if the Lorde make a newe thyng, and the earth open hyr mouth & swalowe theim, and all that pertayne vnto them, so that they go downe quicke vnto hel: then ye shal vnderstand, that these men haue rayled vpon the Lord.
Numbers 16:31 And assone as he hadde made an ende of speakyng al these wordes, the ground cloue a sunder that was vnder them,
Numbers 16:32 and the earth opened hyr mouth and swalowed them and theyr houses, and al menne that were wyth Corah and al theyr goodes.
Numbers 16:33 And they and all that pertained vnto them, went downe aliue vnto hell, and the earth closed vppon theim and they peryshed from amonge the congregation.
Numbers 16:34 Ad all Israel that were aboute them fledde at the cry of them. For they said: The earth myght haply swalow vs vp also.
Numbers 16:35 And there came out a fyre from the Lord and consumed the two hundred and fyftye men that offered cense.
Numbers 16:36 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 16:37 Speake vnto Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the prieste and lette hym take vp the censers oute of the burnynge & scatter the fyre here and there,
Numbers 16:38 for the censers of the synners are halowed in theyr deathes: and let them be beaten, into thyne plates and fastened vpon the alter. For they offered theim before the Lorde, and therfore they are holye and they shalbe a sygne vnto the children of Israel.
Numbers 16:39 And Eleazar the Prieste toke the brasen censers whych they that were burnt had offered, & beate them and fastened them vpon the alter,
Numbers 16:40 to be a remembraunce vnto the children of Israel, that no straunger which is not of the seed of Aaron, come nere to offer cense before the Lord, that he be not made lyke vnto Corah and hys companye: as the Lord sayd vnto hym by the hand of Moses.
Numbers 16:41 And on the morrowe all the multitude of the chyldren of Israell murmured agaynste Moses and Aaron sayinge: ye haue kylled the people of the Lorde.
Numbers 16:42 And when the multitude was gathered against Moses & Aaron thei loked toward the tabernacle of witnes. And beholde, the cloude had couered it and the glory of the Lord appeared.
Numbers 16:43 And Moses & Aaron went before the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 16:44 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 16:45 Get you from this congregation, that I may consume them quyckely. And they fel vpon theyr faces.
Numbers 16:46 And Moses sayd vnto Aaron: take a censer, and put fyre therein out of the alter, and poure on cense, and go quickely vnto the congregation and make an atonement for them For there is wrath gone out from the Lord and ther is a plage begone.
Numbers 16:47 And Aaron toke as Moses commaunded hym, and ran vnto the congregation, & beholde, the plage was begonne amonge the people, and he putt on cense, & made an atonemente for the people.
Numbers 16:48 And he stode betwene the deade, & them that were a lyue and the plage ceased.
Numbers 16:49 And the numbre of them that dyed in the plage, were .xiiij. thousand and seuen hundred: beside them that dyed about the busines of Corah.
Numbers 16:50 And Aaron wente againe vnto Moses vnto the dore of the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and the plage ceased.

CHAPTER: 17

Numbers 17:1 And the Lord spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Numbers 17:2 speake vnto the chyldren of Israel and take of them for euery principal house a rodde, of theyr prynces ouer the houses of their fathers: euen .xij. roddes, & write euery mans name vpon his rod.
Numbers 17:3 And write Aaron a name vpon the state of Leui: for euerye headman ouer the house of theyr fathers shal haue a rodde.
Numbers 17:4 And put them in the tabernacle of wytnesse where I wyll mete you.
Numbers 17:5 And hys rodde whome I chose, shall blossome: So I wyl make cease from me the grudgynges of the chyldren of Israel whyche they grudge agaynst you.
Numbers 17:6 And Moses spake vnto the chyldren of Israel, and al the princes gaue him for euery prynce ouer theyr fathers houses, a rod: euen .xij. rods, and the rod of Aaron was among the roddes.
Numbers 17:7 And Moses put the roddes before the Lord in the tabernacle of witnes.
Numbers 17:8 And on the morow, Moses wente into the tabernacle: and beholde the rodd of Aaron of the house of Leuy was budded & bare blossoms and almondes.
Numbers 17:9 And Moses brought out all the staues frome before the Lorde, vnto all the children of Israel, & they loked vpon them and toke euery man hys staffe.
Numbers 17:10 And the Lorde sayed vnto Moses: bryng Aarons rod agayne before the wytnes to be kepte for a token vnto the chyldren of rebellyon, that theyr murmurynges may cease fro me, that they dye not.
Numbers 17:11 And Moses did as the Lorde commaunded hym.
Numbers 17:12 And the chyldren of Israell spake vnto Moses sayinge: beholde, wee are destroyed and all come to nought:
Numbers 17:13 for whosoeuer cometh nye the dwellynge of the Lorde, dyeth. Shall we vtterlye consume away.

CHAPTER: 18

Numbers 18:1 And the Lorde sayed vnto Aaron. Thou and thy sonnes, and thy fathers house wyth the, shall bear the faulte of that whyche is done amysse in the holye place. And thou & thy sonnes wyth the, shal beare the fault of that whyche is done amysse in your priesthode.
Numbers 18:2 And thy brethren also the trybe of Leui, the trybe of thy father take wyth the, and let them be ioyned vnto the, and minister vnto the. And thou and thy sonnes wyth the shall minister before the tabernacle of wytnes.
Numbers 18:3 And let them wayte vp the & vpon al the tabernacle: onely let them not come nye the holy vesselles & the alter, that boeth they & ye also dye not.
Numbers 18:4 And let them be by the and wayte on the tabernacle of wytnesse, and on all the seruyce of the tabernacle, and let no straunger come nye vnto you.
Numbers 18:5 Wayte therfore vpon the holy place and vpon the alter, that there fal no more wrath vpon the chyldren of Israel:
Numbers 18:6 behold, I haue taken youre brethren the Leuites frome amonge the chyldren of Israell, to be yours, as gyftes geuen vnto the Lord to do the seruyce of the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 18:7 And se that both thou and thy sonnes wyth the take hede vnto your priestes offyce, in al thinges that pertayne vnto the alter, and wythin the vayle. And se that ye serue, for I haue geuen youre prestes offyce vnto you for a gifte to do seruyce, and the straunger that commeth nye, shall dye.
Numbers 18:8 And the Lorde spake vnto Aaron: behold I haue geuen the, the kepyng of mine heueofferynges in al the halowed thynges of the chyldren of Israel. And vnto the I haue geuen them vnto anoyntynge and to thy sonnes: to be a dutye for euer.
Numbers 18:9 Thys shall be thyne of most holy sacrifices. Al theyr giftes, thorow out al their meateofferynges synofferinges and trespace offerynges whyche they bringe vnto me. They shall be most holy vnto the & vnto thy sonnes.
Numbers 18:10 And ye shal eat it in the most holy place: all that are males shall eate of it for it shal be holye vnto the.
Numbers 18:11 And this shalbe thine: the heueofferinges of theyr gyftes, thorowout all the waueofferynges of the chyldren of Israel, for I haue geuen them to the, & thy sonnes, & thy daughters wyth the to be a dutye for euer: and all that are cleane in thy house, shall eate of it,
Numbers 18:12 al the fatt of the oyle, of the wyne and of the corne theyr fyrste frutes whych they geue vnto the Lorde that haue I geuen vnto the.
Numbers 18:13 The first frutes of all that is in theyr Landes whyche they brynge vnto the Lorde, shall be thyne: and all that are cleane in thyne house, shall eate of it.
Numbers 18:14 Al dedicate thynges in Israel, shalbe thine
Numbers 18:15 All that breaketh the matryce of all fleshe that men brynge vnto the Lorde, both of man and beast, shall be thyne. Neuerthelater the fyrst borne of man shall be redemed, and the fyrst borne of vncleane beastes shal be redemed.
Numbers 18:16 And theyr redemptions shall be at a moneth olde, valued at fyue sycles of siluer, of the holye sycle. A sycle maketh twentye Geras.
Numbers 18:17 But the fyrst borne of oxen, shepe, & gotes shall not be redemed. For they are holy, and thou shalt sprinkle theyr bloud vpon the alter, and shalt bourne their fat to be a sacrifice of a swete sauour vnto the Lord.
Numbers 18:18 And the fleshe of them shal be thyne, as the wauebrest & all the ryght shoulder is thyne
Numbers 18:19 al the holy heaueofferinges whych the chyldren of Israel heaue vnto the Lorde, I gyue the and thy sonnes and thy daughters with the to be a duti foreuer. And it shalbe a salted couenaunte for euer, before the Lorde: vnto the and thy seed wyth the.
Numbers 18:20 And the Lorde spake vnto Aaron: thou shalt haue none enheritaunce in theyr Land nor parte amonge them. For I am thy parte and thy enheritaunce amonge the children of Israel.
Numbers 18:21 And behold I haue geuen the children of Leuy, the tenthe in Israell to enherite, for the seruice whych they serue in the tabernacle of wytnesse,
Numbers 18:22 that the chyldren of Israell henceforth come not nye the Tabernacle of wytnesse, and beare synne and dye.
Numbers 18:23 And the Leuites shal do the seruyce in the tabernacle of wytnes and beare theyr synne, & it shal be a lawe for euer vnto youre chyldrene after you: But amonge the children of Israel they shall enherete none enherytannce.
Numbers 18:24 For the tythes of the chyldren of Israell whych they heaue vnto the Lorde, I haue geuen the Leuites to enherite. Wherfore I haue said vnto them: Among the children of Israel ye shal enherite none enheritaunce.
Numbers 18:25 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 18:26 speake vnto the Leuites and say vnto them: when ye take of the chyldren of Israel the tithes whych I haue geuen you of them to your enheritaunce, ye shall take an heaueoffering of that same for the Lorde: euen the tenthe of that tythe.
Numbers 18:27 And it shall be rekened vnto you for your heaueofferynge, euen as though ye gaue corne out of the barne or a fulofferyng from the wyne presse.
Numbers 18:28 And of this maner ye shal heaue an heaueofferynge vnto the Lorde, of all your tythes whyche ye receyue of the chyldren of Israel and ye shal gyue therof the lordes heaueofferyng vnto Aaron the prieste.
Numbers 18:29 Of all your giftes, ye shal take out of the Lordes heaueofferynge: euen the fatt of all theyr halowed thynges.
Numbers 18:30 And thou shalte saye vnto them: when ye haue take away the fatt of it from it, it shal be counted vnto the Leuytes, as the encrease of corne and wyne.
Numbers 18:31 And ye shall eate it in all places both ye and youre housholdes, for it is youre rewarde for youre seruice in the tabernacle of wytnesse.
Numbers 18:32 And ye shall beare no synne by the reason of it, when ye haue taken from it the fatte of it, neyther shall ye vnhalowe the halowed thynges of the chyldren of Israel, and so shal ye not dye.

CHAPTER: 19

Numbers 19:1 And the Lord spake vnto Moses and Aaron saynge:
Numbers 19:2 this is the ordinaunce of the lawe whiche the Lorde commaundeth sayinge, speake vnto the chyldren of Israell and let them take the a redde kowe wythout spotte wherin is no blemish and whyche neuer bare yocke vpon hyr.
Numbers 19:3 And ye shal gyue hyr vnto Eliazar the priest and he shall bryng hyr wythout the host and cause hyr to be slayne before hym.
Numbers 19:4 And Eliazar the Prieste shall take of hyr bloud vpon his finger, & sprynkle it strayght toward the tabernacle of witnes .vij. times. And he shall cause the kowe to be burnt in hys syght:
Numbers 19:5 both skinne flesh and bloud, with the doung also.
Numbers 19:6 And let the priest take Cedar wodd, and Isope and purple cloth, and cast it vpon the kowe as she burneth.
Numbers 19:7 And let the priest wash hys clothes and bath his flesh in water, & then come into the host, & the prieste shalbe vncleane vnto the euen.
Numbers 19:8 And he that burneth hyr, shall wash hys clothes in water & bath hys flesh also in water and be vncleane vntil euen.
Numbers 19:9 And one that is cleane shall goo and take vp the ashes of the kowe, and put them wythout the host in a cleane place, where they shall be kepte to make sprinkelynge water for the multitude of the children of Israel: for it is a synoffering
Numbers 19:10 And let hym that gathered the ashes of the kowe wash his clothes, & remaine vncleane vntyll euen. And thys shall be vnto the children of Israell and vnto the straunger that dwelleth amonge them, a maner for euer.
Numbers 19:11 He that toucheth any dead person, shall be vncleane .vij. dayes.
Numbers 19:12 And he shal purify him selfe wyth the ashes the thyrd daye and then he shall be cleane the seuenth day. And if he purify not hym selfe the thyrde daye, then the seueuth daye, he shal not be cleane.
Numbers 19:13 Whosoeuer toucheth any person that dyeth & sprinkeleth not hym self, defileth the dwelling of the Lord: & therfore that soul shalbe roted out of Israel, bicause he hath not sprynkled the sprinkelynge water vpon hym he shal be vncleane, and hys vncleannesse shal raygne vpon hym.
Numbers 19:14 This is the lawe of the man that dyeth in a tent: al that come into the tente and all that is in the tent, shalbe vnclene .vij. dayes.
Numbers 19:15 And al the vessels that be open which haue no lid nor coueryng vpon them, are vncleane.
Numbers 19:16 And whasoeuer toucheth one that is slayne wyth a swerde in the feldes, or a dead person, or a bone of a deade man, or a graue: shall be vncleane .vij. dayes.
Numbers 19:17 And they shall take for an vncleane person of the burnt ashes of the synofferynge, & put runnynge water therto into a vessel,
Numbers 19:18 And a cleane person shal take Isope & dippe it in the water, and sprinkle it vpon the tente & vpon al the vessels & on the soules that were there, & vpon hym that toucheth a bone or a slaine person or a dead body or a graue.
Numbers 19:19 And the cleane person shal sprinkle vpon the vncleane the thyrde daye and the seuenth daye. And the seuenth day he shall purify him selfe and washe hys clothes and bathe hym selfe in water, and shalbe cleane at euen.
Numbers 19:20 If any be vncleane & sprinkle not him selfe the same soule shalbe destroied from among the congregation: for he hath defiled the holy place of the Lorde & is not sprinkeled wyth sprynling water, therfore is he vncleane. And this shalbe a perpetual lawe vnto them. And he that sprynkeleth the sprinkelyng water, shal wash his clothes.
Numbers 19:21 And he that toucheth the sprynklyng water shall be vncleane vntyll euen.
Numbers 19:22 And whatsoeuer the vncleane person toucheth, shal be vncleane. And the soule that toucheth it shal be vncleane vntil the euen.

CHAPTER: 20

Numbers 20:1 And the whole multitude of the chyldren of Israell, came into the deserte of Syn in the fyrste moneth, and the people dwelt at Cades. And ther dyed MirIam, and was buried ther.
Numbers 20:2 Moreouer there was no water for the multitude, wherefore they gathered them selues togyther againste Moses and againste Aaron.
Numbers 20:3 And the people chode wt Moses & spake saying: wolde God that we had perished when our brethren perished before the Lord.
Numbers 20:4 Whi haue ye brought the congregation of the Lord vnto this wildernes that both we & our cattel should dye here?
Numbers 20:5 Wherfore brought ye vs out of Egipt to bring vs into this vngratious place, whiche is no place of seed nor of figes nor vines nor of pomgranates, neyther is there anye water to drynke.
Numbers 20:6 And Moses & Aaron went from the congregation vnto the dore of the tabernacle of witnes, and fel vpon their faces. And the glory of the Lord appered vnto them.
Numbers 20:7 And the Lord spake vnto Moses, sayinge:
Numbers 20:8 take thy staffe, & gather thou & thy brother Aaron the congregation togither, & say vnto the rocke before their eyes, that he geue forth his water. And thou shalt brynge them water oute of the rocke & shalt gyue the companye dryncke and theyr beastes also.
Numbers 20:9 And Moses toke the staffe from before the Lord as he commaunded hym.
Numbers 20:10 And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation togither before the rocke, and he sayd vnto them here ye rebellious, muste we fette you water out of thys rocke?
Numbers 20:11 And Moses lyfte vp hys handes wyth hys staffe, and smote the rocke two tymes, and the water came oute abundauntly, and the multitude dranke and the beastes also.
Numbers 20:12 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses & Aaron: bicause ye beleued me not to sanctify me in the eyes of the chyldren of Israel, therfore ye shall not brynge thys congregation into the land which I haue geuen them.
Numbers 20:13 This is the water of stryfe, bicause the children of Israel stroue wyth the Lord, and he was sanctified vpon them.
Numbers 20:14 And Moses sente messengers from Cades vnto the kyng of Edom. Thus sayeth thy brother Israel. Thou knowest al the trauel that hath happened vs,
Numbers 20:15 how our fathers went downe into Egypt, and how we haue dwelt in Egypt a longe tyme, and how the Egypcians vexed both vs and our fathers.
Numbers 20:16 Then we cried vnto the Lorde and he hearde oure voyces, and sent an angell & hath fet vs oute of Egypte. And beholde, we are in Cades a city harde by the borders of thy contry
Numbers 20:17 let vs go a good felowshype thorow thy contrey we wil not go thorow thi feldes nor thorow the viniyardes, neither wyl we drinke of the water of the fountaynes, but we wyll go vp the hye way, & neyther turne vnto the righte hand nor to the lift, vntyl we be past thy contrye.
Numbers 20:18 And Edom answered him: Se thou come not by me, least I come out against the with the swerde.
Numbers 20:19 And the chyldren of Israel sayed vnto him: we wyl go by the beaten way: and if eyther we or our cattell drynke of thy water, we wyll pay for it, we wyll do no more but passe thorow by fote onelye.
Numbers 20:20 And he said ye shal not go thorow. And Edom came out against hym with much people and wyth a mighty power.
Numbers 20:21 And thus Edom denied to giue Israel passage thorow his contrie. And Israel turned away from him.
Numbers 20:22 And the children of Israel remoued from Cades & went vnto mount Hor wyth all the congregation.
Numbers 20:23 And the Lord spake vnto Moses and Aaron in mounte Hor, sayinge:
Numbers 20:24 lett Aaron be putt vnto hys people, for he shall not come into the lande whiche I haue geuen vnto the chyldren of Israel: bicause ye disobeied my mouth at the water of strife.
Numbers 20:25 Take Aaron and Eliazar hys sonne, and brynge them vp into mount Hor,
Numbers 20:26 and strippe Aaron out of hys vestimentes and putt them vpon Eliazar hys sonne, and let Aaron be put vnto hys people and dye there.
Numbers 20:27 And Moses dyd as the Lord commaunded: and they went vp into mount Hor in the syght of all the multitude.
Numbers 20:28 And Moses toke of Aarons clothes, and put them vpon Eleazar his sonne, & Aaron dyed there in the topp of the mount.
Numbers 20:29 And Moses and Eleazar came downe out of the mounte. And all the house of Israell mourned for Aaron .xxx. dayes.

CHAPTER: 21

Numbers 21:1 And when king Arad the Cananite which dwelt in the south partyes, heard tell that Israell came by the waye that the spyes hadde founde out, he came and fought wyth Israel and toke some of them prysoners.
Numbers 21:2 Then Israel vowed a vowe vnto the Lord & sayd: If thou wylte gyue thys people into oure handes, we wyll destroye theyr cyties.
Numbers 21:3 And the Lorde hearde the voyce of Israell, and deliuered them the Cananites. And they destroyed both them and their cityes, & called the place Horma.
Numbers 21:4 Then they departed from mount Hor toward the red sea: to compasse the land of Edom. And the soules of the people faynted by the way.
Numbers 21:5 And the people spake against God and against Moses: wherfore hast thou brought vs oute of Egypte, for to dye in the wyldernes, for here is neither bread nor water, and our soules lotheth thys light bread.
Numbers 21:6 Then the Lord sent fiery serpentes amonge the people, which stonge them: so that much people dyed in Israell.
Numbers 21:7 And the people came to Moses and sayed: we haue sinned, for we haue spoken agayust the Lord and againste the, make intercession to the lorde, that he take away the serpentes from vs. And Moses made intercession for the people.
Numbers 21:8 And the Lord saide vnto Moses. Make the a serpente, and hang it vp for a sygne, and let as many as are byten loke vpon it, and they shall lyue.
Numbers 21:9 And Moses made a serpent of brasse & set it vp for a sygne. And when the serpentes had bytten any man, he went and beheld the serpent of brasse, and recouered.
Numbers 21:10 And the children of Israell remoued and pytched in Oboth.
Numbers 21:11 And they departed from Oboth and lay at Egebarim in the wyldernesse which is before Moab on the east syde
Numbers 21:12 And they remoued thence, and pytched vpon the riuer of zarad.
Numbers 21:13 And they departed thence and pitched on the other side of Arnon, which ryuer is in the wyldernesse, and cometh out of the costes of the Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, betwen Moab & the Amorites.
Numbers 21:14 Wherfore it is spoken in the boke of the warre of the Lorde: goo wyth vyolence, both on the ryuer of Arnon
Numbers 21:15 and on the ryuers head, which shoteth downe to dwel at Ar, & leaneth vpon the costes of Moab.
Numbers 21:16 And from thence thei came to Bear, which is the wel wherof the Lord spake vnto Moses: gather the peopple togither, that I may gyue them water.
Numbers 21:17 Then Israell sange thys songe: Aryse vp wel, synge thereto:
Numbers 21:18 The wel whych the rulers dygged and the captaines of the people wt the healpe of the lawe geuer and with their staues. And from thys wyldernesse they went to Matana,
Numbers 21:19 and from Matana to Nahaliel, & from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
Numbers 21:20 & from Bamoth to the valay that is in the feylde of Moab in the top of Phasgah which boweth toward Iesimon.
Numbers 21:21 And Israell sent messengers vnto Sehon, kyng of the Amorites sayinge:
Numbers 21:22 lett vs go thorowe thy lande: we wyll not turne into thy feildes nor into thy viniyardes, neither dryncke of the water of the welles: but we wil go alonge by the commen way vntyll we be past thy contrey.
Numbers 21:23 And Sehon wold giue Israel no lycence to passe thorow hys contrey, but gathered al hys people togyther, & went oute agaynste Israell into the wyldernesse. And he came to Iaheza and foughte wyth Israell.
Numbers 21:24 And Israel smote hym wt the edge of the swerde & conquered his Land, from Arnon vnto Iabock: euen vnto the children of Ammon For the borders of the chyldren of Ammon, are strong.
Numbers 21:25 And Israell toke all these cytyes & dwelte in all the cyties of the Amorites: in Hesbon & in al the townes that longe therto.
Numbers 21:26 For Hesbon was the city of Sehon the kinge of the Amorites whych Sehon had foughte before with the kinge of the Moabites, and had taken al hys land out of hys hande, euen vnto Arnon.
Numbers 21:27 Wherefore it is a prouerbe, go to Hesbon & lette the city of Sehon be builte & made ready,
Numbers 21:28 for there is a fyre gone out of Hesbone & a flame from the city of Sehon & hath consumed Ar of the Moabites and the men of the hilles of Arnon.
Numbers 21:29 Wo be to the Moab: o people of Chamos ye ar vndone. His sonnes are put to flyght and hys daughters broughte captyue vnto Sehon kynge of the Amorites.
Numbers 21:30 Their lyghte is out from Hesbon vnto Dibon and we made a wyldernes euen vnto Nopha which reacheth vnto Mediba.
Numbers 21:31 And thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
Numbers 21:32 And Moses sente to searche oute Iaezer, and they toke the townes belongynge therto and conquered the Amorites that were there.
Numbers 21:33 And then they turned & went vp towarde Basan. And Og the kynge of Basan came out against them, both he and al hys people, to warre at Adrei.
Numbers 21:34 And the Lorde sayed vnto Moses: feare hym not, for I haue deliuered him into thy handes with all his people & his land. And thou shalt do with him as thou didest with Sehon the king of the Amorites whiche dwelt at Hesbon.
Numbers 21:35 And they smote him & hys sonnes and all hys people, vntyll there was nothyng left hym. And they conquered hys land

CHAPTER: 22

Numbers 22:1 and the children of of Israel remoued & pytched in the feldes of Moab, on the other syde of Iordane, by Iericho.
Numbers 22:2 And Balac the sonne of Ziphor sawe all that Israell had done to the Amorites,
Numbers 22:3 and the Moabites were sore afraied of the people bycause they were many, and abhorred the children of Israel.
Numbers 22:4 And Moab sayed vnto the Elders of Madian, nowe shall thys companye lycke vp all that are rounde aboute vs, as an oxe lycketh vp the grasses of the fyeld. And Balac the sonne of Ziphor was Kynge of the Moabites at that tyme.
Numbers 22:5 And he sent menssengers vnto Balam the sonne of Beor, the interpreter which dwelte vpon the riuer of the lande of the children of hys folke, to call hym saying: beholde, there is a people come out of Egypte which couereth the face of the earth and lyeth euen hard by me.
Numbers 22:6 Come nowe a feloweshyp and curse me thys people. For they are to myghty for me, so peraduenture I might be able to smite them & to dryue them out of the Land. For I wot that whom thou blessest shalbe blessed, and whom thou cursest shalbe cursed.
Numbers 22:7 And the elders of Moab wente wyth the elders of Madian, & the reward of the sothsayinge in their handes. And they came vnto Balam and tolde hym the wordes of Balac.
Numbers 22:8 And he sayed vnto them, tary here al night and I wyll brynge you worde, euen as the Lorde shal saye vnto me. And the Lordes of Moab abode with Balam.
Numbers 22:9 And God cam vnto Balam & said: what men are these whych are wyth the?
Numbers 22:10 And Balam sayed vnto God: Balac the sonne of Ziphor kyng of Moab hath sente vnto me sayinge:
Numbers 22:11 beholde ther is a people come out of Egypt and couereth the face of the earth: come nowe therefore and curse me them, that so peraduenture I maye be able to ouercome them in battell, & to driue them oute.
Numbers 22:12 And God sayed vnto Balam: thou shalt not go wt them, neyther curse the people, for they are blessed.
Numbers 22:13 And Balam rose vp in the mornyng and sayd vnto the Lordes of Balac: get you vnto your land, for the Lorde wyll not suffer me to go wt you.
Numbers 22:14 And the Lordes of Moab rose vp & went vnto Balac and said. Balam wolde not come wyth vs.
Numbers 22:15 And Balac sent againe a greater company of lordes & more honourable then they.
Numbers 22:16 And they came to Balam and tolde hym. Thus sayeth Balac the sonne of Ziphor: oh, let nothynge let the to come vnto me,
Numbers 22:17 for I wyll greately promote the vnto greate honour. and wyl do whatsoeuer thou sayeste vnto me, come therefore I praye the curse me thys peole.
Numbers 22:18 And Balam answered and sayd vnto the seruauntes of Balac. If Balac would gyue me hys house ful of syluer and gold, I can go no further then the worde of the Lorde my God, to do lesse or more.
Numbers 22:19 Neuertheles tarye ye here al nyght: that I may wete, what the Lorde wil say vnto me once more.
Numbers 22:20 And God came vnto Balam by nyghte and sayd vnto hym: If the men come to fette the ryse vp & go wyth them: but what I say vnto the, that onely thou shalt do.
Numbers 22:21 And Balam rose vp early & saddeled hys asse & went wyth the Lordes of Moab.
Numbers 22:22 But God was angry bycause he wente. And the angel of the Lorde stode in the way agaynst hym. And he ryd vpon hys asse & .ij. seruauntes wyth him.
Numbers 22:23 And when the asse sawe the angel of the Lorde stand in the waye & his swerde drawen in hys hand, she turned a side out of the way & went out into the feld. And Balam smot the asse, to turne hir into the waye.
Numbers 22:24 And the angell of the Lord wente & stode in a path betwen the viniyardes, wher was a wal on the one syde, & another on the other.
Numbers 22:25 When the asse sawe the angel of the Lorde, she wrenched vnto the wall and thrust Balams fote vnto the wall, and he smote hyr againe.
Numbers 22:26 And the angel of the Lorde went further and stode in a narrow place, whher was no waye to turne, eyther to the ryghte hande or to the lyfte.
Numbers 22:27 And when the asse saw the angel of the lord, she fel downe vnder Balam: and Balam was wrath and smote the asse wyth a staffe.
Numbers 22:28 And the Lorde opened the mouth of the asse, & she sayed vnto Balam: what haue I done vnto the, that thou smyteste me thus .iij. tymes?
Numbers 22:29 And Balam sayed vnto the asse: bycause thou hast mocked me? I would that I had a swerde in myne hande, that I myght now kyll the.
Numbers 22:30 And the asse sayd vnto Balam am I not thyne asse whych thou hast ridden vpon sence thou wast borne vnto this daye? Was I euer wont to do so vnto the? And he sayed naye.
Numbers 22:31 And the Lord opened the eyes of Balam that he sawe the angel of the Lord standyng in the waye, wyth hys swerd drawen in hys hande. And he bowed him selfe & fel flatt on hys face.
Numbers 22:32 And the angell of the Lorde sayed vnto him. Wherfore smitest thou thyne asse thus .iij. tymes? behold I came out to resiste the for the waye is contrarye vnto me,
Numbers 22:33 & the asse sawe me and auoyded me thre tymes: or else (had she not turned fro me). I had surely slayne the and saued hyr a lyue.
Numbers 22:34 And Balam sayed vnto the aungell of the Lorde: I haue synned for I wist not that thou stodest in the wai against me. Now therfore if it displease thine eyes, I wyl turne agayne.
Numbers 22:35 And the angel sayed vnto Balam, go wyth the men: but in any myse, what I saye vnto the, that saye. And Balam went with the lordes of Balac.
Numbers 22:36 And when Balac heard that Balam was come he went out agaynst him vnto a city of Moab that stode in the border of Arnon whiche was the vtmost part of his contrye.
Numbers 22:37 And Balac sayd vnto Balam: did I not sende for the, to call the? wherfore camest thou not vnto me? thinkest thou that I am not able to promote the vnto honour.
Numbers 22:38 And Balam sayd vnto Balac: Loo, I am come vnto the. But I can saye nothynge at all saue what God putteth into my mouth that must I speake.
Numbers 22:39 And Balam went wyth Balac, & they came vnto the large city.
Numbers 22:40 And Balac offered oxen & shepe and sente for Balam and for the Lordes that were with hym.
Numbers 22:41 And on the mornynge Balac toke Balam and brought hym vp into the hye place of Baal: and thence he sawe vnto the vtmost part of the people.

CHAPTER: 23

Numbers 23:1 And Balam sayed vnto Balac: buyld me here seuen alters and prouide here seuen bullockes and seuen rammes.
Numbers 23:2 And Balac dyd as Balam said. And Balac and Balam offered on euery alter a bullock and a ram.
Numbers 23:3 And Balam sayd vnto Balac: stande by the Sacrifyce whyle I go to wete whether the Lorde wil come and mete me, & whatsoeuer he sheweth me, I wyl tel the, & he went forthewyth.
Numbers 23:4 And God came vnto Balam, & Balam sayed vnto hym: I haue prepared .vij. alters & haue offered vpon euerye alter, a bullock and a ram.
Numbers 23:5 And the Lorde put a sayinge in Balams mouth and sayd: go agayne to Balac & say on thys wyse.
Numbers 23:6 And he went againe vnto hym and loo, he stode by hys sacrifice, both he and all the Lordes of Moab.
Numbers 23:7 And he began hys parable and said: Balac the king of Moab hath fette me from Mesopotamia out of the mountaynes of the east, sayinge: come and curse me Iacob, come & defye me Israel.
Numbers 23:8 How shal I curse whom God curseth not and howe shall I defy whome the Lord defieth not?
Numbers 23:9 from the toppes of the rockes I se hym, & from the hylles I behold him: loo, the people shal dwel by him selfe and shal not be rekened among other nations.
Numbers 23:10 Who can tell the dust of Iacob and the numbre of the fourth parte of Israell. I pray God that my soul may dye the death of the rightuous and that my laste ende may be lyke his.
Numbers 23:11 And Balac sayed vnto Balam, what haste thou done vnto me? I fette the to curse myne enemies: and behold, thou blessest them.
Numbers 23:12 And he answered and sayed: must I not kepe that & speake it, whyche the Lorde hath put in my mouthe?
Numbers 23:13 And Balac sayd vnto hym: Come I pray the with me to an other place whence thou shalt se them, and shalt se but the vtmoste parte of theim and shall not se theim all and curse me them there.
Numbers 23:14 And he brought hym into a playne felde where men myght se farre euen to the toppe of Phasgah, & built .vij. alters and offered a bullocke & a ram on euery alter.
Numbers 23:15 And he sayd vnto Balac: stand here by thy Sacrifyce whyle I go yonder.
Numbers 23:16 And the Lorde mette Balam and put wordes in hys mouth and sayd: go agayne vnto Balac and thus say.
Numbers 23:17 And when he came to him: behold, he stode by hys Sacrifice and the Lordes of Moab with him. And Balac said vnto hym: what sayth the Lord?
Numbers 23:18 And he toke vp hys parable and said: rise vp Balac and heare, & herken vnto me thou sonne of Ziphor.
Numbers 23:19 The Lorde is not a man, that he can lye, neither the sonne of man that he can repente: should he saye and not do, or shoulde he speake and not make it good?
Numbers 23:20 beholde, I haue begone to blesse and haue blessed, and can not goo backe therefro.
Numbers 23:21 He beheld no wyckednes in Iacob nor saw idolatry in Israel: The Lord hys God is wyth hym, and the triumphe of a kynge is among them.
Numbers 23:22 God hath brought them out of Egypt is as the strength of an vnicorne vnto them,
Numbers 23:23 for there is no sorcerer, in Iacob, nor sothsayer in Israell. When the tyme cometh, it wyll be sayed of Iacob and of Israell, what God hath wrought.
Numbers 23:24 Behold the people shall ryse vp as a lyonesse and heaue vp him selfe as a lyon, & shall not lye downe agayne, vntyl he haue eaten of the praye and dronke of the bloud of them that are slayne.
Numbers 23:25 And Balac saied vnto Balam: neither curse them nor blesse them.
Numbers 23:26 And Balam answered & sayd vnto Balac: tolde not I the sayinge: all that the Lorde byddeth me, that I muste doo?
Numbers 23:27 And Balac sayed vnto Balam: come I praye the, I wyl bryng the yet vnto an other place: so peraduenture it shall please God, that thou maist curse them there.
Numbers 23:28 And Balac broughte Balam vnto the toppe of Peor, that boweth towarde the wyldernesse.
Numbers 23:29 And Balam sayed vnto Balac: make me here .vij. altares, and prepare me here .vij. bullockes and .vij. rammes.
Numbers 23:30 And Balac dyd as Balam had sayed, and offered a bullocke and a ram on euery alter.

CHAPTER: 24

Numbers 24:1 When Balam sawe that it pleased the Lorde that he shoulde blesse Israell, he wente not as he dyd twise before to fet sothsayinge, but sette hys face towarde the wildernes,
Numbers 24:2 and lyfte vp hys eyes and loked vpon Israel as he laye wyth hys tribes, and the spirite of God came vppon hym.
Numbers 24:3 And he toke vp hys parable and saied Balam the sonne of Beor hathe sayed,
Numbers 24:4 and the manne whose eye is open hath sayed: he hath sayd whych heareth the words of God & seeth the visions of the almyghty, whiche falleth downe: & hys eyes are opened.
Numbers 24:5 Howe goodlye are the tentes of Iacob & thyne habitation Israel,
Numbers 24:6 euen as the brod valeys, and as gardens by ryuers syde, as the tentes whyche the Lodre hath pytched & as cypres trees vpon the water.
Numbers 24:7 The water shal flowe out of hys bouket & hys seed shal be many waters, and hys kyng shalbe hyer then Agag. And hys kyngdome shalbe exalted,
Numbers 24:8 God that brought him out of Egipt his strength is as the strengthe of an vnicorne, & he shal eate the nations that are hys enemies & breake theyr bones, and perce them thorowe wyth hys arrowes.
Numbers 24:9 He touched hym selfe & laye downe as a lyon and as a lyones, who shall sterre him vp, blessed is he that blesseth the, & cursed is he that curseth the.
Numbers 24:10 And Balac was wroth wyth Balam and smote hys hands togyther, & sayd vnto him: I sent for the to curse myne enemies: and behold, thou hast blessed them thys thre times
Numbers 24:11 and now gette the quyckly vnto thy place. I thought that I would promote the vnto honour, but the Lorde hath kept the backe from worshyp.
Numbers 24:12 And Balam sayed vnto Balac: told I not thy messengers which thou sentest vnto me saying.
Numbers 24:13 If Balac would giue me his house full of syluer and gold, I can not passe the mouth of the Lorde, to do eyther good or bad of myne owne mynde. What the Lord saith, that must I speake.
Numbers 24:14 And now beholde, I go vnto my people: come let me shew the what thys people shall do to thy folke in the later dayes.
Numbers 24:15 And he began hys Parable and sayed: Balam the sonne of Beor hath sayed, & the man that hath his eyes open hath said,
Numbers 24:16 and he hath saied that heareth the wordes of God & hath the knowledge of the most hie & beholdeth the vision of the almyghtye, and when he falleth downe hath his eyes opened
Numbers 24:17 I se him but not now, I behold hym but not nye. There shall come a starre of Iacob and ryse a scepter of Israel, which shal smite the costes of Moab and vndermine all the chyldren of Seth.
Numbers 24:18 And Edom shalbe hys possession, and the possession of Seir shall be theyr enemies, and Israel shall do manfully.
Numbers 24:19 And out of Iacob shal come he that shal destroye the remnaunt of the cityes.
Numbers 24:20 And he loked on Amaleck and began hys parable and sayd: Amaleck is the first of the nations, but hys later ende shall peryshe vtterli.
Numbers 24:21 And he loked on the Kenites, & toke his parable and sayd: stronge is thy dwellynge place & put thy neste vpon a rocke.
Numbers 24:22 Neuerthelater thou shalt be a burnyng to Kain, vntyl Assar take the prisoner.
Numbers 24:23 And he toke hys parable & sayed. Alas, who shal lyue when God doth this?
Numbers 24:24 The shyppes shal come out of the cost of Chittim & subdue Assur and subdue Eber, & he him selfe shal perish at the laste.
Numbers 24:25 And Balam rose vp and went & dwelt in his place: & Balac also went hys way.

CHAPTER: 25

Numbers 25:1 And Israel dwelt in Sittim, and the people beganne to commytte whoredome wyth the daughters of Moab,
Numbers 25:2 whych called the people vnto the sacrifice of theyr Goddes. And the people ate & worshypped their Goddes,
Numbers 25:3 and Israel coupled him selfe vnto Baal Peor. Then the Lorde was angry with Israel,
Numbers 25:4 and sayed vnto Moses: take al the heades of the people, and hange them vp vnto the Lorde agaynste the sunne, that the wrathe of the Lorde maye turne away from Israel.
Numbers 25:5 And Moses sayed vnto the iudges of Israel: go and slea those men that ioyned theym selues vnto Baal Peor.
Numbers 25:6 And behold, one of the children of Israell came & broughte vnto hys brethren, a Madianitish wyfe euen in the syght of Moses & in the sighte of al the multitude of the children of Israel, as they were weppyng in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnes.
Numbers 25:7 And when Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the prieste sawe it, he rose vp out of the company & toke a weapen in hys hand,
Numbers 25:8 & went after the man of Israel into the hore house and thrust them thorow: both the man of Israel and also the woman euen thorowe the bealy of hyr. And the plage ceased from the children of Israel.
Numbers 25:9 And ther dyed in the plage .xxiiij. thousand.
Numbers 25:10 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 25:11 Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the prieste, hathe turned myne anger awaye from the chyldren of Israel, bycause he was gelouse for my sake amonge them that I had not consumed the chyldren of Israel in my gelousy.
Numbers 25:12 Wherfore say: beholde I geue vnto him my couenaunt of peace,
Numbers 25:13 & he shall haue it and hys sede after him, euen the couenaunt of the priestes office for euer, bycause he was gelous for his Goddes sake & made an atonement for the children of Israel.
Numbers 25:14 The name of the Israelite whiche was smitten wyth the Madianityshe wyfe, was Zamri the sonne of Salu, a Lorde of an aunciente house among the Simeonites.
Numbers 25:15 And the name of the Madianittshe wyfe, was Cozby the daughter of Zura heade ouer the people of an auncient house in Madian.
Numbers 25:16 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 25:17 vexe the Madianytes & smyte them,
Numbers 25:18 for they haue troubled you with their wiles with the whych they haue begiled you, thorow Peor and thorowe their sister Cozbi the daughter of a Lord in Madian, whiche was slayne in the day of the plage for Peors sake.

CHAPTER: 26

Numbers 26:1 And after the plage, the Lorde spake vnto Moses and vnto Eleazar the sonne of Aaron the prieste sayinge:
Numbers 26:2 take the numbre of all the multitude of the chyldren of Israell frome .xx. yeare & aboue thorow out theyr fathers houses all that are able to go to warre in Israell.
Numbers 26:3 And Moses & Eleazar the prieste tolde them in the feldes of Moab: by Iordane fast by Iericho,
Numbers 26:4 from .xx. yeare and aboue, as the Lord commaunded Moses. And the children of Israell that came out of Egypt were.
Numbers 26:5 Ruben the eldest sonne of Israel. The children of Ruben were, Hanoch, of whom cometh the kynred of the Hanochites: & of Palu, cometh the kynred of the Paluites:
Numbers 26:6 And of Hesron commeth the kinred of the Hesronites: and of Carmi cometh the kinred of the Carmites.
Numbers 26:7 These are the kinreds of the Rubenites whiche were in numbre .xliij. thousande .vi. hundred, & .xxx.
Numbers 26:8 And the sonnes of Palu were Eliab.
Numbers 26:9 And the sonnes of Eliab were: Nemuel, Dathan, & Abiram. Thys is that Dathan & Abiram councelers in the congregation, whiche stroue against Moses and Aaron in the companye of Corah, when they stroue against the Lord.
Numbers 26:10 And the earth opened hir mouth & swalowed them and Corah also, when the multitude dyed, what tyme the fyre consumed .ij. hundred & fyfty men, & they became a sygne:
Numbers 26:11 Notwithstandyng the children of Corah dyed not.
Numbers 26:12 And the children of Simeon in theyr kynreds were: Nemuel, of whom cometh the kinred of the Nemuelites: Iamin, of whom cometh the kinred of the Iaminites: Iachin, of whom cometh the kinred of the Iachinites:
Numbers 26:13 Zareh, of whom cometh the kinred of the Zarehites: Saule, of whom cometh the kinred of the Saulites.
Numbers 26:14 These are the kinredes of the Simeonites: in numbre .xxij. thousand and two hundred.
Numbers 26:15 And the chyldren of Gad in theyr kynredes were: Zephon, of whom cometh the kinred of the Zephonytes: & of Haggi, cometh the kynred of the Haggites: and of Suni, cometh the kinred of the Sunites:
Numbers 26:16 and of Aseni, cometh the kinred of the Asenites: and of Eri cometh the kynred of the Erites:
Numbers 26:17 and of Arod cometh the kinred of the Arodites: & of Ariel cometh the kinred of the Arielites.
Numbers 26:18 These are the kinreds of the children of Gad in numbre .xl. thousand & .v. hundred.
Numbers 26:19 The children of Iuda: Er & Onan, whiche dyed in the lande of Canaan.
Numbers 26:20 But the chyldren of Iuda in theyr kynred were: Sela of whom cometh the kynred of the Selamites: & of Phares cometh the kynred of the Pharesites: and of Zareh cometh the kynred of the Zarehites.
Numbers 26:21 And the children of Phares were Hesron, of whom cometh the kynred of the Hesronites: and of Hamul commeth the kynred of the Hamulites.
Numbers 26:22 These are the kinredes of Iuda, in numbre .lxxvi. thousand & fyue hundred.
Numbers 26:23 And the children of Isachar in their kinreds were: Thola, of whom cometh the kinred of the Tholaites: & Phuna, of whom cometh the kinred of the Phunaites:
Numbers 26:24 & of Iasub cometh the kynred of the Iasubites: and of Simron cometh the kynred of the Simronites.
Numbers 26:25 These are the kynredes of Isachar in numbre .lxiiij. thousand & .iij. hundred,
Numbers 26:26 The children of Zabulon in their kinredes were: Sered, of whom cometh the kynred of the Seredites: and Elon, of whom cometh the kynred of the Elonites: and of Iaheliel cometh the kynred of the Iahelelites,
Numbers 26:27 These are the kynredes of Zabulon: in numbre, .lx. thousand & fiue hundred.
Numbers 26:28 The children of Ioseph in their kinredes were: Manasse and Ephraim,
Numbers 26:29 The chyldren of Manasse: Machir, of whom cometh the kynred of the Machirites. And Machir begat Galaad, of whom cometh the kynred of the Galaadites.
Numbers 26:30 And these are the chyldren of Galaad: Hieser, of whom cometh the kynred of the Hieserites: and of Helech cometh the kynred of the Helechites:
Numbers 26:31 and of Asriel the kynred of the Asrielites: and of Sichem cometh the kynred of the Sichemites:
Numbers 26:32 and of Simida cometh the kynred of the Simidites: and of Hepher cometh the kynred of the Hepherites.
Numbers 26:33 And Zelaphead the sonne of Hephera had no sonnes but daughters. And the names of the daughters of Zelaphead were Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milcha and Thirza.
Numbers 26:34 These are the kinredes of Manasse, in numbre .lij. thousand & seuen hundred.
Numbers 26:35 These are the children of Ephraim in their kynredes: Suthelah, of whom commeth the kynred of the Suthelahites: and Becher, of whom cometh the kinred of the Becherites: & of Thehen cometh the kynred of the Thehenites.
Numbers 26:36 And these are the children of Suthelah: Eran, of whom commeth the kinred of the Eranites.
Numbers 26:37 These are the kynredes of the chyldren of Ephraim in numbre .xxxij. thousand and .v. hundred. And these are the chyldren of Ioseph in theyr kinredes.
Numbers 26:38 These are the chyldren of BenIamin in their kynredes: Bela, of whome cometh the kinred of the Belaites: & of Asbel cometh the kynred of the Asbelites: and of Ahiram, the kinred of the Ahiramites:
Numbers 26:39 and of Supham the kynred of the Suphamites: & of Hupham the kynred of the Huphamites.
Numbers 26:40 And the children of Bela were Ard & Naaman fro whence come the kinreds of the Ardites & of the Naamites.
Numbers 26:41 These ar the children of BenIamin in their kinredes, and in numbre .xlv. thousande and sixe hundred.
Numbers 26:42 These are the children of Dan in their kinredes: of Suham, of whom cometh the kinred of the Suhamites. These are the kinredes of Dan in their generations.
Numbers 26:43 And al the kinredes of the Suhamites were in numbre .lxiiij. thousand and .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 26:44 The chyldren of Aser in theyr kynredes were Iemna, of whom cometh the kinred of the Iemnites: and Iesui, of whom cometh the kinred of the Iesuites: & of Bria cometh the kynred of the Brites.
Numbers 26:45 And the chyldren of Bria were Heber, of whom cometh the kinred of the Heberites: & of Malchiel came the kinred of the Malchealites.
Numbers 26:46 And the daughter of Aser was called Sarah.
Numbers 26:47 These are the kynredes of Aser in numbre .liij. thousand & .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 26:48 The children of Nephthali in ther kynredes were: Ieheziel, of whom came the kinred of the Iahezielites: & Guni, of whom came the kynred of the Gunites:
Numbers 26:49 & of Iezer, came the kinred of the Iezerites: & of Selem the kynred of the Selemites.
Numbers 26:50 These are the kynredes of Nephthali in theyr generations in numbre .xlv. thousande and .iiij. hundred.
Numbers 26:51 These are the numbres of the chyldren of Israel: syxe hundred thousand, and a thousande .vij. hundred and .xxx.
Numbers 26:52 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 26:53 vnto these the land shalbe deuided to enheret, accordyng to the numbre of names:
Numbers 26:54 to many thou shalte gyue the more enheritaunce and to few the lesse: to euery tribe shal the enheritaunce be geuen according to the numbre therof.
Numbers 26:55 Notwythstanding, the land shalbe deuided by lot, & accordinge to the names of the tribes of theyr, fathers they shall enheritt:
Numbers 26:56 & according to theyr lot thou shalt deuide theyr lande both to the many & to the fewe.
Numbers 26:57 These ar the summes of the Leuites in their kynredes of Gerson, came the kynred of the Gersonites: and of Cahath came the kinred of the Cahathites: and of Merari came the kynred of the Merarites.
Numbers 26:58 These are the kinredes of Leui: the kinred of the Libnites, the kynred of the Hebronites, the kynred of the Mahelites, the kinredes of the Musites, the kinred of the Karahites. Kahath begate Amram,
Numbers 26:59 and Amrams wyfe was called Iochebed a daughter of Leui, whyche was borne hym in Egypte. And she bare vnto Amram, Aaron, Moses, & MyrIam theyr sister.
Numbers 26:60 And vnto Aaron were borne, Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar & Ithamar.
Numbers 26:61 But Nadab & Abihu dyed, as they offered straunge fyre before the lord.
Numbers 26:62 And the numbre of them was .xxiij. thousande of all the males from a moneth olde & aboue For they were not numbred among the children of Israel, bycause there was no enheritaunce geuen theym amonge the children of Israel.
Numbers 26:63 These are the numbres of the children of Israel which Moses & Eleazar the priest numbred in the feldes of Moab, fast bi Iordane nye to Iericho.
Numbers 26:64 And among these there was not a man of the numbre of the children of Israel whyche Moses and Aaron told in the wyldernes of Sinai.
Numbers 26:65 For the Lord sayed vnto them, that they should dye in the wildernes and that there should not be lefte a man of them: saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune & Iosua the sonne of Nun.

CHAPTER: 27

Numbers 27:1 And the daughters of Zelaphead the Sonne of Heber the sonne of Gilead, the sonne of Machir the sonne of Manasse of the kynredes of Manasse, the sone of Ioseph (whose names were Mahela, Noha, Hagla, Melcha, and Thyrza)
Numbers 27:2 came and stode before Moses & Eleazar, the priest & before the Lordes & all the multitude in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnes saying
Numbers 27:3 our father dyed in the wyldernesse, & was not amonge the companye of theim that gathered them selues togyther agaynst the Lord in the congregation of Corah: But dyed in hys owne synne, and had no sonnes.
Numbers 27:4 Wherfore sholde the name of our fathers be taken away from amonge hys kynred, bycause he had no sonne? Gyue vnto vs a possession among the brethren of our father.
Numbers 27:5 And Moses brought theyr cause before the Lorde.
Numbers 27:6 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Numbers 27:7 The daughters of Zelaphead speake ryght thou shalt gyue them a possession to enherit among their fathers brethren, & shalte turne the enheritaunce of their father vnto theim.
Numbers 27:8 And speake vnto the children of Israel saying If a man dye & haue no sonne ye shall turne hys enheritaunce vnto hys daughter.
Numbers 27:9 If he haue no doughter, ye shall gyue hys enheritaunce vnto hys brethren.
Numbers 27:10 If he haue no brethren, ye shall gyue hys enheritaunce vnto hys fathers brethren.
Numbers 27:11 If he haue no fathers brethren, ye shal giue hys enheritaunce vnto hym that is nexte to hym of hys kynred, and lette hym possesse it. And thys shall be vnto the chyldren of Israell an ordinaunce, and a lawe, as the Lorde hathe commaunded Moses.
Numbers 27:12 And the Lorde saied vnto Moses: get the vp into thys mount Abarim, & behold, the land whych I haue geuen vnto the children of Israel.
Numbers 27:13 And when thou hast sene it, thou shalt be gathered vnto thy people also, as Aaron thy brother was gathered vnto hys people.
Numbers 27:14 For ye were disobedient vnto my mouthe in the deserte of Sin in the stryfe of the congregation that ye sanctified me not in the water before their eyes. That is the water of stryfe in Cades in the wildernes of Zin.
Numbers 27:15 And Moses spake vnto the Lord saying:
Numbers 27:16 lett the Lord God of the spirites of al fleshe, sette a man ouer the congregation,
Numbers 27:17 which may go in and out before them, & to lead them in & out that the congregation of the Lord be not as a flocke of shepe without a shepeheard.
Numbers 27:18 And the Lord said to Moses: take Iosua the sonne of Nun in whom there is a spirite, & put thine handes vpon him,
Numbers 27:19 and set hym before Eleazar the prieste and before all the congregation and gyue him a charge in their syght.
Numbers 27:20 And put of thy prayse vpon him that all the company of the chyldren of Israell may heare
Numbers 27:21 And he shal stand before Eleazar the prieste which shal axe councel for him after the iudgement of Vrim before the Lorde. And at the mouthe of Eleazar shall both he and all the chyldren of Israell with him and al the congregation go in and out.
Numbers 27:22 And Moses did as the Lorde commaunded hym, and he toke Iosua and set hym before Eleazar the prieste & before all the congregation
Numbers 27:23 and put hys handes vpon hym & gaue hym a charge, as the Lord commaunded thorowe the hande of Moses.

CHAPTER: 28

Numbers 28:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Numbers 28:2 gyue the chyldren of Israell a charge and saye vnto them, that they take hede to offer vnto the offerynge of my breade in the Sacrifyce of swete sauoure, in hys due season.
Numbers 28:3 And saye vnto them. Thys is the offerynge whyche ye shall offer vnto the Lorde two Lambes of a yere olde wythout spotte daye by day to be a burnt offerynge perpetually.
Numbers 28:4 One Lambe thou shalt offer in the mornyng and the other at euen.
Numbers 28:5 And therto the tenthe parte of an Epha of floure for a meate offerynge myngled with beaten oyle, the fourth parte of an Hin:
Numbers 28:6 whych is a dayly offerynge ordeyned in the mounte Sinai vnto a swete sauour in the sacrifice of of the Lord.
Numbers 28:7 And the drynkeofferinge of the same the .iiij. part of an Hin vnto one Lambe, & poure the drynke offering in the holy place, to be good drynke vnto the Lord.
Numbers 28:8 And the other Lambe thou shalte offer at euen, wyth the meatofferyng & the dryncke offeryng after the maner of the mornynge: a sacrifyce of a swete sauour vnto the Lorde.
Numbers 28:9 And on the Sabboth day .ij. Lambes of a yere olde a pece & without spot, and two tenth deales of floure for a meat offerynge myngeled wyth oyle, & the dryncke offerynge therto.
Numbers 28:10 This is the burntoffering of euery Saboth, besides the dayly burnt offeryng, and hys drinkeofferyng.
Numbers 28:11 And in the fyrste daye of your moneth, ye shall offer a burnt offerynge vnto the Lorde two yonge bullockes, and a ram, and seuen Lambes of a yere olde wythout spotte,
Numbers 28:12 & .iij. tenthdeales of floure for a meateofferynge myngeled wyth oyle vnto one bullocke, & .ij. tenthdeales of floure for a meate offerynge myngled wyth oyle vnto one ram.
Numbers 28:13 And euermore a tenthdeale of floure myngled wyth oyle, for a meate offerynge vnto one lambe. That is a burnt offerynge of a swete sauour in the sacrifyce of the Lord.
Numbers 28:14 And their drinkofferynges shal be halfe an Hin of wine vnto one bullocke, and the thyrde parte of an Hin of wyne vnto a ram & the fourthe parte of an hin vnto a lambe. This is the burntofferynge of euery moneth thorow out all the monethes of the yeare,
Numbers 28:15 and one he gote for a synneoffering vnto the Lorde, which shal be offered with the dayly burntofferyng & hys drynkeofferynge.
Numbers 28:16 And the .xiiij. daye of the first moneth shalbe passeouer vnto the Lord
Numbers 28:17 And the .xv. day of the same moneth shall be a feast, in whych .vij. dayes men muste eate vnleuended bread.
Numbers 28:18 The fyrst daye shalbe an holy feast, so that ye shall do no maner of laboryous worke therin.
Numbers 28:19 And ye shall offer a burntoffrynge vnto the Lorde two younge bullockes, one ram, and .vij. lambes of a yere olde wythout spott,
Numbers 28:20 and their meatoffring of floure myngled wyth oyle .iij. tenthdeales vnto a bullocke, and two tenthdeales vnto a ram,
Numbers 28:21 and euermoare one tenthdeale vnto a lambe, thorow out the .vij. lambes:
Numbers 28:22 & an he goote for a synofferynge to make an attonement for you.
Numbers 28:23 And ye shall offer these, besyde the burntofferyng in the mornyng that is alway offered.
Numbers 28:24 And after thys maner ye shal offer thorow out the .vij. dayes, the fode of the sacryfice of a swete sauoure vnto the Lord. And it shalbe done besyde the dayly burntofferyng & hys drynkofferynge.
Numbers 28:25 And the seuenth daye shal be an holy feast vnto you, so that ye shal do no laborious worke therin.
Numbers 28:26 And the daye of your fyrst frutes when ye brynge a newe meateofferyng vnto the Lord in your wekes shalbe an holy feast vnto you:
Numbers 28:27 so that ye shal do no laborious worke therin. And ye shall offer a burntoffring of a swete sauoure vnto the Lord two young bullockes, and a ram, & .vij. lambes of a yere olde a pece,
Numbers 28:28 wt their meatofferynges of floure myngled with oyle .iij. tenthdeales vnto a bullocke two tenthdeales to a ram,
Numbers 28:29 & euermoare one tenthdeale vnto a lambe thorow out the .vij. lambes,
Numbers 28:30 and an he goote to make an attonement for you.
Numbers 28:31 And thys ye shal do besydes the daily burntoffring & his meateoffrynge: & they shalbe wythout spot, with their drynkoffrynges.

CHAPTER: 29

Numbers 29:1 And the fyrst day of the .vij. moneth shalbe an holy feast vnto you and ye shall do no laboryous worke therin. It shalbe a day of trompet blowyng vnto you.
Numbers 29:2 And ye shal offer a burntofferyng of a swete sauour vnto the Lorde: one younge bullocke and one ram and .vij. lambes of a yere olde a peace that are pure.
Numbers 29:3 And their meatoffringes of floure myngled wyth oyle .iij. tenth deales vnto the bullocke, & two vnto the ram,
Numbers 29:4 & one tenth deale vnto one lambe thorow the .vij. lambes.
Numbers 29:5 And an he goote for a synoffryng to make an attonement for you,
Numbers 29:6 besyde the burntofferyng of the moneth and his meatofferynge & besyde the dayly burntofferyng & his meatofferyng, and the drynkofferynges of the same: accordynge vnto the maner of them for a sauoure of swetnesse in the sacryfice of the Lord.
Numbers 29:7 And the tenth daye of that same seuenth moneth shalbe an holy feast vnto you, & ye shall humble youre soules and shall doo no maner worke therin.
Numbers 29:8 And ye shall offer a burntofferyng vnto the Lorde of a swete sauour: one bullocke, and a ram, & .vij. lambes of a yere olde a pece, without faute
Numbers 29:9 and their meateoffringes of floure mingled with oyle .iij. tenthdeales to a bullocke, & .ij. to a ra
Numbers 29:10 & al waye a tenth deale vnto a lambe, thorowe out the .vij. lambes.
Numbers 29:11 And one he goote for a synofferynge, besyde the synneofferynge of attonement and the dayly burntofferynge, & the meate and drynkoffrynges that longe to the same.
Numbers 29:12 And the .xv. day of the .vij. moneth shalbe holy day & ye shall doo no laborious worcke therin, and ye shall kepe a feast vnto the Lord of .vij. dayes longe.
Numbers 29:13 And ye shal offer a burntoffrynge of a swete sauoure vnto the Lord .xiij. bullockes .ij. rammes and .xiiij. lambes which are yerelynges & pure,
Numbers 29:14 wyth oyle .iij. tenthdeales vnto euery one of the .xiij. bullockes .ij. tenthdeales to ether of the rammes
Numbers 29:15 & one tenthdeale vnto eche of the .xiiij. lambes.
Numbers 29:16 And one he goote vnto a synoffering, besyde the dayly burntoffrynge with his meate and drynckofferynges.
Numbers 29:17 And the seconde day .xij. young bullockes .ij. rammes & .xiiij. yerlynge lambes without spot:
Numbers 29:18 & their meatoffringes and drynkofferinges vnto the bullockes, rammes and lambes accordynge to the nombre of them and after the maner.
Numbers 29:19 And an he goote for a synofferynge, besyde the dayly burntoffryng and his meate and drynkofferynges.
Numbers 29:20 And the .iij. daye .xi. bullockes twoo rammes and .xiiij. yerelynge lambes without spot:
Numbers 29:21 & their meat and drynkofferynges vnto the bullockes, rammes and lambes, after the nombre of them and according to the maner.
Numbers 29:22 And an he goote for a synoffrynge, besyde the daylye burntoffrynge and hys meate and drynke offrynges.
Numbers 29:23 And the fourth daye .x. bullockes two rammes and .xiiij. lambes yerelynges pure,
Numbers 29:24 and their meate and drynkofferynges vnto the bullockes, rammes & lambes, according to the nombre of them and after the maner.
Numbers 29:25 And an he goote for a synneoffrynge, besyde the dayly burntofferynge and his meate and drynkofferynges.
Numbers 29:26 And the fyfte daye .ix. bullockes two rammes and .xiiij. lambes of one yere old a pece wtout spot.
Numbers 29:27 And their meate and drynckofferynges vnto the bullockes, rammes and lambes, accordynge to the nombre of them and after the maner.
Numbers 29:28 And an he goote for a synne offerynge, besyde the dayly burntofferynge and his meate and drynkoffrynges.
Numbers 29:29 And the syxte daye .viij. bullockes twoo rammes and .xiiij. yerelynge lambes without spot.
Numbers 29:30 And theyr meate & drynkofferynges vnto the bullockes, rammes and lambes, accordyng to the maner.
Numbers 29:31 And an he goote for a synneofferynge, besyde the dayly burntofferynge and hys meate and drynckofferynges.
Numbers 29:32 And the seuenth daye .vij. bullockes .ij. rammes and .xiij. lambes that are yerelynges & pure.
Numbers 29:33 And their meate and drinkofferinges vnto the bullockes, rammes and lambes, accordynge to their nombre and to the maner.
Numbers 29:34 And an he goote for a synoffering, besyde the dayly burntofferyng & his meate & drynkofferynges.
Numbers 29:35 And the eyght day shalbe the conclusyon of the feaste vnto you, and ye shall do no maner laborious worck therin.
Numbers 29:36 And ye shall offer a burntofferyng of a swete sauoure vnto the Lorde: one bullocke, one ram and seuen yerelynge lambes wythout spott.
Numbers 29:37 And the meate & drynkofferynges vnto the bullocke, ram and lambes, accordynge to their nombres and accordyng to the maner.
Numbers 29:38 And an he goote for a synneofferynge besyde the dayly burntoffering and his meate and drynkofferynges.
Numbers 29:39 These thynges ye shal do vnto the Lorde in your feastes: besyde your vowes and frewyll offerynges, in youre burntofferynges meatofferynges, drynkofferynges and peace offrynges.
Numbers 29:40 And Moses tolde the chyldren of Israel, accordyng to all that the Lorde commaunded hym.

CHAPTER: 30

Numbers 30:1 And Moses spake vnto the heades of the trybes of the chyldren of Israell sayinge: thys is the thyng which the Lord commandeth.
Numbers 30:2 If a man vowe vnto the Lorde or swere an othe and bynde hys soule, he shall not go backe with hys worde: but shal fulfyll all that proceadeth out of his mouth.
Numbers 30:3 If a damsell vowe a vowe vnto the Lord and bynde her selfe beyinge in her fathers house and vnmaried.
Numbers 30:4 If her father heare her vowe & bond which she hath made vpon her soule, & holde hys peace therto: then all her vowes & bondes which she hath made vpon her soule shall stande in effecte.
Numbers 30:5 But & yf her father forbyd her the same daye that he heareth it, none of her vowes nor bondes whych she hath made vpon her soule shalbe of value, & the Lorde shall forgeue her, because her father forbade her.
Numbers 30:6 If she had an husband when she vowed or pronounced oughte out of her lyppes wherwith she bonde her soule,
Numbers 30:7 and her husbande hearde it and helde hys peace there at the same daye he hearde it: Then her vowes and her bondes wherwyth she bounde her soule, shall stande in effecte.
Numbers 30:8 But and yf her husbande forbade her the same day that the heard it, then hath he made her vowe whyche she had vpon her of none effecte, and that also which she pronounced wt her lyppes wherwyth she bounde her soule, and the lord shal forgeue her.
Numbers 30:9 The vowe of a wyddowe and of her that is deuorced, and all that they haue bounde their soules wyth all, shall stande in effecte wyth them.
Numbers 30:10 If she vowed in her husbandes house or bounde her soule with an oth,
Numbers 30:11 & her husband heard it and helde hys peace and forbade her not: then al her vowes & boundes wherwith she bound her soule, shall stande.
Numbers 30:12 But yf her husband disanulled them the same daye that he heard them, then nothyng that proceded out of her lippes in vowes & boundes wherwith she bounde her soule shall stande in effecte: for her husbande hath loused them. And the Lord shal forgeue her.
Numbers 30:13 All vowes and othes that bynde to humble the soule, maye her husbande stablyshe or breake.
Numbers 30:14 But yf her husbande holde hys peace from one day vnto another, then he stablysheth al her vowes and bondes whyche she had vpon her, because he helde his peace the same day that he heard them.
Numbers 30:15 And yf he afterward breake them, he shal beare her sinne hym selfe.
Numbers 30:16 These are the ordynaunces whyche the Lord commaunded Moses, betwene a man and hys wyfe, and betwene the father & hys daughter, beyinge a damsell in her fathers house.

CHAPTER: 31

Numbers 31:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 31:2 aueng the chyldren of Israel of the Madianites, and afterward be geathered vnto thy people.
Numbers 31:3 And Moses spake vnto the folke saying: Harnesse some of you vnto warre, & let them go vpon the Madianites and auenge the Lord of the Madianites.
Numbers 31:4 Ye shal sende vnto the warre a thousand of euery trybe thorow out all the trybes of Israell.
Numbers 31:5 And there were taken oute of the thousandes of Israell .xij. thousand prepared vnto warre, of euery trybe a thousande.
Numbers 31:6 And Moses sent them a thousande of euery trybe, wyth Phineas the sonne of Eleazar the Preast to warre, and the holy vessels and the trompettes to blowe in hys hande.
Numbers 31:7 And they warred agaynst the Madianites, as the Lord commaunded Moses, and slewe al the males.
Numbers 31:8 And they slewe the kynges of Madian amonge other that were slayne: Eui, Rehem, zur, Hur & Reba: fyue kynges of Madian. And they slew Balaam the sonne of Beor with the swerde.
Numbers 31:9 And the children of Israel toke all the wemen of Madian presoners and their chyldren, and spoyled al theyr catel, their substance and their goodes.
Numbers 31:10 And they burnt al their cities wherin they dwelt, and al their castels with fyre.
Numbers 31:11 And they toke all the spoyle and al they coulde catche, both of men and beastes.
Numbers 31:12 And they broughte the captyues and that which they had taken and all the spoyle vnto Moses and Eleazar the Preast and vnto the company of the children of Israel, euen vnto the hoste, in the feldes of Moab by Iordan nye to Iericho.
Numbers 31:13 And Moses and Eleazar the Preast and al the Lordes of the congregacion went out of the hoste agaynst them.
Numbers 31:14 And Moses was angrye with the offycers of the hoste, wyth the captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hundredes, whyche came from warre & battell,
Numbers 31:15 and sayd vnto them: Haue ye saued the wemen alyue?
Numbers 31:16 beholde these caused the chyldren of Israel thorow Balam, to commyt trespace agaynst the Lorde, by the reason of Peor, & there folowed a plage among the congregacion of the Lorde.
Numbers 31:17 Now therfore slee al the men chyldren and the wemen that haue lien with men fleshlye:
Numbers 31:18 But all the wemen chyldren that haue not lyen with men, kepe a lyue for your selues.
Numbers 31:19 And lodge without the hoste seuen dayes al that haue kylled any persone and al that haue touched any dead body, & purifye both your selues & youre presoners the .iij. day and the .vij.
Numbers 31:20 And sprynkle al your raymentes and all that is made of skynnes, and al worke of gootes here, and al thynges made of wood.
Numbers 31:21 And Eleazar the Preast sayde vnto al the men of warre which went out to battel: this is the ordinaunce of the law which the Lord commaunded Moses:
Numbers 31:22 Golde, syluer, brasse, yron, tyn and leade,
Numbers 31:23 and all that may abyde the fyre, ye shall make it go thorow the fyre, & then it is cleane. Neuerthelater, it shalbe sprynkled with sprynklynge water. And all that suffreth not the fyre, ye shall make goo thorow the water.
Numbers 31:24 And wash youre clothes the seuenth day, and then ye are cleane. And afterward come into the hoste.
Numbers 31:25 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 31:26 take the summe of the pray that was taken, both of the wemen & of catell, thou & Eleazar the preast and the auncient heades of the congregacion.
Numbers 31:27 And deuyde it in to two partis, betwene them that toke the warre vpon them and went out to battell and al the congregacion.
Numbers 31:28 And take a porcion vnto the Lord of the men of warre which went out to battell: one of fyue hundred, of the wemen and of the oxen and of the asses and of the shepe:
Numbers 31:29 and ye shal take it of their halfe and geue it vnto Eleazar the preast, an heaueofferynge vnto the Lorde.
Numbers 31:30 And of the halfe of the chyldren of Israel, take one of fyfty, of the wemen, of the oxen, of the asses and of the shepe, and of all maner of beastes, and geue them vnto the leuites which wayte vpon the habitacyon of the Lord.
Numbers 31:31 And Moses and Eleazar the preast did as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Numbers 31:32 And the botye and the praye which the men of warre had caught was .vi. hundred thousande and .lxxv. thousand shepe:
Numbers 31:33 & .lxxij. thousand oxen
Numbers 31:34 .lxi. thousande asses:
Numbers 31:35 and .xxxij. thousand wemen that had lyen by no man.
Numbers 31:36 And the halfe which was the parte of them that went out to warre, was .iij. hundred thousande and .xxxvij. thousande and fyue hundred shepe:
Numbers 31:37 And the Lordes parte of the shepe was .vi. hundred and .lxxv.
Numbers 31:38 And the oxen were .xxxvi. thousande, of which the Lordes parte was .lxxij.
Numbers 31:39 And the asses were .xxx. thousande and fyue hundred, of whych the Lordes parte was .lxi.
Numbers 31:40 And the wemen were .xvi. thousande, of whiche the Lordes parte was .xxxij. soules.
Numbers 31:41 And Moses gaue that summe which was the lordes heaueoffryng vnto Eleazar the preast: as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Numbers 31:42 And the other halfe of the chyldren of Israel which Moses separated from the men of warre
Numbers 31:43 (that is to wete, the halfe that pertayned vnto the congregacion) was .iij. hundred thousande and .xxxvij. thousand and fyue hundred shepe:
Numbers 31:44 & .xxxvi. thousande oxen:
Numbers 31:45 and .xxx. thousand asses and fyue hundred:
Numbers 31:46 & .xvi. thousande wemen.
Numbers 31:47 And Moses toke of this halfe that pertayned vnto the chyldren of Israel: one of euery fyftye, both of the wemen and of the catel, and gaue them vnto the Leuites whyche wayted vpon the habitacion of the Lorde, as the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Numbers 31:48 And the offycers of thousandes of the hoste, the captaynes ouer the thousandes and the captaynes ouer the hundredes came forth & sayd vnto Moses:
Numbers 31:49 Thy seruauntes haue taken the summe of the men of warre, which were vnder oure hand, and there lacked, not one man of them.
Numbers 31:50 We haue therfore brought a present vnto the Lorde what euery man found of Iewels of golde, cheynes, bracelettes, rynges, earynges and spangels, to make an attonement for our soules before the Lord.
Numbers 31:51 And Moses and Eleazar toke the golde of them: Iewels of all maner facions.
Numbers 31:52 And al the gold of the heaueoffring of the Lord, of the captaynes ouer thousandes & hundredes was .xvi. thousand .vij. hundred and .l. sicles
Numbers 31:53 for the men of warre had spoyled, euery man for him selfe.
Numbers 31:54 And Moses & Eleazar the preast toke the golde of the captaynes ouer the thousandes and ouer the hundredes, and brought it into the tabernacle of wytnesse: to be a memorial vnto the children of Israel, before the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 32

Numbers 32:1 The chyldren of Ruben and the children of Gad, had an exceadyng greate multitude of catel. And when they sawe the lande of Iazer and the land of Galaad that it was an apte place for catell,
Numbers 32:2 they came and spake vnto Moses and Eleazar the preast and vnto the Lordes of the congregacion sayinge.
Numbers 32:3 The land of Ataroth & Dibo and Iazer, and Nemrah & Hesbon & Elealeh and Sabam & Nebo and Beon,
Numbers 32:4 whiche contrye the Lord smote before the congregacion of Israel: is a land for catel and we thy seruauntes haue catel
Numbers 32:5 wherfore (sayde they) yf we haue found grace in thy syghte, let thys lande be geuen vnto thy seruauntes to possesse, & brynge vs not ouer Iordan.
Numbers 32:6 And Moses sayd vnto the chyldren of Gad & of Ruben: shall your brethren go to warre and ye tarye here?
Numbers 32:7 Wherfore discorage ye the hertes of the chyldren of Israel for to go ouer into the land whych the Lord hath geuen them.
Numbers 32:8 This dyd your fathers, when I sent them from Cades barne to se the land.
Numbers 32:9 And they went vp euen vnto the ryuer of Escol and sawe the lande, and dyscoraged the hertes of the chyldren of Israell, that they should not go into the land which the Lorde had geuen them.
Numbers 32:10 And the Lorde was wroth the same tyme and sware sayinge.
Numbers 32:11 None of the men that came out of Egypte from twenty yere olde and aboue, shal se the lande whych I sware vnto Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, because they haue not contynually folowed me:
Numbers 32:12 saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune the Kenesite, & Iosua the sonne of Nun, for they haue folowed me continually,
Numbers 32:13 And the Lord was angry wyth Israel, & made them wandre in the wyldernesse .xl. yere, vntyl al the generacion that had done euel in the syghte of the Lord were consumed.
Numbers 32:14 And beholde, ye are rysen vp in your fathers steade, to the encrease of synfull men, and to augment the fearse wrath of the lord to Israell warde.
Numbers 32:15 For yf ye tourne awaye from after him, he wyll yet agayn leaue the people in the wyldernesse, so shal ye destroy al thys folke.
Numbers 32:16 And they went nere hym and sayde: we wyl buylde shepefoldes here for our shepe and for oure catell, and cyties for our chyldren.
Numbers 32:17 But we our selues wil go ready armed before the chyldren of Israell, vntyll we haue brought them vnto their place. And oure chyldren shall dwell in the fenced cyties, because of the inhabiters of the land.
Numbers 32:18 And we wyll not retourne vnto oure houses, vntyll the chyldren of Israel haue enhereted: euery man hys enheritaunce.
Numbers 32:19 For we wyll not enheret wyth them on yonder side Iordan forwarde, because oure enheritaunce is falled to vs on thys syde Iordan eastwarde.
Numbers 32:20 And Moses sayd vnto them: If ye wyl do thys thynge, that ye wyl go all harnessed before the Lord to warre,
Numbers 32:21 and wyll go all of you in harnesse ouer Iordan before the Lord, vntyll he haue cast out hys enemyes before him,
Numbers 32:22 and vntyl the land be subdued before the Lord, then ye shall retourne and be without synne agaynst the Lord & agaynst Israell, & thys lande shalbe your possessyon before the Lorde.
Numbers 32:23 But and yf ye wyl not do so, behold, ye synne agaynst the Lord: and be sure your synne wyll fynde you out.
Numbers 32:24 Bylde youre cyties for your chyldren and fouldes for your shepe, and se ye do that ye haue spoken.
Numbers 32:25 And the chyldren of Gad and of Ruben spake vnto Moses sayinge: thy seruauntes wyl do as my Lorde commaundeth.
Numbers 32:26 Our children our wyues substance and all oure catell shall remayne here in the cyties of Galaad.
Numbers 32:27 But we thy seruauntes wyll go all harnessed for the warre vnto battell before the Lorde, as my Lord hath sayd.
Numbers 32:28 And Moses commaunded Eleazar the Preast: and Iosua the sonne of Nun and the auncient heades of the trybes of the chyldren of Israel,
Numbers 32:29 and sayd vnto them: If the children of Gad and Ruben wyll go wyth you ouer Iordan, al prepared to feyght before the Lord then when the land is subdued vnto you, geue them the lande of Galaad to possesse,
Numbers 32:30 but & yf they wyll not go ouer wyth you in harnesse, then they shall haue their possessyons among you in the land of Canaan.
Numbers 32:31 And the children of Gad & Ruben answered saying: that whych the Lord hath sayd vnto thy seruauntes we wyl do.
Numbers 32:32 We wyl go harnessed before the Lord into the land of Canaan, and the possessyon of our enheritaunce shalbe on thys syde Iordan.
Numbers 32:33 And Moses gaue vnto the chyldren of Gad and of Ruben and vnto halfe the trybe of Manasse the sonne of Ioseph, the kyngdome of Sehon kynge of the Amorites, and the kyngdome of Og kynge of Bason, the lande that longed vnto the cyties therof in the costes of the countre rounde aboute.
Numbers 32:34 And the chyldren of Gad bylte Didon, Ataroth, Aroer, Atroth,
Numbers 32:35 Sophan, Iaeser, Iegabea,
Numbers 32:36 Bethnimra and Betharan fenced cytyes, and they buylt foldes for the shepe.
Numbers 32:37 And the chyldren of Ruben bylte Hesbon, Eleale, Kiriathaim,
Numbers 32:38 Nebo, Baal, Meon and turned theyr names, and Sibaina also: and gaue names vnto the cyties whych they buylt.
Numbers 32:39 And the chyldren of Machir the sonne of Manasse went to Galaad and toke it, and put oute the Amorites that were therin.
Numbers 32:40 And Moses gaue Galaad vnto Machir the sonne of Manasse, and he dwelt therin.
Numbers 32:41 And Iahir the sonne of Manasse went and toke the small townes therof, and called them the townes of Iair.
Numbers 32:42 And Nobah went and and toke Kenath wyth the townes longynge therto, and called it Nobah after his awne name.

CHAPTER: 33

Numbers 33:1 These are the iourneyes of the children of Israell which went out of the land of Egypte wt theyr armies vnder Moses and Aaron.
Numbers 33:2 And Moses wrote theyr goyinge oute by their iourneyes at the commaundement of the Lord: euen these are the iourneyes of their goynge out.
Numbers 33:3 The chyldren of Israel departed from Rahemses the .xv. day of the fyrst moneth, on the morow after. Passeouer, and went out wyth an hye hand in the syghte of all Egypte,
Numbers 33:4 whyle the Egypcyans buryed al their fyrstborne which the Lord had smytten amonge them. And vpon their goddes also the Lorde dyd execucyon.
Numbers 33:5 And the children of Israel remoued from Rahemses and pitched in Socoth.
Numbers 33:6 And they departed from Socoth & pytched their tentes in Ethan, whyche is in the edge of the wyldernesse.
Numbers 33:7 And they remoued from Ethan & tourned vnto the entring of Hiroth whych is before Baall Zephon, and pitched before Migdol.
Numbers 33:8 And they departed from before Hiroth and went thorowe the myddes of the sea into the wyldernesse, and went .iij. dayes iourney in the wildernesse of Ethan and pytched in Marah.
Numbers 33:9 And they remoued from Marah and went vnto Elim where were .xij. fountaynes & .lxx. paulmetrees and they pitched there.
Numbers 33:10 And they remoued from Elim & laye fast by the red sea.
Numbers 33:11 And they remoued from the red sea and laye in the wyldernesse of Sin.
Numbers 33:12 And they toke their iourney out of the wyldernesse of Sin, and set vp their tentes in Daphka.
Numbers 33:13 And they departed from Daphka, & lay in Alus.
Numbers 33:14 And they remoued from Alus, and lay at Raphedim, where was no water for the people to drynke.
Numbers 33:15 And they departed from Raphedim, and pitched in the wyldernesse of Sinai.
Numbers 33:16 And they remoued from the desert of Sinay, and lodged at the graues of lust.
Numbers 33:17 And they departed from the sepulchres of lust, & lay at Hazeroth.
Numbers 33:18 And they departed from Hazeroth, and pytched in Rithma.
Numbers 33:19 And departed from Rithma and pytched at Rimon Parez.
Numbers 33:20 And they departed from Rimon Parez, and pitched in Libna.
Numbers 33:21 And they remoued from Libna, and pitched at Rissa.
Numbers 33:22 And they iourneyed from Rissa and pytched in Kehelatha.
Numbers 33:23 And they went from Kehelatha, & pitched in mounte Sapher,
Numbers 33:24 And they remoued from mount Sapher and lay in Harada.
Numbers 33:25 And they remoued from Harada, and pitched in Makeheloth.
Numbers 33:26 And they remoued from Makeheloth, & laye at Tahath,
Numbers 33:27 & they departed from Tahath & pitched at Tharath.
Numbers 33:28 And they remoued from Tharath, and pitched in Mithca.
Numbers 33:29 And they went from Mithca, an lodged in Hasmona.
Numbers 33:30 And they departed from Hasmona, and laye at Moseroth.
Numbers 33:31 And they departed from Moseroth, & pytched in BaneIakan.
Numbers 33:32 And they remoued from BaneIakan, and lay at Horgadgad.
Numbers 33:33 And they went from Horgadgad, & pitched in Iathhatha.
Numbers 33:34 And they remoued from Iathhatha, and laye at Abrona.
Numbers 33:35 And they departed from Abrona, and laye at Ezeon gaber.
Numbers 33:36 And they remoued from Ezeon gaber, and pitched in the wyldernesse of Sin, whyche is Cades.
Numbers 33:37 And they remoued from Cades, and pitched in mount Hor in the edge of the land of Edom.
Numbers 33:38 And Aaron the Preast went vp into mount Hor at the commaundement of the Lord and dyed there, euen in the fortieth yere, after the children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, and in the fyrst day of the fyft moneth.
Numbers 33:39 And Aaron was an hundred and .xxxiij. yere old when he died in mount Hor.
Numbers 33:40 And kynge Exad the Canaanite which dwelt in the south of the londe of Canaan, hearde that the chyldren of Israell were come.
Numbers 33:41 And they departed from mount Hor, & pytched in Zalmona.
Numbers 33:42 And they departed from Zalmona, and pitched in Phimon,
Numbers 33:43 and they departed from Phimon, & pitched in Oboth
Numbers 33:44 and they departed frym Oboth, and pitched in Iehabarim in the borders of Moab.
Numbers 33:45 And they departed from Iehabarim, & pitched in Dibon Gad.
Numbers 33:46 And they remoued from Dibon Gad, and laye in Almon Diblathama.
Numbers 33:47 And they remoued from Almon Diblathama, & pytched in the mountaynes of Abarim before Nabo.
Numbers 33:48 And they departed from the mountaynes of Abarim, and pitched in the feldes of Moab fast by Iordan nye to Ierycho.
Numbers 33:49 And ther pitched vpon Iordan, from Beth Haiesmoth vnto the playne of Abelsatim in the feldes of Moab.
Numbers 33:50 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses in the feldes of Moab by Iordan nye vnto Ierycho, saying:
Numbers 33:51 speake vnto the children of Israel and saye vnto them: when ye are come ouer Iordan into the lande of Canaan,
Numbers 33:52 se that ye dryue out all the inhabiters of the lande before you, and destroye their chappelles and all their Images of Metall, and plucke downe all their alters buylte on hylles:
Numbers 33:53 And possesse the lande and dwell therin, for I haue geuen you the lande to enioye it.
Numbers 33:54 And ye shall deuyde the enheritaunce of the land by lot amonge youre kynredes, and geue to the mo the moare enheritaunce, and to the fewer the lesse enherytaunce. And youre enheritaunce shalbe in the trybes of youre fathers, in the place where euery mans lott falleth.
Numbers 33:55 But and yf ye wyl not dryue out the inhabiters of the land before you, then those whyche ye let remayne of them, shalbe thornes in youre eyes & dartes in your sydes, & shall vexe you in the land wherin ye dwel.
Numbers 33:56 Moreouer it wyl come to passe, that I shal do vnto you as I thought to do vnto them.

CHAPTER: 34

Numbers 34:1 And the Lorde spake vnto Moses sayinge:
Numbers 34:2 commaunde the children of Israel and say vnto them: when ye come into the lande of Canaan, thys is the lande that shall fall vnto youre enherytaunce, the lande of Canaan wyth all her costes.
Numbers 34:3 And youre south quarter shalbe from the wyldernesse of Sin a longe by the coaste of Edom, so that youre south quarter shalbe from the syde of the salte sea eastward,
Numbers 34:4 and shall set a compasse from the south vp to Acrabim, and reache to Zinna. And it shal go out on the south syde of Cades Barne, and go out also at Bazar Adar, and go a long to Azmon.
Numbers 34:5 And shal fet a compasse from Azmon vnto the ryuer of Egypt, and shall go out at the sea.
Numbers 34:6 And your west quarter shall be the greate sea, which coaste shalbe your west coaste.
Numbers 34:7 And thys shalbe youre north quarter: ye shal compasse from the great sea vnto mount Hor.
Numbers 34:8 And from mount Hor, ye shal compasse and go vnto Hemath, and the ende of the coste shalbe at Zedada,
Numbers 34:9 and the coste shall reache out to Ziphron and go out at Hazar Enan. And thys shalbe your north quarter.
Numbers 34:10 And ye shall compasse youre east quarter from Hazar enan to Sepham.
Numbers 34:11 And the coste shall go doune from Sepham to Ribla on the east syde of Ain. And then descende and go out at the syde of the sea of Cenereth eastward.
Numbers 34:12 And then go downe a longe by Iordan, and leue at the salte sea. And thys shal be your lande wyth al the costes therof rounde about.
Numbers 34:13 And Moses commaunded the children of Israel saying: this is the land which ye shal enheret by lotte, and whych the Lorde commaunded to geue vnto .ix. trybes & an halfe:
Numbers 34:14 for the trybe of the children of Ruben haue receyued, in the housholdes of their fathers, and the trybe of the chyldren of Gad in their fathers housholdes, & halfe the trybe of Manasse, haue receyued their enheritaunce,
Numbers 34:15 that is to wete .ij. trybes and an halfe haue receyued their enheritaunce on the other syde of Iordan by Iericho eastwarde, towarde the sonne rysynge.
Numbers 34:16 And the Lorde spake to Moses sayinge:
Numbers 34:17 These are the names of the men, which shal deuyde you the land to enheret Eleazar the preast, & Iosua the sonne of Nun.
Numbers 34:18 And ye shall take also a Lorde of euery trybe to deuyde the lande,
Numbers 34:19 whose names are these: In the trybe of Iuda, Caleb the sonne of Iephune.
Numbers 34:20 And in the trybe of the chyldren of Simeon, Semuel the sonne of Amiud,
Numbers 34:21 & in the trybe of BenIamin, Elidad the sonne of Cislon.
Numbers 34:22 And in the trybe of the chyldren of Dan, the Lord Bucki the sonne of Iagli.
Numbers 34:23 And among the chyldren of Ioseph: in the trybe of the children of Manasse, the Lord Haniel the sonne of Ephod.
Numbers 34:24 And in the trybe of the chyldren of Ephraim, the Lorde Camuell the sonne of Siphtan.
Numbers 34:25 And in the trybe of the sonnes of Zabulon, the Lord Elizaphan the sonne of Pharnach.
Numbers 34:26 And in the trybe of the children of Isachar, the lord Palthiel the sonne of Asan.
Numbers 34:27 And the trybe of the sonnes of Aser, the lord Ahihud the sonne of Salomi.
Numbers 34:28 And in the trybe of the children of Nephthali, the Lord Peda El the sonne of Ammihud.
Numbers 34:29 These are they which the Lord commaunded to deuyde the enheritaunce vnto the chyldren of Israel, in the land of Canaan.

CHAPTER: 35

Numbers 35:1 And the Lord spake vnto Moses in the feldes of Moab by Iordan ouer agaynst Ierycho sayinge:
Numbers 35:2 commaunde the chyldren of Israell, that they geue vnto the Leuites of the enheritaunce of their possessyon: cytyes to dwell in. And ye shall geue also vnto the cytyes of the Leuites, suburbes rounde aboute them.
Numbers 35:3 The cytyes shalbe for them to dwell in, & the suburbes for their catell, possession & all maner beastes of theirs.
Numbers 35:4 And the suburbes of the cyties which ye shall geue vnto the Leuites, shall reache from the wall of the cytie outwarde, a thousande cubites rounde aboute.
Numbers 35:5 And ye shall measure without the cytie, and make the vtmost border of the eastsyde: two thousande cubytes, And the vtmost border of the southside: two thousande cubites. And the vtmost border of the westsyde: two thousand cubites: & the vtmost border of the northside: two thousande cubytes also: & the cytie shalbe in the myddes. And these shall be the suburbes of their cyties.
Numbers 35:6 And among the cyties which ye shal geue vnto the Leuites, there shall be syxe cytyes of fraunches which ye shall geue to that intent that he which kylleth, maye flye thyther And to them ye shall adde .xlij. cyties mo:
Numbers 35:7 so that all the cyties whyche ye shall geue the Leuites shalbe .xlviij. wyth theyr suburbes.
Numbers 35:8 And of the cyties whyche ye shall geue oute of the possessyons of the chyldren of Israel, ye shall geue many out of theyr possessyons that haue moche and fewe out of their possessyons that haue lytle: so that euery trybe shal geue of hys cityes vnto the Leuites, accordynge to the enheritaunce whyche he enhereteth.
Numbers 35:9 And the Lord spake vnto Moses saying:
Numbers 35:10 speake vnto the chyldren of Israell and saye vnto them: when ye be come ouer Iordan into the land of Canaan,
Numbers 35:11 ye shall buylde cities which shalbe preuyleged townes for you: that he which sleeth a man vnwares may flye thither.
Numbers 35:12 And the cities shalbe to flee from the executer of bloude, that he which kylled dye not, vntyll he stande before the congregacyon in iudgement.
Numbers 35:13 And of these .vi. fre cyties which ye shall geue
Numbers 35:14 .iij. ye shall geue on thys syde Iordan and .iij. in the lande of Canaan.
Numbers 35:15 And these syxe free cytyes shalbe for the chyldren of Israell and for the straunger and for him that dwelleth among you, that al they whyche kyll any persone vnwares, maye flee thyther.
Numbers 35:16 If any man smyte another with a wepon of yeron that he dye, then he is a mutherer, and shall dye for it.
Numbers 35:17 If he smyte him with a throwynge stone that he dye therwyth, then he shall dye: For he is a murtherer and shalbe slayne therfore.
Numbers 35:18 If he smyte him wyth a hand wepon of wood that he dye therwyth then he shall dye: for he is a murtherer & shal be slayne therfore.
Numbers 35:19 The iustice of bloude shall slee the murtherer, assone as he findeth him:
Numbers 35:20 If he thrust at him of hate, or hourle at him with lying of wayte that he dye or smyte hym with his hande of enuy that he dye,
Numbers 35:21 he the smot him shal dye, for he is a murtherer. The iustyce of bloude shall slee hym as soone as he fyndeth hym.
Numbers 35:22 But and yf he pushed hym by chaunce & not of hate or cast at hym with any maner of thynge and not of layinge of wayte:
Numbers 35:23 or cast any maner of stone at him that he dye therwith, and sawe him not: And he cast it vpon hym and he dye, but was not hys enemye, nether sought him any harme:
Numbers 35:24 Then the congregacion shall iudge betwene the sleer, and the executer of bloud in soche cases.
Numbers 35:25 And the congregracion shal deliuer the sleer out of the hande of the iudge of bloude, & shall restore hym agayn vnto the franchesed cytye, whether he was flead. And he shall byde there vnto the deth of the hye preast whych was anoynted with holy oyle.
Numbers 35:26 But and yf he came wythout the borders of hys preuileged citie whether he was fled,
Numbers 35:27 yf the auenger of bloud fynde hym without the borders of his fre towne, he shall slee the murtherer and be gyltlesse,
Numbers 35:28 because he should haue bydden in hys fre towne vntyll the death of the hye preaste, and after the deth of the hye preaste, he shall retourne agayn vnto the land of his possession.
Numbers 35:29 And thys shalbe on ordinaunce and a law vnto you, among your chyldren after you in all youre habitacions.
Numbers 35:30 Whosoeuer sleith, shalbe slayne at the mouth of wytnesses. For one witnesse shal not answere agaynst one persone to put him to death.
Numbers 35:31 Moreouer ye shall take none amendes for the lyfe of the murtherer whyche is worthy to dye: But he shall be put to death.
Numbers 35:32 Also ye shall take none attonement for hym that is fled to a fre cytie, that he shoulde come agayne and dwell in the lande before the death of the hye Preaste.
Numbers 35:33 And se that ye polute not the lande whych ye are in, for bloud defyleth the lande. And the lande can none otherwyse be clensed of the bloude that is shed therin, but by the bloude of hym that shed it.
Numbers 35:34 Defyle not therfore the land whyche ye inhabyte, and in the myddes of whych I also dwel among the chyldren of Israel.

CHAPTER: 36

Numbers 36:1 And the auncyent heades of the children of Galaad the sonne of Machir the sonne of Manasse of the kynred of the children of Ioseph, came forth and spake before Moses and the prynces which were auncient heades amonge the chyldren of Israel
Numbers 36:2 and sayd. The Lord commaunded my Lorde to geue the land to enheret by lotte to the chyldren of Israell. And then my Lorde commaunded in the name of the Lorde to geue the enheritaunce of Zelaphead oure brother vnto hys daughters.
Numbers 36:3 Nowe when any of the sonnes of the trybes of Israell take them to wyues, then shall their enheritaunce be taken from the enheritaunce of our fathers, and shal be put vnto the enherytaunce of the trybe in whych they are and shalbe taken from the lot of oure enheritaunce.
Numbers 36:4 And when the yere of iubelye cometh vnto the chyldren of Israell, then shal their enheritaunce be put vnto the enheritaunce of the trybe wherin they are, and so shall their enheritaunce be taken awaye from the enheritaunce of the trybe of oure fathers.
Numbers 36:5 And Moses commaunded the chyldren of Israell at the mouth of the Lord sayinge: the trybe of the chyldren of Ioseph haue sayde well.
Numbers 36:6 Thys therfore doeth the Lorde commaunde the daughters of Zelaphead sayinge: let them be wyues to whom they them selfe thyncke best, but in the kynred of the trybe of theyr father shall they marye,
Numbers 36:7 that the enheritaunce of the chyldren of Israel roule not from trybe to trybe. But that the chyldren of Israell maye abyde, euery man in the enheritaunce of the trybe of hys fathers.
Numbers 36:8 And euery daughter that possesseth any enheritaunce amonge the trybes of the children of Israell, shalbe wyfe vnto one of the kynred of the trybe of her father, that the children of Israel may enioye euery man the enheritaunce of his father,
Numbers 36:9 and that the enheritaunce go not from one trybe to another: but that the trybes of the chyldren of Israel, maye abyde euery man in his owne enherytaunce.
Numbers 36:10 And as the Lorde commaunded Moses euen so dyd the daughters of Zelaphead:
Numbers 36:11 Mahela, Thirza, Hagla, Milcha and Noa, and were maryed vnto their fathers brothers sonnes,
Numbers 36:12 of the kynred of the chyldren of Manasses the sonne of Ioseph: and so they had their enheritaunce in the trybe of the kynred of their father.
Numbers 36:13 These are the commaundementes and lawes whyche the Lorde commaunded thorow Moses, vnto the chyldren of Israell in the feldes of Moab vpon Iordan nye vnto Ierycho.

BOOK: Deuteronomy

CHAPTER: 1

Deuteronomy 1:1 These be the wordes whyche Moses spake vnto all Israel, on the other syde Iordan in the wyldernesse and in the feeldes by the red sea, betwene Pharan and Tophel, Laban, Hazeroth and Disahah
Deuteronomy 1:2 .xi. dayes iourney from Horeb vnto Cades barne, by the way that leadeth vnto mount Seir.
Deuteronomy 1:3 And it fortuned the fyrst daye of the .xi. moneth in the fortieth yere that Moses spake vnto the chyldren of Israel accordinge vnto all that the Lorde hade geuen him in commaundement vnto them
Deuteronomy 1:4 after that he had smytten Sehon the kynge of the Amorites which dwelt in Hesbon, and Og kinge of Basan which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrai.
Deuteronomy 1:5 On the other syde Iordan in the lande of Moab, Moses began to declare this lawe saying:
Deuteronomy 1:6 the Lord oure God spake vnto vs in Horeb saying: Ye haue dwelt long ynough in this mount:
Deuteronomy 1:7 departe therfore & take youre iourney and go vnto the hilles of the Amorites and vnto all places nye there vnto: both feldes, hylles and dales: and vnto the south & vnto the sea syde in the lande of Canaan, and vnto Libanon: euen vnto the greate ryuer Euphrates.
Deuteronomy 1:8 Beholde, I haue sett the land before you: goo in therfore & possess the land whiche the Lorde sware vnto youre fathers Abraham, Isaac and Iacob, to geue vnto them and their seade after them.
Deuteronomy 1:9 And I sayde vnto you the same season: I am not able to beare you my selfe alon
Deuteronomy 1:10 For the Lorde youre God hath multiplyed you: so that ye are this day as the starres of heauen in nombr
Deuteronomy 1:11 (the Lorde God of youre fathers make you a thousande tymes so many moo as ye are, & blesse you as he hath promysed you)
Deuteronomy 1:12 how (sayde I) can I my selfe alone, beare the combraunce, charge & stryfe that is amonge you:
Deuteronomy 1:13 brynge therfore men of wisedome & of vnderstandynge & expert: knowen amonge youre trybes, that I maye make them ruelars ouer you,
Deuteronomy 1:14 And ye answerd me and sayde: that which thou hast spoken is good to be done.
Deuteronomy 1:15 And then I toke the heades of youre tribes, men of wysdome & that were expert. and made them ruelars ouer you: captaines ouer thousandes, & ouer hundreds, ouer fyfty & ouer ten, officers a monge youre trybes.
Deuteronomy 1:16 And I charged your Iudges the same time sayinge: heare youre brethren & iudge ryghteously betwene euery man and his brother and the straunger that is wyth hym.
Deuteronomy 1:17 Se that ye know no man in Iudgement: but heare the small as well as the greate & be afrayed of no man, for the iudgment is Gods. And the cause that is to harde for you, bryng vnto me and I will heare it.
Deuteronomy 1:18 And I commaunded you the same ceason, all the thynges whych ye should do.
Deuteronomy 1:19 And then we departed from Horeb and walked thorow all that greate & terrible wyldernesse as ye haue sene alonge by the waye that leadeth vnto the hylles of the Amorites, as the Lord our God commaunded vs, and came to Cades barne.
Deuteronomy 1:20 And there I sayd vnto you: Ye are come vnto the hilles of the Amorites, which the Lorde oure God doth geue vnto vs.
Deuteronomy 1:21 Beholde the Lorde thy God hath set the lande before the, goo vp and conquere it, as the Lord God of thy fathers sayeth vnto the: feare not, nether be discorraged.
Deuteronomy 1:22 And then ye came vnto me euery one and said: Let vs sende men before vs, to searche vs out the lande and to brynge vs worde agayne, both what waye we shall go vp by, and vnto what cyties we shall come.
Deuteronomy 1:23 And the sayinge pleased me well and I toke .xij. men of you, of euery trybe one.
Deuteronomy 1:24 And they departed and went vp into the hye contrey and came vnto the ryuer Escoll, and serched it oute,
Deuteronomy 1:25 and toke of the frute of the lande in their handes and brought it doune vnto vs and brought vs worde agayne and sayde: it is a good land whyche the Lorde oure God doth geue vs.
Deuteronomy 1:26 Notwithstandyng yea wold not consente to goo vp, but were dysobedyent vnto the mouth of the Lord your God,
Deuteronomy 1:27 and murmured in youre tentes and sayde: because the Lord hateth vs, therfore he hath broughte vs out of the lande of Egypte, to delyuer vs into the handes of the Amorites and to destroye vs.
Deuteronomy 1:28 How shall we goo vp? Oure brethren haue discorraged oure hertes sayinge: the people is greater and taller then we, and the cyties are greate and walled euen vp to heauen, & moreouer we haue sene the sonnes of the Enakimes there.
Deuteronomy 1:29 And I sayde vnto you: dreade not nor be afrayed of them:
Deuteronomy 1:30 The Lord your god which gothe before you, he shall fyghte for you, accordyng to al that he dyd vnto you in Egypt before your eyes
Deuteronomy 1:31 and in the wyldernesse: as thou hast sene how that the Lorde thy God bare the as a man shoulde beare hys sonne, thorow out all the waye which ye haue gone vntyll ye came vnto this place.
Deuteronomy 1:32 And yet for all this sayinge ye dyd not beleue the Lorde your God
Deuteronomy 1:33 which gothe the way before you, to serche you oute a place to pitche your tentes in, in fyre by nyghte, that ye myghte se what way to go and in a cloude by day.
Deuteronomy 1:34 And the Lorde heard the voyce of youre wordes and was wroth and sware sayinge,
Deuteronomy 1:35 there shall not one of these men of this froward generacion se that good land which I sware to geue vnto your fathers,
Deuteronomy 1:36 saue Caleb the sonne of Iephune, he shall se it, and to hym wyl I geue the land which he hath walked in and to his chyldren, because he hath contynually folowed the Lorde.
Deuteronomy 1:37 Lykewyse the Lorde was angrye with me for youre sakes saying: thou also shalt not go in thither.
Deuteronomy 1:38 But Iosua the sonne of Nun which standeth before the, he shall go in thither. Bolden hym therfore for he shal deuyde the herytage vnto Israell.
Deuteronomy 1:39 Moreouer youre chyldren which ye sayd should be a praye, and youre sonnes which knowe nether good nor bad this day, they shal goo in thither & vnto them I wyl geue it, and they shal enioye it.
Deuteronomy 1:40 But as for you, turne backe & take your iourney into the wildernesse: euen the way to the read sea.
Deuteronomy 1:41 Then ye answered and sayd vnto me: We haue sinned against the Lord: we wyl go vp & fighte, accordyng to al that the Lord our God commaunded vs. And when ye had gyrde on euery man his wepons of warre & were ready to go vp into the hilles,
Deuteronomy 1:42 the Lorde sayd vnto me: say vnto them, se that ye go not vp & that ye fyghte not, for I am not amonge you: lest ye be plaged before youre enemies.
Deuteronomy 1:43 And when I told you ye wold not heare: but disobeyed the mouth of the Lord, & went presumptuously vp into the hylles.
Deuteronomy 1:44 Then the Amorites which dwelt in those hylles, came out against you and chased you as bees do, and hewed you in Seir, euen vnto Horma.
Deuteronomy 1:45 And ye came agayne and wepte before the Lord: but the Lord wolde not heare your voice nor geue you audience.
Deuteronomy 1:46 And so ye abode in Cades a long ceason.

CHAPTER: 2

Deuteronomy 2:1 Then we tourned & toke oure iourney into the wyldernesse, euen the waye to the read sea as the Lorde commaunded me. And we compassed the mountayns of Seir a longe tyme.
Deuteronomy 2:2 Then the Lord spake vnto me saying:
Deuteronomy 2:3 Ye haue compassed these mountayns longe ynough, tourne you northward.
Deuteronomy 2:4 And warne the people saying Ye shall go thorow the costes of youre brethren the chyldren of Esau whyche dwell in Seir, and they shalbe afrayed of you: But take good heade vnto youre selues
Deuteronomy 2:5 that ye prouoke them not, for I wyl not geue you of their lande, no not so moch as a fote breade: because I haue geuen mount Seir vnto Esau to possesse.
Deuteronomy 2:6 Ye shal bye meate of them for money to eate, and ye shall bye water of them for money to drinke.
Deuteronomy 2:7 For the Lord thy God hath blessed the in al the workes of thyne hand & knewe the as thou wentest thorowe thys great wyldernesse. Moreouer the Lorde thy God hath bene wt the this .xl. yeres, so that thou hast lacked nothyng.
Deuteronomy 2:8 And when we were departed from our brethren the chyldren of Esau whyche dwelt in Seir by the feld way from Elath and Ezion Gaber, we turned and went the waye to the wyldernesse of Moab.
Deuteronomy 2:9 Then the Lord sayd vnto me se that thou vexe not the Moabites, nether prouoke them to battel for I wyl not geue the of their lande to possesse:
Deuteronomy 2:10 because I haue geuen Ar vnto the chyldren of loth to possesse. The Emims dwelt therin in tymes past, a people great, many & tall, as the Enakims:
Deuteronomy 2:11 which also were taken for geauntes as the Enakims: And the Moabites called them Emims.
Deuteronomy 2:12 In like maner the Horims dwelt in Seir before tyme whych the chyldren of Esau cast out, & destroyed them before them and dwelt there in their stede: as Israel did in the land of his possession which the Lord gaue them.
Deuteronomy 2:13 Now ryse vp (sayd I) & get you ouer the ryuer Zared: and we went ouer the ryuer Zared.
Deuteronomy 2:14 The space in whyche we came from Cades barne vntyll we were come ouer the ryuer Zared was .xxxviij. yeres: vntyll all the generacion of the men of warre were wasted out of the host as the Lord sware vnto them.
Deuteronomy 2:15 For in dede the hand of the Lord was against them to destroy them out of the host, tyl they were consumed.
Deuteronomy 2:16 And as soone as al the men of warre were consumed & dead from among the people,
Deuteronomy 2:17 then the Lord spake vnto me saying.
Deuteronomy 2:18 Thou shalt go thorow Ar the coste of Moab this day,
Deuteronomy 2:19 & shalt come nye vnto the children of Ammon: se that thou vexe them not, nor yet prouoke them. For I wil not geue the of the land of the children of Ammon to possesse,
Deuteronomy 2:20 because I haue geuen it vnto the chyldren of Loth to possesse. That also was taken for a land of geauntes & geauntes dwelt therin in old tyme, and the Ammonites called them Zanzumins
Deuteronomy 2:21 A people that was great, many & talle, as the Enakims. But the Lord destroyed them before the Ammonites, & they cast them out & they dwelt there in their steade:
Deuteronomy 2:22 as he did for the chyldren of Esau which dwel in Seir: euen as he destroyed the Horyms before them, & they cast them out and dwel in their steade vnto thys daye.
Deuteronomy 2:23 And the Auums which dwelt in Hazarim euen vnto Aza, the Caphthoryms which came out of Caphthor destroyed them and dwelt in their rowmes.
Deuteronomy 2:24 Ryse vp, take youre iourney and go ouer the ryuer Arnon. Behold, I haue geuen into thy hande Sehon the Amorite kynge of Hesbon, & his land. Go to and conquere and prouoke hym to battell.
Deuteronomy 2:25 Thys daye I wyll begynne to sende the feare and dreade of the vpon all nacions that are vnder all portes of heauen: so that when they heare speake of the they shall tremble and quake for feare of the.
Deuteronomy 2:26 Then I sent messengers out of the wildernesse of the easte vnto Sehon kynge of Hesbon, wt wordes of peace saying:
Deuteronomy 2:27 Let me go thorow thy land. I wyl go al wayes alonge by the hye way & wyll nether turne vnto the ryght hand nor to the left.
Deuteronomy 2:28 Sell me meate for money for to eate, & geue me drynke for money for to drynke. I wyll go thorowe by fote only
Deuteronomy 2:29 (as the chyldren of Esau dyd vnto me whych dwel in Seir & the Moabites whych dwel in Ar) vntyl I be come ouer Iordan, into the lande whych the Lorde oure God geueth vs.
Deuteronomy 2:30 But Sehon the kyng of Hesbon wold not let vs passe by hym, for the Lord thy GOD had hardened hys sprite and made his herte tough because he wold delyuer him in to thy handes as it is come to passe thys day.
Deuteronomy 2:31 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: beholde I haue begonne to set Sehon and hys lande before the: go to and conquere, that thou mayst possesse hys lande.
Deuteronomy 2:32 Then both Sehon and al hys people came out agaynst vs vnto battel at Iahaza.
Deuteronomy 2:33 And the Lorde set hym before vs, and we smote hym and hys sonnes and al hys people.
Deuteronomy 2:34 And we toke al his cyties the same ceason and destroyed al the cities with men, wemen and chyldren and let nothyng remayne,
Deuteronomy 2:35 saue the catell onlye we caught vnto oure selues and the spoyle of the cyties which we toke,
Deuteronomy 2:36 from Aroer vpon the brynke of the ryuer of Arnon, and the cytie in the ryuer, vnto Galaad: there was not one citye to stronge for vs. The Lorde oure God delyuered al vnto vs:
Deuteronomy 2:37 only vnto the land of the children of Ammon ye came not nor vnto al the coste of the ryuer Iabock nor vnto the cities in the mountaynes, nor vnto what soeuer the Lord oure God forbade vs.

CHAPTER: 3

Deuteronomy 3:1 Then we turned & went vp the way to Basan. And Og the kynge of Basan came out agaynst vs: both he and all his people to battell at Edrai.
Deuteronomy 3:2 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: feare him not for I haue deliuered him & all hys people & his land into thy hand & thou shalt deale wyth him as thou dealedst with Sehon kyng of the Amorites whiche dwelt at Hesbon.
Deuteronomy 3:3 And so the Lord our god delyuered into oure handes, Og also the kyng of Basan & al his folcke. And we smote him vntil nought was left him.
Deuteronomy 3:4 And we toke al his cities the same ceason (for there was not a citie which we toke not from them) euen .iij. score cyties, al the region of Argob, the kyngdome of Og in Basan.
Deuteronomy 3:5 Al these cities were made stronge wyth hye walles gates & barres, besyde vnwalled townes a great meanye.
Deuteronomy 3:6 And we vtterly destroyed them as we played wt Sehon kynge of Hesbon bryngyng to nought al the cities with men, wemen and chyldren.
Deuteronomy 3:7 But all the catel & the spoyle of the cities, we caught for oure selues.
Deuteronomy 3:8 And thus we toke the same season, the land out of the hande of two kynges of the Amorytes on the other syde Iordan, from the ryuer of Arnon vnto mount Hermon
Deuteronomy 3:9 (whyche Hermon the Sidons cal Sirion, but the Amorytes cal it Senyr)
Deuteronomy 3:10 al the cities in the playne and al Galaad and all Basan vnto Salecha & Edray, cities of the kyngdome of Og in Basan.
Deuteronomy 3:11 For only Og king of Basan remayned of the remnaunt of the geauntes: behold, his yron bed is yet at Rabah among the children of Ammon .ix. cubytes longe & .iiij. cubites brode, of the cubites of a man.
Deuteronomy 3:12 And when we had conquered thys lande the same time, I gaue from Aroer which is vpon the riuer of Arnon, & halfe mount Galad and the cities therof vnto the Rubenites, & Gadites.
Deuteronomy 3:13 And the rest of Galaad and al Basan the kingdom of Og, I gaue vnto the halfe trybe of Manasse: al the region of Argob wythal, Basan was called the lande of geauntes.
Deuteronomy 3:14 Iair the sonne of Manasse toke al the region of Argob vnto the costes of Gesuri & Maachati & called them after his owne name: Basan Hauoth Iair vnto this dai.
Deuteronomy 3:15 And I gaue half Galaad vnto Machir.
Deuteronomy 3:16 And vnto Ruben & Gad I gaue from Galaad vnto the ryuer of Arnon & halfe the valley & the cost, euen vnto the ryuer Iabock which is the border of the chyldren of Ammon,
Deuteronomy 3:17 and the feldes and Iordan with the coaste, from Ceneroth euen vnto the sea in the feld which is the salt sea vnder the springes of Phasgah the eastwarde.
Deuteronomy 3:18 And I commaunded you the same tyme (yea Ruben & Gad) saying: the Lord youre God hath geuen you thys land to enioye it: se that ye go harnessed before youre brethren the children of Israel, all that are men of warre among you.
Deuteronomy 3:19 Youre wyues only your chyldren & your catell (for I wote that ye haue moch catel) shal abyde in your cities whych I haue geuen you,
Deuteronomy 3:20 vntyl the Lord haue geuen rest vnto your brethren as wel as vnto you, & vntyll they also haue conquered the lande which the Lord your God hath geuen them beyonde Iordan: and then returne agayne euery man vnto his possessyon whych I haue geuen you.
Deuteronomy 3:21 And I warned Iosua the same tyme saying: thyne eyes haue sene all that the Lorde your God hath done vnto these two kinges, euen so the Lorde wyll do vnto all kyngdomes whyther thou goest.
Deuteronomy 3:22 Feare them not for the Lord your GOD he it is that fyghteth for you.
Deuteronomy 3:23 And besoughte the Lorde the same tyme saying:
Deuteronomy 3:24 O Lorde GOD thou hast begonne to shewe thy seruaunte thy greatnesse & thy myghty hande, for there is no God in heauen nor in erth that can do after thy workes & after thy power:
Deuteronomy 3:25 let me go ouer & se the good lande that is beyonde Iordan, that goodly hye contre and Libanon.
Deuteronomy 3:26 But the Lord was angrye wyth me for your sakes & wolde not heare me, but sayed vnto me, be content, and speake henceforth no moare vnto me of this matter.
Deuteronomy 3:27 Get the vp into the toppe of Phasgah & lyfte vp thyne eyes west, north, south, and easte, and behold it wyth thyne eyes for thou shalt not go ouer thys Iordan.
Deuteronomy 3:28 Moreouer charge Iosua and courage him & bolden hym. For he shal go ouer before hys people, & he shall deuyde the lande which thou shalt se vnto them.
Deuteronomy 3:29 And so we abode in the valeye besyde Bethpheor.

CHAPTER: 4

Deuteronomy 4:1 And now herken Israel vnto the ordinaunces & lawes which I teach you, for to do them, that ye maye lyue & go and conquere the lande whych the Lorde God of youre fathers geueth you.
Deuteronomy 4:2 Ye shall put nothynge vnto the worde whych I commaunde you nether do ought therfrom, that ye maye kepe the commandementes of the Lord your God which I commaunde you.
Deuteronomy 4:3 Youre eyes haue sene what the Lord dyd vnto Baal Peor: for all the men that folowed Baal Peor, the Lord your God hath destroyed among you.
Deuteronomy 4:4 But ye that claue vnto the Lorde your God are alyue euery one of you this day.
Deuteronomy 4:5 Beholde, I haue taught you ordinaunces & lawes such as the Lorde my God commaunded me that ye should do euen so in the land whither ye go to possesse it.
Deuteronomy 4:6 Kepe them therefore and do them for that is your wysdome and vnderstandyng in the syght of the nations, whych when they haue hearde all these ordinaunces, shall saye: O what a wyse and vnderstaudynge people is thys greate nation.
Deuteronomy 4:7 For what nation is so great that hath Goddes so nye vnto him as the Lorde oure God is nye vnto vs, in all thynges, when we cal vnto him?
Deuteronomy 4:8 Yea, & what nation is so greate that hathe ordinaunces, and lawes so ryghtuouse, as all thys lawe which I set before you thys day.
Deuteronomy 4:9 Take hede to thy selfe therfore only & kepe thy soule diligently, that thou forget not the thynges whych thyne eyes haue sene, & that they departe not oute of thyne herte, all the dayes of thy lyfe: but teach them thy sonnes and thy sonnes sonnes.
Deuteronomy 4:10 The day that I stode before the Lorde your God in Horeb, when he sayed vnto me, gather me the people togither, that I may make them heare my wordes that they maye learne to feare me as longe as they lyue vpon the earth & that they may teache theyr children:
Deuteronomy 4:11 ye came and stode also vnder the hyll, and the hyll burnte with fyre euen vnto the mydes of heauen, and there was darckenes cloudes and myste.
Deuteronomy 4:12 And the Lorde spake vnto you out of the fyre and ye heard the voyce of his wordes: but sawe no ymage, saue heard a voyce onely.
Deuteronomy 4:13 And he declared vnto you his couenaunt which he commaunded you to do, euen .x. verses & wrote them in two tables of stone.
Deuteronomy 4:14 And the Lord commaunded me that same ceason to teache you ordinaunces and lawes, for to do them in the land whither ye go to possesse it.
Deuteronomy 4:15 Take hede vnto youre selues diligentlye as pertaynynge vnto youre Soules, for ye sawe no maner of ymage the daye when the Lorde spake vnto you in Horeb out of the fire lest ye marre your selues
Deuteronomy 4:16 & make you grauen ymages after whatsoeuer likenes it be: whether after the lykenesse of manne or woman
Deuteronomy 4:17 or any maner beaste that is on the earth or of anye maner fethered foule that flyeth in the ayre,
Deuteronomy 4:18 or of anye maner worme that creapeth on the earth or of anye maner fish that is in the water beneth the earth.
Deuteronomy 4:19 Yea, & least thou lyfte vp thyne eye vnto heauen, & when thou seist the sunne and the mone and the starres and whatsoeuer is contained in heauen, shouldest be deceyued and shouldest bowe thy selfe to them and serue the thynges whych the Lord thy God hathe distributed vnto all nations that are vnder al quarters of heauen.
Deuteronomy 4:20 For the Lorde toke you and brought you out of the, yron furnace of Egipt, to be vnto him a people of enheritaunce, as it is come to passe thys daye.
Deuteronomy 4:21 Furthermore, the Lorde was angrye wt me for youre sakes & sware, that I shoulde not go ouer Iordan and that I should not go vnto that good land, which the Lorde thy God geueth the to enheritaunce.
Deuteronomy 4:22 For I must dye in thys Land, & shal not go ouer Iordan. But ye shall go ouer and conquere that good land.
Deuteronomy 4:23 Take hede to your selues therefore, that ye forgett not the appoyntment of the Lorde your god which he made with you, & that ye make you no grauen ymage of whatoeuer it be that the Lorde thy God hath forbydden the.
Deuteronomy 4:24 For the Lorde thy God is a consuming fyre, and a gelouse God.
Deuteronomy 4:25 If after thou haste gotten chyldren and chyldrens chyldren & hast dwelt long in the lande, ye shall marre your selues and make grauen ymages after the likenes of whatsoeuer it be, and shall worke wyckednes in the syght of the Lord thy God, to prouoke him.
Deuteronomy 4:26 I cal heauen and earth to recorde vnto you thys day, that ye shal shortely perishe from of the lande whither ye go ouer Iordan to possesse it: ye shal not prolong your daies therin but shal shortly be destroyed.
Deuteronomy 4:27 And the Lorde shal scatter you among nations, & ye shalbe left fewe in numbre among the people whyther the lord shal bryng you,
Deuteronomy 4:28 & there ye shall serue Gods whych are the workes of mans hand, wod & stone which neither se nor heare nor eate nor smell.
Deuteronomy 4:29 Neuerthelater ye shall seke the Lord your God euen ther, and shall fynde hym it thou seeke hym wyth all thyne herte and wyth all thy soule.
Deuteronomy 4:30 In thy tribulation and when all these thynges are come vpon the euen in the later dayes, thou shalte turne vnto the Lorde thy God, and shalte herken vnto hys voyce.
Deuteronomy 4:31 For the Lord thy God is a pitiful God, he wil not forsake the neyther destroy the, nor forget the appoyntment made wt thy fathers whyche he sware vnto them.
Deuteronomy 4:32 For aske I pray the for the dayes that are past which were before the, sence the day that God created man vpon the earth and from the one syde of heauen vnto the other whether any thynge hath bene lyke vnto thys greate thyng or whether any suche thyng hath bene heard as it is,
Deuteronomy 4:33 that a nation hath heard the voice of God speaking out of fire as thou hast herde and yet lyued?
Deuteronomy 4:34 eyther whether God assaied to go & take him a people from amonge nations, thorowe temptations and sygnes and wonders & thorow warre & wyth a myghty hand and a streatched oute arme and with myghtye terryble syghtes, accordynge vnto all that the Lord your God dyd vnto you in Egypt before your eyes.
Deuteronomy 4:35 Vnto the it was shewed, that thou mightest know, howe that the lorde he is God & that there is none but he.
Deuteronomy 4:36 Oute of heauen he made the hear hys voyce to nurture the, and vpon earth he shewed the his great fire, and thou heardest hys wordes out of the fyre.
Deuteronomy 4:37 And bycause he loued thy fathers, therefore he chose theyr sede after them and broughte the out wyth hys presence and with hys mighty power of Egypte:
Deuteronomy 4:38 to thruste oute nations greater & myghtier then thou before the, to bring the in, & to giue the their land to enheritaunce: as it is come to passe this day.
Deuteronomy 4:39 Vnderstand therefore thys daye & turne it to thyne herte, that the Lord he is God in heauen aboue, & vpon the earth beneth there is no mo:
Deuteronomy 4:40 kepe therefore hys ordinaunces, & his commaundementes which I commaund the this day, that it may go wel with the & with thy children after the, & that thou maist prolong thi dayes vpon the earth which the Lord thy God geueth the thy lyfe long.
Deuteronomy 4:41 Then Moses seuered .iij. cityes on the other syde Iordan toward the sonne rysing,
Deuteronomy 4:42 that he shoulde flee thyther whyche had kylled hys neyghboure vnwares and hated hym not in tyme paste, and therefore shoulde flee to one of the same cities and lyue:
Deuteronomy 4:43 Bezer in the wildernes, euen in the playne contry among the Rubenites: & Ramoth in Galaad among the Gaddites and Solan in Bason amonge the Manassites.
Deuteronomy 4:44 This is the law which Moses set before the chyldren of Israell,
Deuteronomy 4:45 and these are the witnesses, ordinaunces & statutes whych Moses tolde the chyldren of Israel after they came out of Egypt
Deuteronomy 4:46 on the other side Iordan in the valey besyde Beth Pheor in the land of Sehon kyng of the Amorytes whiche dwelt at Hesbon, whom Moses & the children of Israell smote after they were come out of Egypt
Deuteronomy 4:47 and conquered hys land and the lande of Og kynge of Basan .ij. kynges of the Amorites on the other syde Iordan toward the sunne rysynge:
Deuteronomy 4:48 from Aroer vpon the bancke of the ryuer Arnon, vnto the mount Sion which is called Hermon
Deuteronomy 4:49 and al the feildes on the other syde Iordan eastwarde: euen vnto the sea in the felde vnder the springes of Phasgah.

CHAPTER: 5

Deuteronomy 5:1 And Moses called vnto all Israel & said vnto them: Heare Israell the ordinaunces and lawes which I speake in thine eares this daye, & learne theim, & take hede that ye do them.
Deuteronomy 5:2 The Lord our God made an appoyntment with vs in Horeb.
Deuteronomy 5:3 The Lord made not thys bond wyth our fathers, but wyth vs, we are they whyche are all here a lyue thys daye.
Deuteronomy 5:4 The Lorde talked wyth you face to face in the mount out of the fyre.
Deuteronomy 5:5 And I stode betwene the Lorde and you the same tyme, to shewe you the saying of the Lorde. For ye were afrayed of the fyre and therfore wente not vp into the mount, and he sayed.
Deuteronomy 5:6 I am the Lord thy God which brought the out of the land of Egypte, the house of bondage.
Deuteronomy 5:7 Thou shalte haue therefore none other Gods in my presence.
Deuteronomy 5:8 Thou shalte make the no grauen Image of anye maner lykenesse that is in heauen aboue, or in the earth beneth, or in the water beneth the earth.
Deuteronomy 5:9 Thou shalt neither bowe thy selfe to them, nor serue them, for I the Lorde thy God, am a gelous God, visitynge thy wyckednes of the fathers vpon the children, euen in the third and fourth generation, among them that hate me:
Deuteronomy 5:10 and shewe mercye vpon thousandes amonge them that loue me and kepe my commaundementes.
Deuteronomy 5:11 Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vaine: for the Lord wyl not hold him giltles, that thaketh hys name in vaine.
Deuteronomy 5:12 Kepe the Sabboth daye that thou sanctifye it, as the Lorde thy God hathe commaunded the.
Deuteronomy 5:13 Syxe dayes thou shalt laboure & do all that thou hast to do,
Deuteronomy 5:14 but the seuenth dai is the Saboth of the lorde thy God: thou shalt do no maner worke, neither thou, nor thy sonne, nor thy daughter, nor thy seruaunte nor thy mayd, nor thyne oxe nor thyne asse, nor any of thy cattel, nor the straunger that is within thy cytye: that thy seruaunte and thy mayde maye reste as well as thou.
Deuteronomy 5:15 And remembre that thou was a seruaunte in the Lande of Egipt and how that the Lord God, brought the out thence wyth a mighty hande and a streatched out arme. For whyche cause the Lord thy God commaunded the to kepe the Saboth day.
Deuteronomy 5:16 Honoure thy father and thy mother, as the Lord thy God hath commaunded the: that thou maiste prolonge thy dayes, and that it may go wel wyth the on the land, which the Lord thy God geueth the.
Deuteronomy 5:17 Thou shalt not slea.
Deuteronomy 5:18 Thou shalt not breake wedlocke.
Deuteronomy 5:19 Thou shalt not steale.
Deuteronomy 5:20 Thou shalt not beare false witnes agaynst thy neyghbour.
Deuteronomy 5:21 Thou shalte not luste after thy neyghbours wyfe: thou shalt not couet thy neyghbours house, feylde, seruaunte, mayde, oxe, asse nor ought that is thy neyghbours
Deuteronomy 5:22 These wordes the Lord spake vnto al youre multitude in the mount out of the fyre, cloud and darckenes, with a loude voyce & added no more therto, and wrote them in .ij. tables of stone and deliuered them vnto me.
Deuteronomy 5:23 But as sone as ye heard the voyce out of the darcknes, and sawe the hyl burne wyth fyre, ye came vnto me all the heades of your tribes and your elders:
Deuteronomy 5:24 & ye sayd behold: the Lorde our God hath shewed vs hys glorye & hys greatnes, & we haue heard hys voyce out of the fyre & we haue sene thys day that God may talke with a man and he yet lyue.
Deuteronomy 5:25 And now wherfore should we dye that this great fyre should consume vs. If we should heare the voyce of the Lorde our God anye more we should dye.
Deuteronomy 5:26 For what is any fleshe that he shoulde heare the voyce of the liuing God speakynge oute of the fyre as we haue done & shoulde yet lyue?
Deuteronomy 5:27 Go thou and heare all that the Lorde oure God sayeth, and tell thou vnto vs all that the Lorde oure God sayth vnto the, and we wyl hear it and do it.
Deuteronomy 5:28 And the Lorde hearde the voyce of youre wordes when ye spake vnto me, & he sayed vnto me: I haue heard the voice of the words of thys people which they haue spoken vnto the, they haue well sayed all that they haue sayed.
Deuteronomy 5:29 Oh that they had such an hert wyth them to feare me and kepe al my commaundementes alway, that it myght go wel with them & with theyr children foreuer.
Deuteronomy 5:30 Go and saye vnto theim: gette you into youre tentes agayne,
Deuteronomy 5:31 but stande thou here before me and I wyl tell the al the commaundementes, ordinaunces & lawes which thou shalt teache them, that they may do them in the lande whiche I gyue them to possesse.
Deuteronomy 5:32 Take hede therfore that ye do as the lord your God hath commaunded you, & turne not a syde: either to the ryght hande or to the lyfte,
Deuteronomy 5:33 but walke in all the wayes whych the Lorde youre God hathe commaunded you, that ye maye lyue and that it maye go well wyth you and that ye maye prolonge youre dayes in the land which ye shall possesse.

CHAPTER: 6

Deuteronomy 6:1 These are the commaundementes, ordinaunces & lawes whyche the Lorde youre God commaunded to teache you, that ye myghte do theym in the Lande whyther ye go to possesse it:
Deuteronomy 6:2 that thou mighteste feare the Lorde thy God, to kepe all hys ordinaunces and hys commaundementes whyche I commaunde the, boeth thou and thy sonne, and thy sonnes sonne al dayes of thy lyfe, that thy dayes maye be prolonged.
Deuteronomy 6:3 Heare therfore Israell and take hede that thou do there after, that it may go well with the, and that it maye encrease myghtelye, euen as the Lorde God of thy fathers hathe promised the, a land that floweth wyth milke and honye.
Deuteronomy 6:4 Heare Israel, the Lord thy God is Lord onely,
Deuteronomy 6:5 and thou shalt loue the lorde thy God wyth al thine hert, with all thy soule & wyth al thy myght.
Deuteronomy 6:6 And these wordes which I commande the thys daye, shall be in thyne hert
Deuteronomy 6:7 & thou shalt whett theim on thy children. & shalt talke of theim when thou arte at home in thyne house, and as thou walkeste by the way, and when thou lyest downe and when thou rysest vp:
Deuteronomy 6:8 and thou shalt bynd them for a sygne vpon thyne hande. And they shall be papers of remembraunce betwene thyne eyes and
Deuteronomy 6:9 shalt write them vpon the postes of thy house & vpon thy gates.
Deuteronomy 6:10 And when the lord thy God hath brought the into the land which he sware vnto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac & Iacob, to gyue the with great & goodly cityes which thou buildedst not,
Deuteronomy 6:11 & houses full of all maner goodes which thou filledest not, and welles dygged whych thou dyggedest not, & vynes & olyue trees which thou plantedest not, & when thou hast eaten and art ful:
Deuteronomy 6:12 Then beware lest thou forget the Lorde whych brought the oute of the lande of Egipt the house of bondage.
Deuteronomy 6:13 But feare the Lorde thy God and serue him, and sweare by his name,
Deuteronomy 6:14 & se that ye walke not after straunge Goddes of the Gods of the nations whych are about you.
Deuteronomy 6:15 For the Lord thy god is a gelous God among you leste the wrath of the Lord thy God waxe whote vpon the and destroy the from the earth.
Deuteronomy 6:16 Ye shall not tempte the Lorde your God as ye dyd at Masa.
Deuteronomy 6:17 But se that ye kepe the commaundementes of the Lorde your God hys wytnesses and ordinaunces whyche he hath commaunded the,
Deuteronomy 6:18 & se thou do that which is ryght and good in the syght of the Lorde: that thou maiste prospere & that thou maiste go and conquere that good lande which the Lorde sware vnto thy fathers,
Deuteronomy 6:19 and that the Lorde may cast out all thyne enemies before the as he hath sayed.
Deuteronomy 6:20 When thy sonne asketh the in tyme to come sayinge: What meaneth the witnesses ordinaunces & lawes whych the Lord oure God hath commaunded you?
Deuteronomy 6:21 Then thou shalt saye vnto thy sonne: We were bondmen vnto Pharao in Egypte, but the Lorde broughte vs out of Egypt wyth a myghty hand.
Deuteronomy 6:22 And the Lorde shewed sygnes and wonders, both greate and euyl vppon Egypt, Pharao and vpon al hys housholde, before our eyes
Deuteronomy 6:23 and brought vs from thence: to bryng vs in and to giue vs the land which he sware vnto our fathers.
Deuteronomy 6:24 And therefore commaunded vs to do all these ordinaunces & for to feare the Lord our God, for our wealth alwayes and that he myght saue vs, as it is come to passe thys day.
Deuteronomy 6:25 Moreouer it shalbe ryghtuousenesse vnto vs before the Lord our God if we take hede to kepe al these commaundementes as he hath commaunded vs.

CHAPTER: 7

Deuteronomy 7:1 When the Lorde thy God hathe brought the into the land whither thou goest to possesse it, & hast coste out manye nations before the: the Hethytes, the Gergesites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Pheresites, the Heuites, and the Iebusites .vij. nacions moo in numbre & mightier then thou:
Deuteronomy 7:2 and when the Lord thy God hath sett them before the that thou shouldest smyt them se that thou vtterly destroye them and make no couenaunt with theym nor haue compassyon vppon theym. Also thou shalte make no maryages wyth theim,
Deuteronomy 7:3 neyther gyue thy daughter vnto hys sone, nor take hys daughter vnto thy sonne.
Deuteronomy 7:4 For they wyl make your Sonnes departe fro me, and serue straunge Goddes, and then wyll the wrathe of the Lorde waxe whote vpon you and destroye you shortely.
Deuteronomy 7:5 But thus ye shall deale wyth them: ouerthrow theyr alters, breake downe theyr pyllers cut downe their groues and burne their ymages wyth fyre.
Deuteronomy 7:6 For thou art an holy nacion vnto the Lorde thy God, the Lorde thy God hath chosen the to be a seuerall people vnto hym selfe of al nations that are vpon the erth.
Deuteronomy 7:7 It was not bicause of the multitude of you aboue al nations, that the Lord had lust vnto you and chose you. For ye were fewest of all nations.
Deuteronomy 7:8 But bycause the Lord loued you & bicause he would kepe the oth whych he hadde sworne vnto your fathers, therfore he brought you out of Egypt with a mighty hande and deliuered you out of the house of bondage: euen from the hande of Pharao, kynge of Egypt.
Deuteronomy 7:9 Vnderstande therefore, that the Lord thy God he is god & that a true god, which kepeth pointment and mercy vnto them that loue him and kepe hys commaundementes, euen thorowe oute a thousande generations
Deuteronomy 7:10 and rewarded them that hate him before his face so that he bryngeth them to nought, and will not defarre the tyme to him that hateth hym but wyl rewarde hym before his face.
Deuteronomy 7:11 Kepe therfore the commaundementes, ordinaunces and lawes which I commaund you thys day, that ye do them
Deuteronomy 7:12 If ye shall herken vnto these lawes & shall obserue and do them, then shal the Lord thy God kepe poyntment with the and the mercy which he sware vnto thy fathers
Deuteronomy 7:13 & wyl loue the, blesse the, and multiply the: he wil blesse the frute of thy wombe & the frute of thy felde thy corne, thy wine, and thyne oyle, the frute of thyne oxen, and the flockes of thy shepe, in the Lande whyche he sware vnto thy fathers to gyue the.
Deuteronomy 7:14 Thou shalt be blessed aboue al nations, there shal be neither man nor woman vnfruitfull among you, nor any thing vnfrutful amonge youre cattell.
Deuteronomy 7:15 Moreouer the Lorde wyll turne from the all maner infirmities, & wyll putte none of the euyl deseases of Egypte (which thou knowest) vpon the, but will send them vpon them that hate the.
Deuteronomy 7:16 Thou shalt brynge to naught all nacions which the Lord thy God deliuereth the, thine eye shal haue no pyty vpon them neither shalt thou serue theyr Goddes, for that shall be thy decaye.
Deuteronomy 7:17 If thou shalt saye in thine herte, these nacions are moo then I, howe can I cast them out?
Deuteronomy 7:18 Fear them not, but remembre what the Lorde thy God dyd vnto Pharao & vnto all Egypte,
Deuteronomy 7:19 and the greate temptations whiche thyne eyes sawe, & the sygnes and wondres & myghty hand and stretched out arme wherewith the Lord thy God brought the out: euen so shal the Lord thi God do vnto al the nations of which thou art afrayed.
Deuteronomy 7:20 Therto the Lorde thy God wil send hornettes among them vntyl they that are lefte and hyd them selues from the, be destroyed.
Deuteronomy 7:21 Se thou feare them not for the Lord thy God is among you a mighty God and a terrible.
Deuteronomy 7:22 The Lord thy God wil put out these nations before the a lytle, and a lytle, thou maist not consume theim at once lest the beastes of the feylde encrease vpon the.
Deuteronomy 7:23 And the Lorde thy God shal deliuer them vnto the and styrre vp a myghty tempest among them, vntyll they be brought to nought.
Deuteronomy 7:24 And he shall deliuer theyr kynges into thyne hande, & thou shalt destroy theyr names from vnder heauen. There shall no man stande before the vntyll thou haue destroyed them.
Deuteronomy 7:25 The Images of their Gods thou shalt burne wyth fire, and se that thou couet not the syluer or golde that is on them nor take it vnto the, least thou be snared therwyth. For it is an abhomination vnto the lord thy God.
Deuteronomy 7:26 Bring not therfore the abhomination to thyne house, least thou be a damned thing as it is: but vtterlye defye it and abhorre it, for it is a thynge that must be destroyed.

CHAPTER: 8

Deuteronomy 8:1 All the commaundementes which I commaunde the thys day ye shall kepe for to do them, that ye may lyue & multiplye, & go & possesse the lande which the lord sware vnto youre fathers.
Deuteronomy 8:2 And thinke on all the waye whych the lord thy God ledde the this .xl. yere in the wildernesse, for to humble the and to proue the, to wete what was in in thyne herte, whether thou wouldest kepe his commaundements or no,
Deuteronomy 8:3 He humbled the and made the hongry and fedde the with Manna, whych neyther thou nor thy father knew of to make the know that a man must not lyue by breade onely: but by all that proceadeth out of the mouth of the Lord must a man liue.
Deuteronomy 8:4 Thy raiment waxed not old vpon the neither did thy fete swell this .xl. yere.
Deuteronomy 8:5 Vnderstand therefore in thyne herte that as a man nourtereth hys sonne, euen so the Lord thy god nourtereth the.
Deuteronomy 8:6 Kepe therfore the commaundementes of the Lord thy god that thou walke in hys wayes & that thou fear him.
Deuteronomy 8:7 For the Lorde thy God bryngeth the into a good Lande, a lande of ryuers of water, of fountaynes & of springes that spring out boeth in valeies and hylles:
Deuteronomy 8:8 a land of wheate & of barley, of vynes, fyggetrees & pomgranates, a land of olyue trees wyth oyle & of honye:
Deuteronomy 8:9 a lande wherein thou shalt not eate bread in scharsenesse, and where thou shalt lacke nothynge, a lande whose stones are yron, & out of whose hyls thou shalt digge brasse.
Deuteronomy 8:10 When thou haste eaten thereof and fylled thy selfe, then blesse the Lord for the good land which he hath geuen the.
Deuteronomy 8:11 But beware that thou forget not the Lord thy god, that thou wouldest not kepe his commaundementes, lawes & ordinaunces which I commaund the thys daye:
Deuteronomy 8:12 yea, & when thou hast eaten and fylled thy selfe and hast built goodly houses and dwelt therein,
Deuteronomy 8:13 & when thy beasse and thy shepe are waxed manye & thy syluer and golde is multiplied & al that thou hast encreased,
Deuteronomy 8:14 then beware lest thyne herte ryse & thou forget the Lorde thy God which brought the out of the land of Egypt the house of bondage,
Deuteronomy 8:15 & which ledde the in the wildernesse boeth great and terrible wyth fyry serpentes and scorpions and drought where was no water which brought the water oute of the rocke of flint:
Deuteronomy 8:16 which fed the in the wildernes with Manna whereof thy fathers knewe not for to humble the and to proue the, that he myght do the good at thy later ende.
Deuteronomy 8:17 And beware that thou saye not in thyne herte, my power & the myght of mine owne hande hath done me all these actes:
Deuteronomy 8:18 But remembre the Lord thy God, how that it is he which gaue the power to do manfullye, for to make good the promises whiche he sware to thy fathers, as it is come to passe this day.
Deuteronomy 8:19 For if thou shalt forget the Lord thy god and shalt walke after straung Gods & serue them and worshyppe them, I testifye vnto you thys day, that ye shal surely perysh.
Deuteronomy 8:20 As the nations whych the Lorde destroyeth before the, euen so, ye shall peryshe, bycause ye woulde not herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde your God.

CHAPTER: 9

Deuteronomy 9:1 Heare Israell, thou goest ouer Iordan thys daye, to go & conquere nations greater & mightyer then thy selfe, and cytyes great and walled vp to heauen,
Deuteronomy 9:2 and people greate and tal, euen the children of the Enakyms, whyche thou knowest, and of whom thou hast heard saye, who is able to stand before the children of Enack?
Deuteronomy 9:3 But vnderstand this day that the Lorde thy God whych goth ouer before the a consuming fyre, he shall destroye them and he shall subdue them before the. And thou shalt cast them out, and bryng them out, and bryng them to nought quyckelye as the Lorde hathe sayed vnto the.
Deuteronomy 9:4 Speake not in thyne herte, after that the Lord thy God hath cast them out before the sayinge: for my ryghtuousnes the Lord hath brought me in to possesse this land. Nay, but for the wyckednes of these nations the Lord doeth caste them out before the.
Deuteronomy 9:5 It is not for thy ryghtuousnes sake & right hert that thou goest to possesse their land: But partely for the wickednesse of these nations, the Lorde thy God doeth caste them before the, and partelye to perfourme that whyche the Lorde thy God sware vnto thy fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.
Deuteronomy 9:6 Vnderstand therfore that it is not for thy rightuousnes sake, that the lord thy God doth giue the thys good land to possesse it, for thou art a styfnecked people.
Deuteronomy 9:7 Remembre & forget not how thou prouokedest the lord thy God in the wildernes: for sence the day that thou camest out of the land of Egipt vntil ye came vnto this place, ye haue rebelled against the Lorde.
Deuteronomy 9:8 Also in Horeb ye angryed the Lord so that the Lorde was wroth wyth you, euen to haue destroied you,
Deuteronomy 9:9 after that I was gone vp into the mount, to fett the tables of stone the table of an appoyntment whych the Lord made wyth you. And I abode in the hyll .xl. dayes & .xl. nyghtes, & neyther ate bread nor dranke water.
Deuteronomy 9:10 And the Lord deliuered me two tables of stone written with the finger of God, and in them was accordynge to all the wordes which the Lord said vnto you in the mounte out of the fyre in the daye when the people were gathered togyther.
Deuteronomy 9:11 And when .xl. daies and .xl. nightes were ended, the Lorde gaue me the two tables of stone, the tables of the testament,
Deuteronomy 9:12 and sayde vnto me. Vp, and get the downe quyckely from hence, for the people whych thou hast broughte out of Egypte, haue marred them selues. They are turned attonce out of the waye, whych I commaunded them, & haue made them a God of metall.
Deuteronomy 9:13 Furthermore the Lorde spake vnto me sayinge: I se thys people howe that it is a styfenecked people,
Deuteronomy 9:14 let me alone that I maye destroye them and put out the name of them from vnder heauen and I wil make of the a nation both greater and mo then they.
Deuteronomy 9:15 And I turned away and came downe from the hyll (& the hyll burnt with fire) & had the two tables of the appointment in my handes
Deuteronomy 9:16 And when I loked & saw that ye had synned against the Lorde our God & had made you a calfe of metall and had turned attonce out of the way which the Lord had commaunded yo
Deuteronomy 9:17 Then I toke the two tables & cast them out of my two handes, & brake theym before your eyes.
Deuteronomy 9:18 And I fell before the Lord: euen as at the fyrst tyme .xl. dayes & .xl. nyghtes & neither ate breade nor dranke water ouer all your synnes which ye had sinned in doynge wickedly in the sight of the Lord & in prouokyng hym.
Deuteronomy 9:19 For I was afrayed of the wrath and fearcenes wherwith the Lorde was angry wyth you, euen to haue destroyed you. But the Lorde hearde my peticion at that tyme also.
Deuteronomy 9:20 The Lorde was very angry with Aaron also, euen for to haue destroyed hym: But I made intercession for Aaron also the same tym
Deuteronomy 9:21 And I toke your synne, the calfe whyche ye had made & burnt him wt fyre & stamped him & ground him a good, euen vnto smal dust. And I cast the dust therof into the broke that descended out of the mount.
Deuteronomy 9:22 Also at Thaberah & at Masah & at the sepulchres of lust ye angred the Lorde,
Deuteronomy 9:23 yea, and when the Lord sent you from Cades Barne saying: go vp & conquere the lande whych I haue geuen you, ye disobeyed the mouth of the Lord your God & neither beleued hym, nor herkened to hys voice.
Deuteronomy 9:24 Thus ye haue bene disobedient to the Lord, sence the daye that I knew you.
Deuteronomy 9:25 And I fell before the Lord .xl. dayes and .xl. nyghtes whyche I lay there, for the Lord was mynded to haue destroyed you.
Deuteronomy 9:26 But I made intercession vnto the Lord & sayed O Lorde God, destroye not thy people & thyne enheritaunce whyche thou haste delyuered thorowe thy greatenes and whych thou hast brought out of Egypte with a myghty hand
Deuteronomy 9:27 Remembre thy seruauntes Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob, & loke not to the stubburnes of thys people nor to their wyckednes & synne:
Deuteronomy 9:28 leste the land whence thou broughtest them saye: Bycause the Lorde was not able to brynge them into the lande whyche he promised them and bycause he hated them, therfore he caried them out to destroy them in the wyldernes.
Deuteronomy 9:29 Moreouer they are thy people and thine enherytaunce, whyche thou broughteste oute wyth thy myghty power & wyth thy streatched out arme.

CHAPTER: 10

Deuteronomy 10:1 In the same ceason the Lorde sayed vnto me hewe the two tables of stone lyke to the fyrst and come vp vnto me into the mount and make the an arke of wodde,
Deuteronomy 10:2 and I wyll wryte in the tables, the words that were in the fyrst tables which thou brakest, & thou shalt put them in the arcke.
Deuteronomy 10:3 And I made an arke of sethyn wood & hewed two tables of stone like vnto the fyrste, and wente vp into the mountayne and the .ij. tables in myne hand.
Deuteronomy 10:4 And he wrote in the tables, according to the spake vnto you in the mount of the fyre in the day when the people gathered togither and gaue them vnto me.
Deuteronomy 10:5 And I departed & came downe from the hil and put the tables in the arke whych I had made: and there they remained, as the Lord commaunded me.
Deuteronomy 10:6 And the children of Israel toke theyr iourney from Beroth of the chyldren Iakan to Mosera, wher Aaron dyed and wher he was buried, and Eleazar his sonne became priest in hys stead.
Deuteronomy 10:7 And from thence they departed vnto Gadgad: & from Gadgad to Iathbath a land of riuers of water.
Deuteronomy 10:8 And the same ceason the Lorde seperated the trybe of Leui to beare the arcke of the appoyntmente of the Lorde and to stande before the Lord, and to minister vnto hym and to blesse in his name vnto thys day.
Deuteronomy 10:9 Wherfore the Leuites haue no part nor enheritaunce with theyr brethren The Lorde he is theyr enheritaunce, as the Lorde thy God hath promised them.
Deuteronomy 10:10 And I taried in the mount, euen as at the first time .xl. dayes and .xl. nyghtes and the Lord herkened vnto me at that tyme also, so that the Lord wold not destroy the.
Deuteronomy 10:11 And the Lord sayed vnto me: vp & go forthe in the iourney before the people and let them go in and conquere the land which I sware vnto theyr fathers to giue them.
Deuteronomy 10:12 And now Israel what is it that the Lord thy God requireth of the, but to feare the lord thy God and to walke in all hys wayes & to loue him & to serue the Lord thy God with al thyne herte, & with al thy soule,
Deuteronomy 10:13 that thou kepe the commaundementes of the Lorde & hys ordinaunces which I commaund the this day, for thy wealth.
Deuteronomy 10:14 Behold, heauen and the heauen of heauens is the Lordes thy God, & the earth wt al that therin is:
Deuteronomy 10:15 onely the Lorde had a lust vnto thy fathers to loue them, and therfore chose you their sede after them of al nacions, as it is come to passe this day.
Deuteronomy 10:16 Circumcyse therefore the foreskynne of youre hertes, and be no lenger styfenecked.
Deuteronomy 10:17 For the Lord your God, he is god of Goddes, and Lorde of Lordes, a greate God, a myghty and a terrible whych regardeth no mans person, nor taketh giftes:
Deuteronomy 10:18 but doth right vnto the fatherles & wydowe and loueth the straunger, to giue him fode and raiment.
Deuteronomy 10:19 Loue therfore the straunger, for ye were straungers your selues in the lande of Egypt.
Deuteronomy 10:20 Thou shalt feare thy Lord thy God & serue him, and cleaue vnto him, & sweare by his name,
Deuteronomy 10:21 for he is thy prayse and he is thy God that hathe done these greate & terrible thynges for the, whych thine eyes haue sene.
Deuteronomy 10:22 Thy fathers went downe into Egypt wt .lxx. soules & nowe the Lord thy God hath made the as the starres of heauen in multitude.

CHAPTER: 11

Deuteronomy 11:1 Loue the Lorde thy God and kepe hys obseruaunces, hys ordinaunces, hys lawes and and hys commaundementes alwaye.
Deuteronomy 11:2 And call to mynde thys daye that whyche your children haue neither knowne nor sene: euen the nurtoure of the Lord your God, hys greatnes, hys myghty hande, and hys streatched oute arme:
Deuteronomy 11:3 hys myracles and hys actes whyche he dyd amonge the Egyptians, euen vnto Pharao kynge of Egypte, and vnto all hys lande:
Deuteronomy 11:4 and what he dyd vnto the hoste of the Egyptians, vnto theyr horses and charettes howe he broughte the water of the redde see vpon them as they chased you, and how the Lorde hath brought theym to noughte vnto thys daye:
Deuteronomy 11:5 and what he dyd vnto you in the wyldernes, vntyll ye came vnto thys place:
Deuteronomy 11:6 and what he dyd vnto Dathan and Abiram the sonns of Eliab, the sonnes of Ruben, how the earth opened hyr mouth & swalowed them with theyr housholdes and theyr tentes, & al theyr substaunce that was in theyr possession in the myddes of Israel.
Deuteronomy 11:7 For youre eyes haue seene all the greate dedes of the Lord whych he dyd.
Deuteronomy 11:8 Kepe therfore al the commaundementes whiche I commaunde the thys day, that ye may be stronge and go and conquere the lande whether ye go to possesse it,
Deuteronomy 11:9 & that ye maye prolonge youre dayes in the lande whyche the Lorde sware vnto your fathers to gyue vnto them and to theyr sede, a lande that floweth with milcke and hony.
Deuteronomy 11:10 For the lande whether thou goest to possesse it, is not as the Lande of Egypte whence thou camest out, wher thou sowedest thi sede and waterstest it with thy fete as a garden of herbes:
Deuteronomy 11:11 but the land whither ye go ouer to possesse it, is a land of hylles and valeyes & drynketh water of the rayne of heauen,
Deuteronomy 11:12 and a Land whyche the Lord thy God careth for. The eyes of the lord thy God are alwayes vpon it, from the beginnyng of the yere vnto the latter end of the yere.
Deuteronomy 11:13 If thou shalt herken therfore vnto mi commoundementes which I commaund you this day, that ye loue the Lord your God & serue him with all your hertes and with all youre soules:
Deuteronomy 11:14 then he wyll giue rayne vnto youre lande in due ceason, both the first rayne & the later, and thou shalte gather in thy corne thy wyne and thyne oyle.
Deuteronomy 11:15 And he wyl sende grasse in thy feldes for thi cattel: & thou shalt eate and fyll thy selfe.
Deuteronomy 11:16 But beware that youre hertes deceyue you not that ye turne asyde and serue straunge Gods & worshyp them,
Deuteronomy 11:17 & then the wrath of the Lord waxe whote vpon you, & shut vp the heauen that ther be no raine, & that your land yeld not hyr frute and that ye peryshe quyckly from of the good land, which the Lord geueth you.
Deuteronomy 11:18 Put vp therfore these mi wordes in your hertes, and in your soules, & bind them for a sygne vnto your handes, and let them be as papers of remembraunce betwene your eyes
Deuteronomy 11:19 and teach them your chyldren: so that thou talke of them when thou sittest in thine house and when thou walkest by the way, & when thou liest downe, & when thou risest vp,
Deuteronomy 11:20 yea, & write them vpon the dorepostes of thine house and vpon thy gates,
Deuteronomy 11:21 that your dayes may be multiplyed, and the dayes of youre children vpon the earth, whych the Lord sware vnto your fathers to gyue theym, as longe as the dayes of heauen last vpon the earth.
Deuteronomy 11:22 For if ye shall kepe al these commaundementes whiche I commaund you, so that ye do them, & loue the Lord your God, and walke in all his waies & cleaue vnto him.
Deuteronomy 11:23 Then wyl the Lord caste out al these nations, & ye shall conquire them which are both greater & mightier then youre selues.
Deuteronomy 11:24 Al the places whereon the solles of your fete shall treade, shall be youres euen from the wildernes and from Libanon, and from the riuer Euphrates, euen vnto the vtmost sea, shall youre coastes be.
Deuteronomy 11:25 There shall no man be able to stande before you: the Lorde your God shall caste the feare and dread of you vpon all landes whether ye shall come as he hath sayed vnto you.
Deuteronomy 11:26 Beholde I sette before you thys daye, a blessynge, and a curse:
Deuteronomy 11:27 a blessynge: if that ye herken vnto the commaundementes of the Lord
Deuteronomy 11:28 And a curse: if ye wyll not herken vnto the commaundementes of the Lord your God: but turne out of the waye which I commaunde you this daye, to go after straunge Goddes which ye haue not knowne.
Deuteronomy 11:29 When the Lord thy God hath brought the into the lande whether thou goest to possesse it, then put the blessyng vpon mount Garizim and the curse vpon mount Ebal,
Deuteronomy 11:30 whiche are on the other syde Iordan on the backe syde of the waye towarde the goynge downe of the sunne in the Land of the Cananites whyche dwel in the feldes ouer against Galgal beside the groue of Moreh.
Deuteronomy 11:31 For ye shal go ouer to go & possesse the lande which the Lord your God geueth you, and shall conquere it and dwell therein.
Deuteronomy 11:32 Take hede therfore that ye do all the commaundementes and lawes, which I set before you this day.

CHAPTER: 12

Deuteronomy 12:1 These are the ordinaunces & lawes which ye shal obserue to do in the lande whyche the Lorde God of thy fathers geueth the to possesse it, as longe as ye lyue vpon the earth.
Deuteronomy 12:2 Se that ye destroy all places where the nations whyche ye conquere serue theyr Goddes, vpon hye mountaynes, and on hye hylles, & vnder euery grene tre.
Deuteronomy 12:3 Ouerthrow theyr alters and breake theyr pyllers, & burne theyr groues wyth fyre & hew downe the ymages of theyr Goddes, and brynge the names of them to naught out of that place.
Deuteronomy 12:4 Se ye do not so vnto the Lorde youre God
Deuteronomy 12:5 but ye shal enquere the place which the Lord your God shal haue chosen out of all youre trybes to putte hys name there, and there to dwell.
Deuteronomy 12:6 And thyther thou shalte come, and thyther ye shall brynge youre burnte sacryfyces, and your offeringes, your tythes and heaueofferynges of your handes, youre vowes and frewylofferynges & the fyrst borne of your oxen and of your shepe.
Deuteronomy 12:7 And there ye shall eate before the Lord your God, and ye shal reioyce in al that you lay your handes on, boeth ye and your housholdes, bicause the Lord thy God hath blessed the.
Deuteronomy 12:8 Ye shall do after nothynge that we do here thys day, euery man what semeth hym good in hys owne eyes.
Deuteronomy 12:9 For ye are not yet come to rest nor vnto the enheritaunce which the Lorde your God geueth you.
Deuteronomy 12:10 But ye shall go ouer Iordan and dwell in the lande which the Lord your God geueth you to enheret, & he shal giue you rest from al your enemies round about, & ye shal dwel in safetye.
Deuteronomy 12:11 Therfore when the Lord your God hath chosen a place to make hys name dwel there thyther ye shall brynge all that I commaunde you, your burnt sacrifices and your offerynges, your tythes, & the heaueofferynges of your handes and all your Godlye vowes which ye vowe vnto the Lord.
Deuteronomy 12:12 And ye shall reioyce before the Lord your God, boeth ye youre sonnes & youre daughters, youre seruauntes and youre maydes, and the Leuite that is within in your gates for he hath neither part nor enheritaunce with you.
Deuteronomy 12:13 Take hede that thou offer not thy burntofferynges in whatsoeuer place thou seyste:
Deuteronomy 12:14 but in the place whych the Lorde shall haue chosen amonge one of thy trybes, there thou shalt offer thy burntofferynges & there thou shalt do al that I commaund the.
Deuteronomy 12:15 Notwithstandynge thou mayest kyl and eate flesh in all thy cytyes, whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth after, accordyng to the blessyng of the Lord thy God whych he hath geuen the, both the vncleane and the cleane mayste thou eate, euen as the roo and the hert:
Deuteronomy 12:16 onely eat not the bloud, but poure it vpon the earth as water.
Deuteronomy 12:17 Thou maiste not eate wythin thy gates the tythe of thy corne, of thy wine & of thy oyle, eyther the fyrstborne of thyne oxen or of thy shepe, neither any of thy vowes which thou vowest, nor thy frewil offeringes or heueofferynges thyne handes:
Deuteronomy 12:18 but thou muste eate them before the Lorde thy God, in the place whych the Lorde thy God hath chosen: both thou, thy sonne, & thy daughter, thy seruaunt & thy mayde, & the Leuite that is wythin thy gates: & thou shalte reioyce before the Lorde thy God, in al that thou puttest thine hande to.
Deuteronomy 12:19 And beware that thou forsake not the Leuite as longe as thou lyuest vpon the earth.
Deuteronomy 12:20 If (when the Lord thy God hath enlarged thy costes as he hath promised the) thou saye I wyl eate flesh, bicause thy soule longeth to eate flesh: then thou shalt eate flesh, what soeuer thy soule lusteth.
Deuteronomy 12:21 If the place which the Lorde thy God hath chosen to put his name there be farre from the, then thou maiste kyll of thy oxen and of thy shepe which the Lord hath geuen the as I haue commaunded the & thou maiste eate in thyne owne citye whatsoeuer thy soule lusteth.
Deuteronomy 12:22 Neuerthelater, as the roo and the hart is eaten, euen so thou shalt eate it: the vncleane & the cleane indifferently thou shalt eate.
Deuteronomy 12:23 But be strong that thou eate not the bloude. For the bloud that is the life & thou mayst not eate the life with the flesh:
Deuteronomy 12:24 thou mayst not eate it: but must poure it vpon the erth as water.
Deuteronomy 12:25 Se thou eate it not therfore that it may go well wt the & with thy children after the, when thou shalt haue done that which is ryght in the syght of the Lord.
Deuteronomy 12:26 But thy holy thynges which thou hast & thy vowes, thou shalt take & go vnto the place which the Lord hath chosen,
Deuteronomy 12:27 & thou shalt offer thy burnt offerynges, both flesh & bloud vpon the alter of the Lord thy God, and the bloude of thyne offeringes thou shalt poure out vpon the alter of the Lord thy God, and shalt eat the flesh.
Deuteronomy 12:28 Take hede & hear all these wordes which I commaund the that it may go wel wyth the & with thy children after the for euer, when thou doest that whiche is good & ryght in the syght of the Lord thy God.
Deuteronomy 12:29 When the Lord thy God hath destroyed the nacions before the, whether thou goest to conquere them, & when thou hast conquered them, and dwelt in theyr landes:
Deuteronomy 12:30 Beware that thou be not taken in a snare after them, after that they be destroyed before the, & that thou aske not after theyr Gods sayinge: how dyd these nations serue theyr Goddes. that I maye do so lykewyse:
Deuteronomy 12:31 Naye, thou shalt not do so vnto the Lorde thy God: for all abhominacions whyche the Lorde hated dyd they vnto theyr Goddes. For they burnt both their sonnes and their daughters with fire vnto their Goddes.
Deuteronomy 12:32 But whatsoeuer I commaunde you that take hede ye do: & put nought thereto nor take therfrom.

CHAPTER: 13

Deuteronomy 13:1 If there aryse amonge you a Prophete or a dreamer of dreames, and gyue the a sygne or a wonder,
Deuteronomy 13:2 and that signe or wonder whyche he hath said come to passe and then say: let vs go after straunge Goddes whyche thou hast not knowne and let vs serue them:
Deuteronomy 13:3 herken not vnto the wordes of the prophete, or dreamer of dreames. For the Lord thy God tempteth you to wete whether ye loue the Lord your God wt all youre hertes & wyth all your soules.
Deuteronomy 13:4 For ye muste walke after the Lord your God & feare him & kepe hys commaundementes & herken vnto his voyce, & serue him & cleaue vnto him.
Deuteronomy 13:5 And the prophete or dreamer of dreames shal dye for it bicause he hath spoken to turne you away from the Lorde your God whyche brought you out of the land of Egipt & deliuered you out of the house of bondage, to thrust the out of the waye whiche the Lord thy God commaunded the to walke in: and so thou shalte put euyl away from the.
Deuteronomy 13:6 If thy brother the sonne of thy mother or thine own sonne or the daughter of the wife that lieth in thy bosome or thy frende which is as thyne owne soule vnto the, entyce the secretely saying, let vs go & serue straung Goddes which thou hast not knowne nor yet thy fathers of the gods,
Deuteronomy 13:7 of the people which are round aboute the, whether they be nye vnto the, or farre of from the, from the one end of the lande vnto the other.
Deuteronomy 13:8 Se thou consente not vnto him, nor herken vnto him: no let not thyne eye pity him nor haue compassion on him nor kepe hym secrete, but cause hym to be slaine.
Deuteronomy 13:9 Thine hande shall be first vpon him to kyl him, & then the handes of all the people.
Deuteronomy 13:10 And thou shalte stone hym wt stones that he dye, bicause he hath gone about to thrust the away from the Lorde thy God which brought the out of Egypt the house of bondage.
Deuteronomy 13:11 And all Israel shal heare and feare and shal do no more any suche wyckednes as thys is amonge them.
Deuteronomy 13:12 If thou shalt hear say of one of thy cities whyche the Lord thy God hath geuen the to dwel in,
Deuteronomy 13:13 that certayne (beyng the children of Belial) are gone out from among you & haue moued the enhabiters of their citi saying: let vs go and serue straung Goddes whiche ye haue not knowne.
Deuteronomy 13:14 Then seke & make searche and enquire diligently. If it be true and the thynge of a surety that suche abhomination is wrought among you:
Deuteronomy 13:15 then thou shalt smite the dwellers of that city with the edge of the swerde, & destroye it mercilesse and all that is therin,
Deuteronomy 13:16 & euen the very cattell therof wyth the edge of the swerd. And gather al the spoile of it into the myddes of the streates thereof, and burne with fyre boeth the city and al the spoyle therof euery whyt vnto the Lord thy God. And it shal be an heape for euer & shal not be built agayne.
Deuteronomy 13:17 And se that there cleaue nought of the dampned thing in thyne hand that the Lord maye turne from his fearce wrathe and shewe the mercye and haue compassion on the, and multiplye the, as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers:
Deuteronomy 13:18 when thou haste herkened vnto the voyce of the Lord thy God, to kepe all hys commaundementes whych I commaund the thys day so that thou do that which is right in the eyes of the Lord thy God.

CHAPTER: 14

Deuteronomy 14:1 Ye are the chyldren of the lord your God, cut not your selues nor make you anye baldenesse betwene the eies for any mannes deth.
Deuteronomy 14:2 For thou art an holy people vnto the Lord thy God, and the lord hathe chosen the to be a seuerall people vnto hym selfe, of all the nations that are vpon the earth.
Deuteronomy 14:3 Ye shall eate no maner of abhomination.
Deuteronomy 14:4 These are the beastes which ye shal eate of: oxen, shepe, and gotes,
Deuteronomy 14:5 hart, roo, and bugle wyldegote, vnicorne, origen and Camelion.
Deuteronomy 14:6 And all beastes that cleaue the hoffe & slytte it into two clawes & chewe the cud, them ye shall eate.
Deuteronomy 14:7 Neuerthelesse, these ye shall not eate of them that chewe cud, & of them that deuyde & cleaue the hoffe: the Camell, the hare, & the cony. For they chew cud, but deuide not the hoffe: & therfore are vnclene vnto you:
Deuteronomy 14:8 & also the swine, for though he deuyde the hoffe, yet he cheweth not cud, and therfore is vncleane vnto you: ye shall not eate of the flesh of them nor touch the dead carkasses of them.
Deuteronomy 14:9 These ye shall eate of all that are in the waters: Al that haue fynnes and scales.
Deuteronomy 14:10 And whatsoeuer hath not fynnes & scales, of that ye may not eate, for that is vncleane vnto you.
Deuteronomy 14:11 Of al cleane byrdes ye shal eate,
Deuteronomy 14:12 but these are they of whych ye may not eate: the egle, the goshauke, the cormerant,
Deuteronomy 14:13 the ixion the vultur the kyte, & hyr kinde,
Deuteronomy 14:14 and al kinde of rauens
Deuteronomy 14:15 the Estrich, the nyght crowe, the kuckou, the sparowhauke & al hyr kind,
Deuteronomy 14:16 the litle oule, the greate oule, the backe,
Deuteronomy 14:17 the bytture, the pye,
Deuteronomy 14:18 the storke, the heron, the Iaye in hys kynde, the lapwynge, the swalow.
Deuteronomy 14:19 And al creping foules are vncleane vnto you & may not be eaten of:
Deuteronomy 14:20 but of al cleane foules ye may wel eate.
Deuteronomy 14:21 Ye shall eate of nothynge that dyeth alone: But thou maiste gyue it vnto the straunger that is in thy city, that he eate it, or maist sell it vnto an aliant. For thou art an holy people vnto the Lord thy god. Thou shalt not seth a kyd in hys mothers mylcke.
Deuteronomy 14:22 Thou shalt tith al the encrease of thi sede that cometh out of the feld yere bi yere.
Deuteronomy 14:23 And thou shalt eate before the lord thi God in the place which he hath chosen to make his name dwel there the tyth of thy corne, or thy wine and of thine oyle, and the fyrstborne of thine oxen & of thy flocke, that thou mayst learne to feare the Lord thy God alway.
Deuteronomy 14:24 If the way be to longe for the, so that thou art not able to carye it, bycause the place is to farre from the whyche the Lord thy God hath chosen to set his name there (for the Lord thy God hath blessed the)
Deuteronomy 14:25 then make it in money and take the money in thyne hande, & go vnto the place which the Lord thi God hath chosen,
Deuteronomy 14:26 & bestowe that money on whatsoeuer thi soule lusteth after: of oxen, shepe, wine, & good drinke, and of whatsoeuer thi soule desiereth, & eate there before the Lord thy God and be mery: both thou and thy houshold
Deuteronomy 14:27 & the Leuite that is in thi city. Se thou forsake not the Leuite, for he hath neither part nor enheritaunce wyth the.
Deuteronomy 14:28 At the ende of thre yere, thou shalt bryng forth all the tythes of thine encrease the same yere & laye it vp wythin thyne owne cytye,
Deuteronomy 14:29 and the Leuite shall come bycause he hathe neither parte nor enheritaunce with the, and the straunger and the fatherles, and the wydowe whych are wythin thy citye and shall eate and fyll them selues: that the Lorde thy God maye blesse the in all thy worckes of thyne hand which thou doest.

CHAPTER: 15

Deuteronomy 15:1 At the end of seuen yere thou shalt make a fre yere. And thys is the maner of the fre yere,
Deuteronomy 15:2 whosoeuer lendeth ought wt hys hand vnto hys neyghbour, may not aske agayne that whyche he hath lent, of hys neyghbour or of his brother: bicause it was called the lords fre yer
Deuteronomy 15:3 yet of a straunger thou maiste call it home agayne. But that which thou hast with thy brother thyne hand shal remit, & that in any wyse,
Deuteronomy 15:4 that there be no begger amonge you. For the Lord shall blesse the land which the Lord thy God geueth the, an enheritaunce to possesse it:
Deuteronomy 15:5 so that thou herken vnto the voice of the Lord thy God, to obserue & do al these commaundementes which I commaund you this day:
Deuteronomy 15:6 yea, & then the Lord thy God shal blesse the as he hath promised the, and thou shalt lend vnto many nations, and shalte borowe of no man, and shalt raygne ouer many nations, but none shall raygne ouer the.
Deuteronomy 15:7 When one of thy brethren among you is waxed poore in any of thy cityes within thy land whych the Lord thy God geueth the, se that thou harden not thyne hert nor shet to thine hand from thy poore brother:
Deuteronomy 15:8 But open thyne hand vnto him & lende hym suffitiente for hys nede whych he hath.
Deuteronomy 15:9 And beware that there be not a poynt of Belial in thine hert, that thou wouldest say. The seuenth yere, the yere of fredome is at hand, & therfore it greues the to loke on thy poore brother and geuest hym nought & he then cry vnto the Lord againste the, and it be synne vnto the:
Deuteronomy 15:10 But giue him & let it not greue thine herte to giue. Bycause that for that thinge, the Lorde thy God shall blesse the in all thy workes & in all that thou puttest thyne hand to.
Deuteronomy 15:11 For the land shall neuer be wythout pore. Wherfore I commaund the saying: open thine hand vnto thy brother that is neady and pore in thy land.
Deuteronomy 15:12 If thy brother an Hebrue sel him self to the or an Hebruesse, he shal serue the syxe yere & the seuenth yere thou shalt let him go fre from the.
Deuteronomy 15:13 And when thou sendest hym out fre from the, thou shalt not let him go away emptye:
Deuteronomy 15:14 but shalt giue him of thy shepe & of thi corne and of thy wine, and giue him of that wherwith the Lord thy God hath blessed the.
Deuteronomy 15:15 And remembre that thou waste a seruaunt in the lande of Egypte, and the Lord thy God delyuered the thence: wherfore I commaunde the thys thyng to daye.
Deuteronomy 15:16 But and if he saye vnto the, I wyl not go awaye from the, bicause he loueth the & thyne house & is well at ease with the.
Deuteronomy 15:17 Then take a naule and nayle hys eare to the dore therewith & let hym be thy seruaunte for euer and vnto thy my mayde seruaunte thou shalte do likewise.
Deuteronomy 15:18 And let him not greue thine eyes to let him go out from the, for he hath bene worth a double hired seruaunte to the in his seruice .vi. yeres. And the Lord thy God shall blesse the in al that thou doest.
Deuteronomy 15:19 Al the first borne that come of thine oxen & of thy shepe that are males, thou shalt halowe vnto the lord thy God. Thou shalt do no seruice wyth the fyrst borne of thy shepe:
Deuteronomy 15:20 but shalt eat them before the Lorde thy God yere by yere in the place which the Lord hath chosen both thou & thine housholde.
Deuteronomy 15:21 If there be any deformitie therin, whether it be lame or blynde, or whatsoeuer euyll fauerdenesse it hath, thou shalt not offer it vnto the Lorde thy God:
Deuteronomy 15:22 But shalt eat it in thine own cytye the vncleane & the cleane indifferently, as the roo and the herte.
Deuteronomy 15:23 Onelye eate not the bloud therof, but purge it vpon the grounde as water.

CHAPTER: 16

Deuteronomy 16:1 Obserue the moneth of Abib and offer passeouer vnto the Lorde thy God. For in the moneth of Abib, the Lord thy God broughte the oute of Egypte by nyghte.
Deuteronomy 16:2 Thou shalt therefore offer passe ouer vnto the Lord thi God, and shepe & oxen in the place which the Lord shall chose to make hys name dwell there.
Deuteronomy 16:3 Thou shalte eate no leauened breade therwyth: but shalt eate therwyth the breade of tribulation .vij. dayes longe. For thou camest out of the land of Egipt in haste, that thou maist remembre the day when thou camest out of the land of Egipt all dayes of thy life.
Deuteronomy 16:4 And se that there be no leuened bread sene in al thy costes .vij. daies longe, and that there remayne nothynge of the flesh which thou hast offred the first day at euen, vntyl the mornyng.
Deuteronomy 16:5 Thou mayst not offer passeouer in any of thy cityes which the Lord thy god geueth th
Deuteronomy 16:6 But in the place whiche the Lord thy God shall chose to make his name dwell in, there thou shalt offer passeouer at euen about the goyng downe of the sunne, euen in the ceason that thou camest out of Egypt.
Deuteronomy 16:7 And thou shalt seeth & eate it in the place whyche the Lorde thy God hath chosen, & depart on the morow & gette the vnto thy tente.
Deuteronomy 16:8 Syxe dayes thou shalt eate swetebreade, and the seuenth daye is for the people to come togither to the Lord thy God, that thou maist do no worcke.
Deuteronomy 16:9 Then reken the .vij. wekes & begyn to reken the .vij. wekes when the sickle beginneth in the corne,
Deuteronomy 16:10 and kepe the feaste of wekes vnto the Lord thy God, that thou gyue a frewylofferyng of thyne hande vnto the Lorde thy God accordynge as the Lord thy God hath blessed the.
Deuteronomy 16:11 And reioyce before the Lorde thy God, both thou, thy sonne, thy daughter, thy seruaunt and thy mayd, & the Leuite that is wythin thy gates, & the straunger, the fatherles & the wedowes that are among you, in the place which the lord thy god hath chosen to make hys name dwel there.
Deuteronomy 16:12 And remembre that thou wast a seruaunt in Egypte that thou obserue and do these ordinaunces.
Deuteronomy 16:13 Thou shalt obserue the feast of the tabernacles .vij. dayes long, after that thou hast gathered in thy corne & thy wine.
Deuteronomy 16:14 And thou shalte reioyce in that thy feast, both thou & thy sonne thy daughter, thy seruaunt, thy mayd, the Leuite, the straunger, the fatherles, & the widow that are in thy cities.
Deuteronomy 16:15 Seuen dayes thou shalt kepe holy day vnto the Lord thy God, in the place which the Lord shall chose: for the Lorde thy God shall blesse the in al thy frutes and in all the workes of thyne handes, & therfore shalte thou be glad.
Deuteronomy 16:16 Thre times in the yere shall al your males appeare before the Lorde thy God in the place which he shal chose: In the feast of swete bread, in the feaste of wekes & in the feast of tabernacles. And they shall not appeare before the Lord empty:
Deuteronomy 16:17 but euery man with the gyft of his hand, according to the blessyng of the Lord thy God whyche he hath geuen the.
Deuteronomy 16:18 Iudges and officers thou shalt make the, in all thy gates which the Lord thy God geueth the thorowout thy trybes: & let them iudge the people ryghtuously.
Deuteronomy 16:19 Wrest not the lawe nor know any person nether take any reward for giftes blind the wise & peruert the wordes of the ryghtuous.
Deuteronomy 16:20 But in all thyngs folowe ryghtuousnes that thou maist lyue & enioy the land which the Lord thy God geueth the.
Deuteronomy 16:21 Thou shalt plante no groue of whatsoeuer trees it be, nye vnto the alter of the Lord thy God which thou shalt make the.
Deuteronomy 16:22 Thou shal sette the vp no pyller, whyche the Lord thy God hateth.

CHAPTER: 17

Deuteronomy 17:1 Thou shalt offer to the Lord thy god no oxe nor shepe wherin is any deformitie, whatsoeuer ylfauerednes it be: for that is an abhomination vnto the Lorde thy God
Deuteronomy 17:2 If ther be found among you in any of the cityes whych the Lord thy God geueth the man or woman that hath wrought wyckednes in the syght of the Lord thy God, that they haue gone beyond his appoyntment,
Deuteronomy 17:3 so that they haue gone & serued straung Gods and worshypped them, whether it be the sunne or mone or any thing contayned in heauen which I forbade,
Deuteronomy 17:4 and it was told the and thou hast heard of it: then thou shalt enquire diligently. And if it be true and the thynge of a suretye that suche abhomination is wrought in Israell then
Deuteronomy 17:5 thou shalt bryng forth that man or that woman which haue committed that wicked thing, vnto the gates and shalt stone them with stones, and they shal dye.
Deuteronomy 17:6 At the mouth of .ij. or .iij. wytnesses shal he that is worthy of death dye: but at the mouth of one witnes he shal not dye.
Deuteronomy 17:7 And the handes of the witnesses shal be fyrst vpon hym to kyll hym, & afterwarde the handes of all the people: so shalt thou put wickednes away from the.
Deuteronomy 17:8 If a matter be to hard for the in iudgment betwene bloud & bloud, plee, and plee, plage & plage in matters of strife within thi cityes Then arise & get the vp vnto the place whyche the Lord thy God hath chosen,
Deuteronomy 17:9 and go vnto the priestes the Leuites, & to the iudge that shall be in those dayes, & aske, and they shall shewe the how to iudge.
Deuteronomy 17:10 And se that thou do accordynge to that whych they of that place (which the lord had chosen) shew the & se that thou obserue to do accordinge to al that they enforme the.
Deuteronomy 17:11 Accordyng to the lawe whyche they teach the & maner of iudgement whych they tell the, se that thou do & that thou bowe not from that which they shewe the, neither to the ryght hand nor to the left.
Deuteronomy 17:12 And that man that wil do presumptuousely, so that he will not herken vnto the priest that standeth there to minister vnto the Lord thy God or vnto the iudge, shal dye: and so thou shalt put away euil from Israell.
Deuteronomy 17:13 And all the people shall heare, & shal feare, & shall do no more presumptuously.
Deuteronomy 17:14 When thou art come vnto the land which the Lord thy God geueth the and enioyest it and dwellest therin: If thou shalt say, I will set a kynge ouer me: lyke vnto all the nations that are aboute me.
Deuteronomy 17:15 Then thou shalte make him kyng ouer the, whom the Lorde thy God shall chose. One of thy brethren muste thou make kynge ouer the, and mayste not sette a straunger ouer the which is not of thi brethren
Deuteronomy 17:16 But in any wyse let hym not holde to many horses, that he bringe not the people agayne to Egypt thorowe the multitude of horsses, for asmuch as the Lord hath sayd vnto you: ye shall henceforthe go no more agayne that way.
Deuteronomy 17:17 Also he shall not haue to many wyues lest his hert turne away, neither shal he gather hym siluer & gold to much.
Deuteronomy 17:18 And when he is sett vpon the seate of hys kyngedome, he shal write hym oute thys seconde lawe in a boke takynge a copye of the priestes the Leuites.
Deuteronomy 17:19 And it shalbe wyth him and he shall read therin all dayes of hys life that he may learne to feare the lord his God for to kepe al the wordes of this lawe & these ordinaunces for to do them:
Deuteronomy 17:20 that his hert arise not aboue his brethren and that he turne not from the commaundement: either to the right hand or to the left, that both he & his children mai prolong their daies in his kingdom in Israel.

CHAPTER: 18

Deuteronomy 18:1 The Preastes the Leuytes, all the trybe of Leui shal haue no parte nor enheritaunce with Israel. The offrynges of the Lord and his enheritaunce they shall eate,
Deuteronomy 18:2 but shall haue no enheritaunce among their brethren: the Lorde he is their enherytaunce, as he hath sayde vnto them.
Deuteronomy 18:3 And this is the dutie of the preastes of the people and of them that offer, whether it be oxe or shepe: They must geue vnto the preast, the shoulder and the two chekes & the mawe,
Deuteronomy 18:4 the fyrst frutes of the corne, wyne & oyle & the first of the shepe sheryng must thou geue him.
Deuteronomy 18:5 For the Lord thy God hath chosen him out of all the trybes to stande and to minystre in the name of the Lord: bothe: hym & hys sonnes for euer.
Deuteronomy 18:6 If a Leuite come out of any of thy cytyes or any place of Israel, wher he is a soiourner, & come wyth all the lust of his herte vnto the place which the Lord hath chosen:
Deuteronomy 18:7 he shal ther ministre in the name of the Lord his God as all his bretherne the Leuites do which stande ther before the Lord.
Deuteronomy 18:8 And they shall haue lyke porcyones to eate, besyde that whych cometh to hym of the patrimonye of hys elders.
Deuteronomy 18:9 When thou arte in to the lande whyche the Lorde thy God geueth the, se that thou lerne not to do after the abhominacions of these nacyons.
Deuteronomy 18:10 Let ther not be founde among you that maketh hys sonne or daughter to go thorow the fyre, or that vseth withcrafte, or a choser out of dayes or that regardeth the flieng of foules,
Deuteronomy 18:11 or a sorcerar, or a charmar, or that counceleth with spretes, or a propheciar or that asketh the aduyse of the dead,
Deuteronomy 18:12 for al that do such thyngs are abhominacion vnto the Lorde: and because of these abhominacions the Lord thy God doeth cast them out before the,
Deuteronomy 18:13 be pure therfore wyth the Lorde thy God.
Deuteronomy 18:14 For these nacions which thou shalt conquere, herken vnto chosers out of dayes and prophecyars. But the Lorde thy God permytteth not that to the.
Deuteronomy 18:15 The Lord thy God wyl sterre vp a Prophete amonge you: euen of thy brethren lyke vnto me: & vnto him ye shal herken
Deuteronomy 18:16 according to al that thou desyredest of the Lord thy God in Horeb in the daye when the people were gathered sayinge: Let me heare the voyce of my Lorde God no more, nor se thys greate fire any more, that I dye not.
Deuteronomy 18:17 And the Lord sayde vnto me: they haue wel spoken,
Deuteronomy 18:18 I wyl rayse them vp a prophet from among their brethren lyke vnto the & wyll put my wordes into his mouth & he shal speake vnto them al that I shal commaunde him.
Deuteronomy 18:19 And whosoeuer will not herken vnto the wordes whych he shall speake in my name, I wil requyre it of hym.
Deuteronomy 18:20 But the prophete which shall presume to speake ought in my name whych I commaunded not to speake, and he that speaketh in the name of straunge goddes, the same prophete shal dye.
Deuteronomy 18:21 And yf thou saye in thyne hert how shall I knowe that whyche the Lorde hath not spoken?
Deuteronomy 18:22 When a prophete speaketh in the name of the Lorde, yf the thynge folow not nor come to passe, that is the thyng whych the Lord hath not spoken. But the Prophete hath spoken it presumptuously: be not aferde therfore of hym.

CHAPTER: 19

Deuteronomy 19:1 When the lord thy god hath destroied the nacions whose land the Lord thy god geueth the, and thou hast conquered them & dwellest in their cities and in their houses:
Deuteronomy 19:2 thou shalt appoynte .iij. cytyes in the lande whyche the Lorde thy God geueth the to possesse it:
Deuteronomy 19:3 thou shalt prepare the way and deuyde the costes of thy land whych the Lord thy God geueth the to enheret, into .iij. partes that whosoeuer commytteth murther may flee thither.
Deuteronomy 19:4 And thys is the cause of the slayer that shal flee thither and be saued:
Deuteronomy 19:5 If he smyte his neyghboure ignorantly & hated him not in tyme passed: As when a man goeth vnto the wood wyth hys neyghbour to hewe wood, & as his hand fetcheth a stroke wt the axe, the head slippeth from the helue & smyteth his neyghboure that he dyeth: the same shal flee vnto one of the same cities & be saued.
Deuteronomy 19:6 Lest the executer of bloude folowe after the slayer while is hert is whote and ouertake him, because the way is longe, and slee hym, & yet there is no cause worthy of death in hym, in as moche as he hated not hys neyghbour in tyme passed.
Deuteronomy 19:7 Wherfore I commaunde the saying se that thou apoynte out .iij. cytyes.
Deuteronomy 19:8 And If the Lord thy God enlarge thy costes as he hath sworne vnto thy fathers and geue all the lande which he sayd he wold geue vnto thi fathers
Deuteronomy 19:9 (so that thou kepe al these commaundementes to do them, which I commaunde the this day, that thou loue the lord thy God and walke in his wayes euer) them thou shalt adde .iij. cities mo vnto those .iij.
Deuteronomy 19:10 that innocent bloud be not shed in thy land which the Lorde thy God geueth the to enheret, & so bloud come vpon the.
Deuteronomy 19:11 But and yf there be any man that hateth hys neyghboure and layeth awayte for him & riseth agaynst hym & smyteth him that he dye, & fleeth vnto any of these cytyes.
Deuteronomy 19:12 Then let the elders of his citye sende & fetche him thence & deliuer hym into the handes of the iustice of bloude, & he shall dye,
Deuteronomy 19:13 Let thyne eye haue no pitie on hym, & so thou shalt put awaye innocent bloude from Israel, & happye arte thou.
Deuteronomy 19:14 Thou shalt not remoue thy neyghboures mark whych they of olde tyme haue sett in thyne enheritaunce that thou enherettest in the lande whihe the Lorde thy God geueth the to enioye it.
Deuteronomy 19:15 One witnesse shal not ryse agaynst a man in any maner tresspace or synne, what souer synne a man synneth: But at the mouthe of two witnesses or of .iii. witnesses shal al maters betryed.
Deuteronomy 19:16 If an vnrighteous witnesse ryse agaynst a man to accuse him of trespace:
Deuteronomy 19:17 then let both the men which stryue together stande before the Lord, before the preastes and the iudges which shalbe in those dayes,
Deuteronomy 19:18 & let the iudges enquyre a good. And yf the witnesse be founde false and that he hath geuen false wytnesse agaynst his brother
Deuteronomy 19:19 then shal ye do vnto him as he had thought to do vnto his brother, & so thou shalt put euell awaye from the.
Deuteronomy 19:20 And other shall heare & feare and shal henceforth comyt no more any soche wickednesse among you.
Deuteronomy 19:21 And let thyne eye haue no compassyon, but life for life, eye for eye, tothe for tothe, hande for hand and fote for fote.

CHAPTER: 20

Deuteronomy 20:1 When thou goest out to battel. agaynst thyne enemyes, & seyst horsses & charettes & people mo then thou, be not aferde of them, for the Lord thy God is wyth the which brought the out of the lande of Egypt.
Deuteronomy 20:2 And when ye are come nye vnto battel, let the preast come forth and speake vnto the peopl
Deuteronomy 20:3 & say vnto them: Heare Israel, ye are come vnto battel agaynst your enemyes, let not your hartes faynte, neither feare nor be amazed nor a dread of them.
Deuteronomy 20:4 For the lord thy god goeth with you to fight for you agaynst your enemyes & to saue you.
Deuteronomy 20:5 And let the offycers speake vnto the people sayinge: If any man haue buylt a new house and haue not dedicate it, let him go and returne to his house lest he dye in the battell, & another dedicate it.
Deuteronomy 20:6 And yf any man haue planted a vyneyarde & haue not made it comen let him go & returne agayn vnto hys house, lest he dye in the batell and another make it comen.
Deuteronomy 20:7 And yf any man be betrauthed vnto a wyfe and haue not taken her, let hym go and returne agayn vnto his house, lest he dye in the battel and another take her.
Deuteronomy 20:8 And let the officers speake further vnto the people and say. If any man feare & be fainte herted, let him go and returne vnto his house lest his brothers hert be made faynte as wel as his.
Deuteronomy 20:9 And when the offycers haue made an ende of speaking vnto the people, let them make captaynes of warre ouer them.
Deuteronomy 20:10 When thou comest nye vnto a citie to fight against it, offre them peace.
Deuteronomy 20:11 And yf they answere the agayne peasably, and open vnto the, then let all the people that is founde therin be tributaries vnto the and serue the.
Deuteronomy 20:12 But & yf they wyll make no peace wyth the, then make warre agaynst the citie and besyege it.
Deuteronomy 20:13 And when the Lord thy God hath deliuered it into thine handes, smyte al the males therof wyth the egde of the swerde,
Deuteronomy 20:14 saue the wemen and the chyldren and the catel and all that is in the cytie and al the spoyle therof take vnto thy selfe & eate the spoyle of thyne enemyes whych the Lord thy God geueth the.
Deuteronomy 20:15 Thus thou shalt do vnto al the cities whych are a greate waye of from the and not of the cities of these nacions.
Deuteronomy 20:16 But in the cities of these nacions which the Lorde thy God geueth the to enheret, thou shalt saue alyue nothyng that breatheth.
Deuteronomy 20:17 But shalt destroy them with out redempcion, both the Hethites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Pherezites, the Heuites & the Iebusites, as the Lord thy God hath commaunded the,
Deuteronomy 20:18 that thei teach you not to do after al their abhominacions which they do vnto their goddes, & so should synne agaynst the Lord your God.
Deuteronomy 20:19 When thou hast besyeged a citie long time in making warre against it to take it, destroy not the trees therof, that thou woldest thrust an axe vnto them. For thou mayst eate of them, & therfore destroy them not. For the trees of the feldes are no men, that they might come against the to besyege the.
Deuteronomy 20:20 Neuerthelater those trees which thou knowest that men eate not of them thou mayst destroye & cutte them doune and make bulwerkes agaynst the citie that maketh warre with the, vntyl it be ouerthrowne.

CHAPTER: 21

Deuteronomy 21:1 If one be founde slaine in the land whych the Lorde thy God geueth the to possesse it, and lyeth in the feeldes: & not knowne who hath slayne hym:
Deuteronomy 21:2 Then let thyne elders and thy iudges come forth, and mete vnto the cytyes that are round about the slayne.
Deuteronomy 21:3 And let the elders of that citie which is next vnto the slayne man, take an heyffer that is not laboured wt nor hath drawen in the yocke,
Deuteronomy 21:4 and let them brynge her vnto a valeye where is nether earyng nor sowynge, and strike of her head there in the valeye.
Deuteronomy 21:5 Then let the preastes the sonnes of Leui come forth for the Lord thy God hath chosen them to ministre & to blesse in the name of the Lord, and therfore at their mouth shal al strife and plage be tryed.
Deuteronomy 21:6 And al the elders of the citie that is nexte to the slayne man shal washe their handes ouer the heyffer that is be headed in the playne,
Deuteronomy 21:7 & shall answere and saye: oure handes haue not shed this bloude nether haue oure eyes sene it.
Deuteronomy 21:8 Be mercifull Lord vnto thy people Israell whyche thou hast delyuered and put not innocent bloude vnto thy people Israel: and the bloude shalbe forgeuen them.
Deuteronomy 21:9 And so shalt thou put innocent bloud from the, when thou shalt haue done that which is ryght in the syght of the Lord.
Deuteronomy 21:10 When thou goest to warre against thyne enemyes & the Lord thy God hath deliuered them into thyne handes & thou hast take them captyue,
Deuteronomy 21:11 and seyst amonge the captyues a bewtyful woman & hast a fantasye vnto her that thou woldest haue her to thy wyfe.
Deuteronomy 21:12 Then bryng her home to thine house and let her shaue her head & pare her nayles
Deuteronomy 21:13 & put her raiment that she was taken in from her, and let her remaine in thine house & bewepe her father and her mother a moneth longe & after that go in vnto her, & marie her & let her be thy wyfe.
Deuteronomy 21:14 And yf thou haue no fauoure vnto her, then let her go whether she lusteth: for thou mayest not sell her for moneye nor make cheuesaunce of her, because thou haste humbled her.
Deuteronomy 21:15 If a man haue two wyues, one loued & another hated, and they haue borne him children, both the loued & also the hated.
Deuteronomy 21:16 If the firstborne be the sonne of the hated: then when he dealeth his goodes among his chyldren, he may not make the sonne of the beloued fyrstborne before the sonne of the hated whych is in dead the fyrstborne:
Deuteronomy 21:17 But he shal know the sonne of the hated for his firstborne that he geue him dowble of al that he hath. For he is the fyrst of his strength, and to hym belongeth the ryght of the fyrstborne shyppe.
Deuteronomy 21:18 Yf any man haue a sonne that is stubburne & disobedient, that he wyl not herken vnto the voyce of hys father & voyce of his mother, & they haue taught him nurtour, but he wolde not herken vnto them:
Deuteronomy 21:19 Then let his father & his mother take him and bring him out vnto the elders of that citie and vnto the gate of that same place,
Deuteronomy 21:20 & say vnto the elders of the citie, This our sonne is stubburne and dysobedient and wyl not herken vnto oure voyce, he is a ryoter and a dronckarde.
Deuteronomy 21:21 Then let al the men of that citie stone him with stons vnto death And thou shalt put euell awaye from the, & all Israel shall heare & feare.
Deuteronomy 21:22 If a man haue committed a trespace worthy of death & is put to death for it and hanged on tre:
Deuteronomy 21:23 let not hys body remayne al nyghte vpon the treee, but burye hym the same daye, For the curse of God is on him that is hanged. Defile not thy lande therefore, whyche the Lorde thy God geueth the to enheret.

CHAPTER: 22

Deuteronomy 22:1 If thou se thy brothers oxe or shepe go astraye, thou shalt not with drawe thy selfe from them: But shalt brynge them home agayne vnto thy brother
Deuteronomy 22:2 If thy brother be not nye vnto the or yf thou knowe him not, then bring them vnto thyne awne house and lett them be with the vntyll thy brother aske after them, and then deliuer him them agayne.
Deuteronomy 22:3 In like maner shalt thou do with his asse. with his rayment and wyth al lost thinges of thy brother which he hath lost and thou hast founde, and thou mayst not withdrawe thy selfe.
Deuteronomy 22:4 If thou se that thy brothers asse or oxe is fallen doune by the way, thou shalt not wythdrawe thy selfe from them: but shalt helpe him to heaue them vp agayne.
Deuteronomy 22:5 The woman shal not weare that which pertayneth vnto the man, nether shall a man put on womans rayment. For all that do so, are abhomynacyon vnto the Lord thy God.
Deuteronomy 22:6 If thou chaunce vpon a byrdes nest by thy waye, in what soeuer tree it be or on the ground, whether they be young or egges, and the damme syttyng vpon the younge vpon the egges: Thou shalt not take the mother with the younge.
Deuteronomy 22:7 But shalt in any wyse let the damme go and take the young, that thou mayst prospere and prolonge thy dayes.
Deuteronomy 22:8 When thou buyldest a new house, thou shalt make a batelment vnto the rouffe, that thou lade not bloude vpon thyne house, yf any man fal therof.
Deuteronomy 22:9 Thou shalt not sowe thy vyneyarde with diuerse sead: lest thou halow the sead which thou hast sowen wt the frute of thy vyneyard.
Deuteronomy 22:10 Thou shalt not plowe with an oxe and an asse together.
Deuteronomy 22:11 Thou shalt not weare a garment made of wool & flaxe together.
Deuteronomy 22:12 Thou shalt put rybandes vpon the .iiij. quarters of thy vesture wherewith thou couerest thy selfe.
Deuteronomy 22:13 If a man take a wife & when he hath lyen with her hate her,
Deuteronomy 22:14 and lay shameful thinges vnto her charge, and bryng vp an euel name vpon her, and say: I toke this wife, and when I came to her, I found her not a mayd:
Deuteronomy 22:15 Then let the father of the damsell and the mother bring forth the tokens of the damsels virginitie vnto the elders of the citie, euen vnto the gate.
Deuteronomy 22:16 And let the damsels father say vnto the elders I gaue my daughter vnto this man to wyfe and he hateth her:
Deuteronomy 22:17 and lo, he layeth shameful thynges vnto her charge sayinge, I founde not thy daughter a mayde. And yet these are the tokens of my daughters virginite. And let them sprede the vesture before the elders of the citie.
Deuteronomy 22:18 Then let the elders of that citie take that man & chastyce him
Deuteronomy 22:19 and mearce hym in an hundred sycles of syluer and geue them vnto the father of the damsell, because he hath brought vp an euell name vpon a mayde in Israel. And she shalbe his wyfe, and he may not put her awaye al his dayes.
Deuteronomy 22:20 But and yf the thyng be of a suertye that the damsell be not founde a virgen,
Deuteronomy 22:21 let them bryng her vnto the dore of her fathers house, & let the men of that cytie stone her wt stones to death, because she hath wrought folye in Israell, to play the whore in her fathers house. And so thou shalt put euel away from the.
Deuteronomy 22:22 If a man be founde lyinge with a woman, that hath a wedded husband, then let them dye ether other of them: both the man that laye with the wyfe and also the wyfe: so thou shalt put away euel from Israel.
Deuteronomy 22:23 If a maid be hand fasted vnto an husband, and then a man fynde her in the towne & lye wyth her,
Deuteronomy 22:24 then ye shal brynge them both out vnto the gates of the same cytie & shall stone them wt stones to death: The damsel because she cryed not beyng in the citie: And the man, because he hath humbled hys neyghbours wyfe, & thou shalt put away euell from the.
Deuteronomy 22:25 But yf a man fynde a betrauthed damsell in the felde and force her & lye wyth her: Then the man that lay with her shal dye alone,
Deuteronomy 22:26 and vnto the damsell thou shalt do no harme: because there is in the damsell no cause of death For as when a man ryseth against his neyghbour and sleyeth him, euen so is this matter.
Deuteronomy 22:27 For he founde her in the feldes & the betrauthed damsel cryed: but there was no man to suckoure her.
Deuteronomy 22:28 If a man fynde a mayde that is not betrauthed & take her & lye with her & be founde:
Deuteronomy 22:29 Then the man that laye with her shal geue vnto the damsels father .l. sycles of syluer. And she shall be his wyfe, because he hath humbled her, & he maye not put her a waye all his dayes.
Deuteronomy 22:30 No man shall take his fathers wyfe, nor vnhylle his fathers couerynge.

CHAPTER: 23

Deuteronomy 23:1 Non that is gelded or hath his preuye membres cut of shal come in to the congregacion of the Lord.
Deuteronomy 23:2 And he that is borne of a comen woman shall not come into the congregacyon of the Lorde, no in the tenth generacyon he shall not entre into the congregacyon of the Lorde.
Deuteronomy 23:3 The Ammonites and the Moabites shall not come in to the congregacyon of the Lord, no not in the tenth generacion, no they shall neuer come in to the congregacyon of the Lorde,
Deuteronomy 23:4 because they met you not wyth bread and water in the waye when ye came out of Egypt, & because they hyred agenst the Balaam the sonne of Beor the interpreter of Mesopotamia, to curse the.
Deuteronomy 23:5 Neuerthelesse the Lorde thy God wolde not herken vnto Balaam, but turned the curse to a blessing vnto the, because the Lorde thy God loued the.
Deuteronomy 23:6 Thou shalt neuer therfore seke that which is prosperouse or good for them all thy dayes for euer.
Deuteronomy 23:7 Thou shalt not abhorre an Edomite, for he is thy brother: nether shalt thou abhorre an Eygpcian, because thou waste a straunger in his lande.
Deuteronomy 23:8 The chyldren that are begotten of them shall come in to the congregacyon of the Lorde in the .iii. generacion.
Deuteronomy 23:9 When thou goest out with the host agaynst thine enemies, kepe the from al wickednesse for the Lord is amonge you.
Deuteronomy 23:10 If there be any man that is vncleane by the reason of vnclennesse that chaunceth him by nyght, let him go out of the host and not come in agayn
Deuteronomy 23:11 vntyll he haue washed him selfe with water before the euen: & then when the sonne is doune, let hym come in to the host agayne.
Deuteronomy 23:12 Thou shalt haue a place without the host whether thou shalt resorte to
Deuteronomy 23:13 & thou shalt haue a sharpe poynte at the ende of thy wepon: & when thou wylt ease thy selfe, dygge therwith and turne and couer that which is departed from the.
Deuteronomy 23:14 For the Lorde thy god walketh in thyne host, to ryd the and to set thyne enemyes before the. Let thyne host be pure, that he se no vncleane thyng among you and turne from you.
Deuteronomy 23:15 Thou shalt not delyuer vnto his master the seruaunt which is escaped from his master vnto the.
Deuteronomy 23:16 Let him dwel wt the, euen amonge you in what place he him self lyketh best, in one of thy cyties where it is good for hym, & vexe him not.
Deuteronomy 23:17 There shalbe no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor whorekeper of the sonnes of Israel.
Deuteronomy 23:18 Thou shalt nether brynge the hyre of an whore nor the price of a dogge in to the house of the Lorde thy God, in no maner of vowe, for euen both of them are abhominacion vnto the Lord thy God.
Deuteronomy 23:19 Thou shalt be no vsurer vnto thy brother, nether in money nor in fode, nor in any maner thyng that is let vpon vsurye.
Deuteronomy 23:20 Vnto a straunger thou mayst lende vpon vsurye, but not vnto thy brother, that the Lord thy God may blesse the in al that thou settest thyne hande to in the land whether thou goest to conquere it.
Deuteronomy 23:21 When thou hast vowed a vowe vnto the Lord thy God, se thou be not slacke to paye it. For he wyl surely requyre it of the, and it shalbe sinne vnto the.
Deuteronomy 23:22 If thou shalt leaue vowynge, it shalbe no synne vnto the:
Deuteronomy 23:23 but that whych is once gone out of thy lyppes, thou must kepe and do, accordynge as thou hast vowed vnto the Lorde thy God of a frewyl which thou hast spoken with thy mouth.
Deuteronomy 23:24 When thou comest into thy neyghbours vineyarde, thou mayst eate grapes thy belyfull at thyne awne pleasure: but thou shalt put none in thy bagge.
Deuteronomy 23:25 When thou goest into thy neyghboures corne, thou mayst plucke the eares wt thyne hande, but thou mayst not moue a sycle vnto thy neyghbours corne.

CHAPTER: 24

Deuteronomy 24:1 When a man hath taken a wife and maryed her, yf she fynde no fauoure in his eies, because he hath spied some vnclennesse in her. Then let hym wryte her a bylle of deuorcement & put it in her hande and sende her out of hys house.
Deuteronomy 24:2 If when she is departed out of hys house, she go and be another mans wif
Deuteronomy 24:3 and the seconde husbande hate her & wryte her a letter of deuorcement & put it in her hande & sende her out of his house: or yf the seconde man dye whiche toke her to wyfe,
Deuteronomy 24:4 her fyrst man which sent her awaye may not take her agayne to be hys wyfe, in as moch as she is defyled. For that is abhomynacion in the syght of the Lorde: that thou defyle not the land with sinne, which the Lord thy god geueth the to enheret.
Deuteronomy 24:5 When a man taketh a newe wife, he shal not go a warrefare nether shalbe charged wt any busynesse: but shalbe fre at home one yere & reioyse with hys wyfe which he hath taken.
Deuteronomy 24:6 No man shal take the neather or the vppermylstone to pledge, for then he taketh a mans lyfe to pledge.
Deuteronomy 24:7 If any man be found stealyng any of hys brethren the chyldren of Israel, & maketh cheuesaunce of hym or selleth him, the thefe shall dye. And thou shalt put euell away from the.
Deuteronomy 24:8 Take heade to thy selfe as concernynge the plage of leprosye, that thou obserue dyligently to do accordyng to all that the Preastes the Leuites shall teache the, as I commaunded them so ye shal obserue to do.
Deuteronomy 24:9 Remembre what the Lord thy God dyd vnto Miriam by the waye, after that ye were come out of Egypte.
Deuteronomy 24:10 If thou lende thy brother any maner socoure, thou shalt not go in to hys house to fetche a pledge:
Deuteronomy 24:11 but shalt stande without & the man to whom thou lendest, shall brynge the pledge out at the dore.
Deuteronomy 24:12 Forthermore yf it be a pore body, go not to slepe wt hys pledg
Deuteronomy 24:13 but delyuer hym the pledge agayne by that the sonne go doune, & let him slepe in hys awne rayment and blesse the. And it shalbe ryghteousnes vnto the, before the Lord thy god.
Deuteronomy 24:14 Thou shalt not defraude an hyred seruaunte that is nedye and poore whether he be of thy brethren or a straunger that is in thy land
Deuteronomy 24:15 with in thy cyties. Geue him his hyre the same daye, and let not the sonne go doune theron. For he is nedye and therwith susteyneth hys lyfe, lest he crye agaynst the vnto the Lord and it be synne vnto the.
Deuteronomy 24:16 The fathers shal not dye for the chyldren nor the children for the fathers: but euery man shal dye for his awne synne.
Deuteronomy 24:17 Hynder not the ryght of the straunger nor of the fatherlesse, nor take wedowes rayment to pledge.
Deuteronomy 24:18 But remembre that thou wast a seruaunte in Egypte, and how the Lord thy God delyuered the thence. Wherfore I commaunde the to do this thyng.
Deuteronomy 24:19 When thou cuttest doune thy herueste in the feeld & hast forgotte a shefe in the feelde thou shalt not go agayne and fett it: But it shalbe for the straunger, the fatherlesse & the wydowe, that the Lord thy God may blesse the in all the workes of thyne hande.
Deuteronomy 24:20 When thou beatest doune thyne olyue trees thou shalt not make cleane riddaunce after the: but it shalbe for the straunger, the fatherlesse & the wydowe.
Deuteronomy 24:21 And when thou gatherest they venyarde, thou shalt not gather cleane after the: but it shalbe for the straunger, the fatherlesse & the wyddow.
Deuteronomy 24:22 And remembre that thou wast a seruaunt in the land of Egipte: wherfore I commaunde the to do this thinge.

CHAPTER: 25

Deuteronomy 25:1 If there be strife betwene men let them com vnto the law, & let the iudges iustifie the righteous & condemne the trespaser.
Deuteronomy 25:2 And yf the trespaser be worthy of stripes, then let the iudge cause to take him doune and to beate hym before his face accordynge to his trespace vnto a certayne nombr
Deuteronomy 25:3 .xl. strypes he shall geue him & and not passe: lest yf he should exceade & beate him aboue that with many stripes, thi brother should appeare vngoodly before thyne eyes.
Deuteronomy 25:4 Thou shalt not mosell the oxe that treadeth out the corne.
Deuteronomy 25:5 When bethern dwel together and one of them dye and haue no childe, the wyfe of the deed shal not be geuen out vnto a straunger: but hir brother in lawe shal go in vnto her & take her to wife & marie her.
Deuteronomy 25:6 And the eldeste sonne whych she beareth, shall stande vp in the name of his brother which is dead, that his name be not put out in Israel.
Deuteronomy 25:7 But and if the man wyll not take hys sister in lawe, then let her go to the gate vnto the elders & saye: My brother in lawe refuseth to sterre vp vnto hys brother a name in Israel, he wyl not mary me.
Deuteronomy 25:8 Then let the elders of his cyty call vnto hym and comen wt him. If he stande & saye: I wyll nat take her,
Deuteronomy 25:9 then let his syster in lawe go vnto hym in the presence of the elders and loose his shoo of his fote & spit in his face & answere and saye. So shall it be done vnto that man that wyll not byld his brothers house.
Deuteronomy 25:10 And his name shal be called in Israel, the vnshoed house.
Deuteronomy 25:11 If when men stryue to gether, one wyth another, the wyfe of the one runne to, for to ryd her husband out of the handes of hym that smyteth him and put forth her hand & take hym by the secrettes:
Deuteronomy 25:12 cut of her hand, and let not thyne eye pytie her.
Deuteronomy 25:13 Thou shalbe not haue in thy bagge two maner of weyghtes, a great & a smal,
Deuteronomy 25:14 nether shalt thou haue in thine house dyuerse measures, a great & a small.
Deuteronomy 25:15 But thou shalt haue a perfect and a iust measure: that thy dayes may be lenghthed in the land which the Lord thy God geueth the.
Deuteronomy 25:16 For all that do suche thynges & all that do vnryght, are abhomynacion vnto the Lord thy God.
Deuteronomy 25:17 Remembre what Amalech dyd vnto the by the waye after thou camest out of Egypte,
Deuteronomy 25:18 he mett the by the waye and smote the hyndmost of you, all that were ouer laboured and dragged by hynde, when thou wast faynted & werye, & he feared not God.
Deuteronomy 25:19 Therfore when the Lord thy God hath geuen the reast from al thyne euemyes rounde aboute, in the lande whych the Lord thy God geueth the to enheret and possesse: se that thou put oute the name of Amalech from vnder heauen, and forget not.

CHAPTER: 26

Deuteronomy 26:1 When thou art come into the land whyche the Lord thy God geueth the to enheret and hast enioyed it and dwellest therin:
Deuteronomy 26:2 take of the first of al the frute of the erthe, whych thou hast brought in out of the lande that the Lorde thy GOD geueth the and put it in a maunde and go vnto the place which the Lorde thy GOD shall chose to make hys name dwell there.
Deuteronomy 26:3 And thou shalt come vnto the preast that shalbe in those dayes and saye vnto hym, I knowledge this daie vnto the Lord thy God, that I am come vnto the countre which the Lord sware vnto oure fathers for to geue vs.
Deuteronomy 26:4 And the preast shall take the maunde out of thyne hande, and sett it doune before the aulter of the Lord thy God.
Deuteronomy 26:5 And thou shalt answere and saye before the Lord thy God: The Syrians wolde haue destroied my father, and he went doune into Egypte and soiourned there with a fewe folcke and grewe there vnto a nacyon greate, mightie and ful of people.
Deuteronomy 26:6 And the Egypcians vexed vs and troubled vs, & laded vs with cruel bondage.
Deuteronomy 26:7 And we cryed vnto the Lorde God of oure fathers, and the Lord heard oure voyce and loked on oure aduersyte, laboure & oppressyon.
Deuteronomy 26:8 And the Lord brought vs out of Egipt with a myghtye hand & a stretched out arme & wt great terreblenesse and with signes and wonders.
Deuteronomy 26:9 And he hath brought vs in to thys place and hath geuen vs this land that floweth wyth mylke & honye.
Deuteronomy 26:10 And nowe loo, I haue brought the fyrst frutes of the land whiche the Lorde hath geuen me. And set it before the Lorde thy God, & worshyp before the Lorde thy God
Deuteronomy 26:11 & reioyse ouer al the good thynges which the Lord thy God hath geuen vnto the and vnto thyne house, bothe thou the Leuite and the straunger that is amonge you.
Deuteronomy 26:12 When thou hast made an ende of tything all the tythes of thyne encrease the thyrde yere, the yere of tythyuge: and hast geuen it vnto the Leuyte, the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wydowe, and they haue eaten in thy gates and fylled them selues.
Deuteronomy 26:13 Then saye before the Lord thy God: I haue brought the halowed thinges out of myne house, & haue geuen them vnto the Leuite, the straunger, the fatherlesse and the wydowe accordynge to al the commaundementes whych thou commaundest me: I haue not ouerskypped thy commaundementes, nor forgotten them.
Deuteronomy 26:14 I haue not eaten therof in my mournynge nor taken awaye therof vnto any vnclennesse, nor spente therof aboute any dead corse: but haue herkened vnto the voyce of the Lorde my God, and haue done after al that he commaunded me,
Deuteronomy 26:15 loke doune from thy holy habitacyon heauen, and blesse thy people Israell & the land which thou hast geuen vs (as thou swarest vnto oure fathers) a land that floweth with mylke and hony.
Deuteronomy 26:16 This daye the Lorde thy God hath commaunded the to do these ordinaunces & lawes Kepe them therfore & do them with all thyne herte and all thy soule.
Deuteronomy 26:17 Thou hast sett vp the Lorde thys daye to be thy God and to walke in his wayes & to kepe hys ordinaunces, his commaundementes and his lawes, and to herken vnto his voyce.
Deuteronomy 26:18 And the Lord hath sett the vp thys daye, to be a seuerall people vnto him (as he hath promysed the) & that thou kepe his commaundementes,
Deuteronomy 26:19 & to make the hye aboue al nacions which he hath made, in prayse, in name and honoure: that thou mayst be an holy people vnto the Lord thy God, as he hath sayde.

CHAPTER: 27

Deuteronomy 27:1 And Moses with the elders of Israel commanded the people sayinge: kepe al the commaundementes which I commaunde you thys daye.
Deuteronomy 27:2 And when ye be come ouer Iordan vnto the land whiche the Lorde thy God geueth the, set vp greate stones and plaister them wyth playster,
Deuteronomy 27:3 and wryte vpon them al the wordes of this lawe, when thou arte come ouer: that thou mayst come into the land which the Lord thy god geueth the: a land that floweth with mylke & honye as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promysed the.
Deuteronomy 27:4 When ye be com ouer Iordan, se that ye set vp these stones whyche I commaunde you this daye in mount Ebal, & plaister them with playster.
Deuteronomy 27:5 And there bylde vnto the Lord thy God, an altare of stones and se thou lyfte vp no yron vpon them:
Deuteronomy 27:6 But thou shalt make the alter of the Lord thy God of rough stones and offer burntofferynges theron vnto the Lorde thy God.
Deuteronomy 27:7 And thou shalt offer peaceoffringes and shalt eate there and reioyse before the Lord thy God.
Deuteronomy 27:8 And thou shalt wryt vpon the stones al the wordes of thys lawe, manyfestly and well.
Deuteronomy 27:9 And Moses wyth the preastes the Leuytes spake vnto all Israel sayinge: take hede and heare Israel, thys daye thou art become the people of the Lord thy God.
Deuteronomy 27:10 Herken therfore vnto the voyce of the Lord thy God & do his commandementes & his ordinaunces which I commaunde you this day.
Deuteronomy 27:11 And Moses charged the people the same daye sayinge.
Deuteronomy 27:12 These shall stande vpon mount Garizim to blesse the people, when ye are come ouer Iordan, Symeon, Leui, Iuda, Isachar, Ioseph and Beniamin.
Deuteronomy 27:13 And these shal stande vpon mount Ebal to curse: Ruben, Gad, Aser, Zabulon, Dan & Nephthali.
Deuteronomy 27:14 And the Leuites shall begynne & say vnto al the men of Israel wyth a loude voyce.
Deuteronomy 27:15 Cursed be he that maketh anye carued ymage or ymage of metall (an abhominacion vnto the Lord, the worke of the hands of the craftesman) and putteth it in a secret place: and all the people shall answere & saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:16 Cursed be he that curseth hys father or his mother, and all the people shall saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:17 Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbours marcke and all the people shall saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:18 Cursed be he that maketh the blynd go out of his waye, & all the people shall saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:19 Cursed be he that hyndreth the right of the straunger, fatherlesse and wydowe, and all the people shall saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:20 Cursed be he that lyeth wyth hys fathers wyfe because he hath opened hys fathers couerynge, and all the people shal saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:21 Cursed be he that lyeth wyth anye maner beast, and all the people shall saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:22 Cursed be he that lieth wt his syster whether shee be the daughter of hys father or of hys mother, and all the people shall saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:23 Cursed be that lyeth wyth hys mother in lawe, and all the people shall saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:24 Cursed be he that smiteth his neyghbour secretly, and all the people shall saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:25 Cursed be he that taketh a rewarde to sle innocent bloude, & all the people shal saye Amen.
Deuteronomy 27:26 Cursed be he that mayntayneth not the wordes of thys lawe to do them, and all the people shal say Amen.

CHAPTER: 28

Deuteronomy 28:1 If thou shalt herken dilygently vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, to obserue and to do al hys commaundementes which I commaunde the thys day. The Lord wyl set the vp on hye aboue all nacions of the erth.
Deuteronomy 28:2 And al these blessinges shal come on the and ouertake the, yf thou shalt herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God.
Deuteronomy 28:3 Blessed shalt thou be in the towne and blessed in the feldes,
Deuteronomy 28:4 blessed shalbe the frute of thy body, the frute of thy grounde and the frute of thy catell, the frute of thyne oxen, and thy flockes of shepe,
Deuteronomy 28:5 blessed shall thyne aulmery be and thy store.
Deuteronomy 28:6 Blessed shalt thou be, both when thou goest out, and blessed when thou comest in.
Deuteronomy 28:7 The Lord shal smyte thyne enemyes that ryse agaynst the before thy face. They shall come out agaynst the one way, & flee before the .vij. wayes.
Deuteronomy 28:8 The Lord shall commaunde the blessynge to be wyth the in thy store houses & in al that thou settest thyne hande to, and wyll blesse the in the lande whyche the Lorde thy God geueth the.
Deuteronomy 28:9 The Lord shall make the an holy people vnto him self, as he hath sworne vnto the: yf thou shalt kepe the commandementes of the Lord thy God and walke in his wayes.
Deuteronomy 28:10 And al nacions of the erth shall se that thou arte called after the name of the Lorde, and they shalbe aferde of the.
Deuteronomy 28:11 And the Lord shal make the plentuous in goodes, in the frute of thy body, in the frute of thy catell and in the frute of thy grounde, in the land whych the Lord sware vnto thy fathers to geue the.
Deuteronomy 28:12 The Lord shall open vnto the hys good treasure, euen the heauen, to geue rayne vnto thy lande in due ceason and to blesse al the laboures of thyne hande. And thou shalt lende vnto many nacions, but shalt not nede to borowe thy selfe.
Deuteronomy 28:13 And the Lord shall set the before and not behynde, & thou shalt be aboue only and not beneth: yf that thou herken vnto the commaundementes of the Lorde thy God which I commaunde the this day to kepe and to do them.
Deuteronomy 28:14 And se that thou bowe not from any of these wordes which I commaunde the this daye ether to the ryght hande or to the lefte, that thou woldest goo after straunge goddes to serue them.
Deuteronomy 28:15 But and yf thou wilt not herken vnto the voice of the Lord thy God to kepe and to do al his commaundementes and ordinaunces which I commaunde the thys day: then all these curses shall come vpon the & ouertake the:
Deuteronomy 28:16 Cursed shalt thou be in the towne, & cursed in the felde,
Deuteronomy 28:17 cursed shall thyne aulmery be & thy store.
Deuteronomy 28:18 Cursed shal the frute of thy body & the frute of thy lande be & the frute of thyne oxen & the flockes of thy shepe.
Deuteronomy 28:19 And cursed shalt thou be when thou goest in, & when thou goest out.
Deuteronomy 28:20 And the Lorde shall sende vpon the cursynge, goyinge to nought & complanynge in all that thou settest thyne hande to whatsoeuer thou doest: vntyl thou be destroyed & brought to nought quyckely, because of the wickednesse of thyne inuencions in that thou hast forsaken the Lorde.
Deuteronomy 28:21 And the Lorde shall make the pestilence cleaue vnto the, vntyll he haue consumed the from the land whether thou goest to enioye it.
Deuteronomy 28:22 And the Lord shall smyte the with swellynge, with feuers, heet, bunrynge, wetherynge, with smytynge and blastynge. And they shall folowe the vntyll thou peryshe.
Deuteronomy 28:23 And the heauen that is ouer thy head shalbe brasse, & the erthe that is vnder the, yeron.
Deuteronomy 28:24 And the Lorde shall turne the rayne of the land vnto powder & dust: euen from heauen they shall come doune vpon the, vntyll thou be brought to nought.
Deuteronomy 28:25 And the Lorde shall plage the before thyne enmyes: Thou shalt come out one waye agaynste them, and flee seuen wayes before them, & shalt be scatered amonge al the kingdomes of the erth.
Deuteronomy 28:26 And thy carkesse shalbe meate vnto all maner foules of the apre and vnto the beastes of the erth, and no man shall fraye them awaye.
Deuteronomy 28:27 And the Lorde wyll smyte the wyth the botches of Egypt and the emoroydes, scalle & maungynesse, that thou shalt not be healed therof.
Deuteronomy 28:28 And the Lorde shall smyte the wyth madnesse, blyndnesse & dasyng of herte.
Deuteronomy 28:29 And thou shalt grope at none dayes as the blynd gropeth in darknesse, and shalt not come to the ryght waye. And thou shalt suffer wronge only & be polled euermore, and no man shall sucker the,
Deuteronomy 28:30 thou shalt be betrawthed vnto a wyfe, and another shal lye with her. Thou shalt buylde and house & another shal dwell therin. Thou shalt plante a vyneard, & shalt not make it comen.
Deuteronomy 28:31 Thyne oxe shalbe slayne before thyne eyes, and thou shalt not eate therof. Thyne asse shalbe vyolentlye taken awaye euen bofore thy face, and shall not be restored the agayne. Thy shepe shalbe geuen vnto thyne enemyes, and no man shall helpe the.
Deuteronomy 28:32 Thy sonnes and thy daughters shall be geuen vnto another nacion, and thyne eyes shall se and dase vpon them all daye longe, but shalt haue no myght in thyne hande.
Deuteronomy 28:33 The frute of thy lande and all thy laboures shall a nacion which thou knowest not, eate, and thou shalt but suffre vyolence only & be oppressed alwaye:
Deuteronomy 28:34 that thou shalt be cleane besyde thy selfe for the syghte of thyne eyes which thou shalt se.
Deuteronomy 28:35 The Lord shal smyte the wyth a myscheuous botche in the knees and legges, so that thou canst not be healed: euen from the sole of the fote vnto the toppe of the head.
Deuteronomy 28:36 The Lord shall brynge both the and thy kynge whych thou hast sett ouer the, vnto a nacyon whych nether thou nor thy fathers haue knowne, and there thou shalt serue straunge Goddes: euen wod & stone,
Deuteronomy 28:37 And thou shalt go to waste & be made an ensample, & a iestynge stocke vnto all nacyons whether the Lord shall carye the.
Deuteronomy 28:38 Thou shalt carie moch seed out in the felde & shalt gather but lytle in: for the greshopers shall destroye it.
Deuteronomy 28:39 Thou shalt plante a veynearde & dresse it, but shalt nether drynke of the wyne neither gather of the grapes, for the wormes shall eate it.
Deuteronomy 28:40 Thou shalt haue olyuetrees in al thy coastes, but shalt not be anoynted with the oyle, for thyne olyue trees shalbe roted out.
Deuteronomy 28:41 Thou shalt get sonnes and daughters, but shalt not haue them: for they shalbe caryed awaye captiue.
Deuteronomy 28:42 All thy trees and frute of thy lande shalbe marred with blastynge.
Deuteronomy 28:43 The straungers that are a monge you shall clyme aboue the vp on hye, and thou shalt come doune beneth alowe.
Deuteronomy 28:44 He shal lende the & thou shalt not lende him, he shalbe before and thou behynde.
Deuteronomy 28:45 Moreouer all these curses shall come vpon the & shall folowe the and ouertake the, tyll thou be destroyed: because thou herkenedest not vnto the voyce of the Lorde thy God, to kepe his commandementes and ordynaunces whych he commaunded the,
Deuteronomy 28:46 and they shalbe vpon the as miracles and wonders & vpon thy seed for euer.
Deuteronomy 28:47 And because thou seruedest not the Lord thy God wyth ioyfulnesse and with a good herte for the abundaunce of all thinges,
Deuteronomy 28:48 therfore thou shalt serue thyne enemye which the Lord shall sende vpon the: in hunger and thrust, in nakednesse and in nede of all thynge: & he shall put a yocke of yeron vpon thyne necke, vntyll he haue broughte the to nought.
Deuteronomy 28:49 And the Lord shal brynge a nacyon vpon the from a farre, euen from the ende of the world, as swyfte as an egle flyeth: a nacyon whose tonge thou shalt not vnderstande:
Deuteronomy 28:50 a harde fauoured nacyon whiche shall not regarde the person of the olde nor haue compassion on the yonge.
Deuteronomy 28:51 And he shall eate the frute of thy lande and the frute of thy catell vntill he haue destroyed the: so that he shall leaue the nether corne, wyne, nor oyle, nether the encrease of thyne oxen nor the flockes of thy shepe: vntyll he haue brought the to nought.
Deuteronomy 28:52 And he shall kepe the in, in all thy cities, vntyll the hye & stronge walles be come doune wherin thou trustedest, thorow al the lande. And he shal besyege the in al thy cytyes thorow out all thy land which the Lord thy god hath geuen the.
Deuteronomy 28:53 And thou shalt eate the frute of thyne owne body: the flesh of thi sonnes and of thy daughters whych the Lorde thy God hath geuen the, in that straytenesse & seyge wherwith thine enemye shal besyege the,
Deuteronomy 28:54 so that it shal greue the man that is tender and exceadynge delycate amonge you, to loke on hys brother and vpon his wyfe that lyeth in hys bosome, & on the remnaunte of his chyldren which he hath yet lefte,
Deuteronomy 28:55 for feare of geuynge vnto any of them of the flesh of his children, which he eateth, because he hath noughte lefte him in that straytenes and seyge wherwyth thyne enemyes shall besyege the in all thy cyties.
Deuteronomy 28:56 Yea, and the woman that is so tender & delycate among you that she dare not aduenture to sett the sole of her foote vpon the grounde for softnesse and tendernesse, shalbe greued to loke on the husbande that lyeth in her bosome and on her sonne & on her daughter:
Deuteronomy 28:57 euen because of the after byrthe, that is come out from betwene her legges, & because of her chyldren which she hath borne, because she wolde eate them for nede of all thynges secretly, in the straytenes & seyge wherwyth thyne enemye shal besyege the in thy cyties.
Deuteronomy 28:58 If thou wilt not be dyligent to do all the wordes of this law that are wrytten in thys boke, for to feare this glorious and fearfull name of the Lorde thy God:
Deuteronomy 28:59 the Lorde wyll smyte both the and thy sead with wonderful plages and with greate plages and of longe continuaunce,
Deuteronomy 28:60 and with euell sekenesses and of longe duraunce. Moreouer he wyll brynge vpon the al the diseases of Egypt which thou wast afrayed of, and they shall cleaue vnto the.
Deuteronomy 28:61 Therto al maner sickenesses and all maner plages which are not wrytten in the boke of this lawe, wyll the Lord brynge vpon the vntyll thou be come to noughte.
Deuteronomy 28:62 And ye shalbe lefte fewe in nombre, where before ye were as the starres of heauen in multitude: because thou woldest not herken vnto the voyce of the Lord thy God.
Deuteronomy 28:63 And as the Lord reioysed ouer you to do you good & to multyplye you: euen so he wil reioyse ouer you, to destroy you and to bring you to nought. And ye shalbe wasted from of the lande whether thou goest to enioye it.
Deuteronomy 28:64 And the Lord shall scater the amonge all nacions from the one ende of the world vnto the other and there thou shalt serue straunge goddes, whyche nether thou nor thy fathers haue knowne: euen wood and stone.
Deuteronomy 28:65 And amonge these nacyons thou shalt be no small ceason, and yet shalt haue no reste to the sole of thy foote. For the Lorde shall geue the there a tremblynge herte & dasynge eyes & sorowe of mynde.
Deuteronomy 28:66 And thy lyfe shall hange before the, & thou shalt feare both day and nyght & shalt haue no trust in thy lyfe.
Deuteronomy 28:67 In the mornyng thou shalt saye, wold God it were nyght. And at nyght thou shalt saye, wolde God it were mornynge: for feare of thyne herte which thou shalt feare, and for the syght of thyne eyes which thou shalt se.
Deuteronomy 28:68 And the Lord shal brynge the into Egypt agayne with shyppes, by the way whych I bade the that thou shouldest se it no moare. And there ye shalbe solde vnto youre enemies, for bondmen and bondwemen: and yet no man shal bye you.

CHAPTER: 29

Deuteronomy 29:1 These are the wordes of the appoyntment which the Lord commaunded Moses to make with the chyldren of Israell in the lande of Moab, besyde the appoyntment which he made with them in Horeb.
Deuteronomy 29:2 And Moses called vnto al Israel & sayd vnto them: Ye haue sene al that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of Egypt, vnto Pharao & vnto all hys seruauntes, and vnto al his land,
Deuteronomy 29:3 and the great temptacions whiche thyne eyes haue sene and those great myracles and wonders:
Deuteronomy 29:4 & yet the Lord hath not geuen you an herte to perceyue, nor eyes to se, nor eares to heere vnto thys daye.
Deuteronomy 29:5 And I haue led you .xl. yere in the wyldernesse: & youre clothes are not waxed olde vpon you, nor thy shooes are waxed old vpon thy fete.
Deuteronomy 29:6 Ye haue eaten no bread nor droncke wyne or strounge drynke: that ye myghte knowe, how that he is the Lorde your God.
Deuteronomy 29:7 And at the last ye came vnto this place, & Sehon the kynge of Hesbon and Og kynge of Basan came out agaynst you vnto battel, and we smote them
Deuteronomy 29:8 and toke thier lande and gaue it an herytaunce vnto the Rubenytes and Gadites & to the half tribe of Manasse Kep
Deuteronomy 29:9 therfore the wordes of this appoyntment and do them, that ye maye vnderstande all that ye ought to do.
Deuteronomy 29:10 Ye stand here this day euery one of you before the Lord your God, both the heades of your trybes your elders, youre officers & all the men of Israel:
Deuteronomy 29:11 youre chyldren, your wiues and the straungers that are in thyne host, from the hewer of thy wood vnto the drawer of thy water:
Deuteronomy 29:12 that thou shuldest come vnder the appoyntment of the Lorde thy God, & vnder his oth which the Lord the God maketh with the this day.
Deuteronomy 29:13 For to make the a people vnto him selfe, & that he maye be vnto the a God, as he hath sayde vnto the & he hath sworne vnto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac and Iacob.
Deuteronomy 29:14 Also I make not this bonde and this othe with you onlye:
Deuteronomy 29:15 but both with him that standeth here with vs this daye before the Lorde oure god, and also with him that is not here with vs this daye.
Deuteronomy 29:16 For ye knowe howe we haue dwelt in the lande of Egypte, and how we came thorow the myddes of the nacions which we passed by.
Deuteronomy 29:17 And ye haue sene their abhominacions and their ydolles: wod: stone, siluer and gold which they had.
Deuteronomy 29:18 Lest there be among you man or woman kynred or trybe, that turneth away in hys hert thys day from the Lord our God, to go and serue the goddes of these nacions: & lest there be amonge you some roote that beareth gall and wormwod,
Deuteronomy 29:19 so that when he heareth the wordes of this curse, he blesse him self in his hert saying: I shall haue peace. I wyll therfore worke after the luste of myne owne hert, that the droncken may perysh with the thyrstye.
Deuteronomy 29:20 And so the Lorde wyll not be mercyfull vnto hym, but then the wrath of the lord & his gelousye, smoke agaynst that man, & al the curses that are written in thys boke lyght vpon hym, and the Lorde do out hys name from vnder heauen,
Deuteronomy 29:21 and separate hym vnto euell out of all the trybes of Israell accordyng vnto al the curses of the appoyntement that is written in the boke of this lawe.
Deuteronomy 29:22 So that the generacion to come of youre chyldren that shall ryse vp after you and the straunger that shal come from a ferre land, say when they se the plages of that lande, & the diseases wherwith the Lord hath smytten it
Deuteronomy 29:23 how all the land is burnt vp wyth bremstone & salt, & that it is nether sowne nor beareth, nor any grasse groweth therin, after the ouerthrowing of Sodome, Gomor, Adama and Zeboim: which the Lord ouerthrewe in his wrath and angre.
Deuteronomy 29:24 And then shal al nacions also say: wherfore hath the Lorde done of this facion vnto this lande? O how fearse is this great wrath?
Deuteronomy 29:25 And men shal saye: because they lefte the testament of the Lorde God of their fathers which he made with them, when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.
Deuteronomy 29:26 And they went & serued straunge goddes & worshipped them: goddes which they knew not and which had geuen them nought.
Deuteronomy 29:27 And therfore the wrath of the Lorde waxed whote vpon that lande to bryng vpon it all the curses that are written in this boke.
Deuteronomy 29:28 And the Lorde cast them out of their lande in angre, wrath and greate furyousnesse, and cast them in to a straunge land, as it is come to passe this day.
Deuteronomy 29:29 The secrettes of the Lord oure God are opened vnto vs and our children for euer, that we do all the wordes of this lawe.

CHAPTER: 30

Deuteronomy 30:1 When all these wordes are come vpon the whether it be the blessyng or the cursse whych I haue set before the, yet yf thou turne vnto thyne herte amonge al the nacyons whether the Lord thy God hath truste the,
Deuteronomy 30:2 and come agayne vnto the Lorde thy GOD and herken vnto hys voyce accordynge to all that I commaunde the this day: both thou and thy children with al thyne herte and al thy soule:
Deuteronomy 30:3 Then the Lorde thy God wyll turne thy captiuite and haue compassyon vpon the, and goo and fet the agayn from all the nacyons, amonge which the Lord thy God shal haue scatered the.
Deuteronomy 30:4 Though thou wast cast vnto the extreme partes of heauen: euen from thence wyl the Lorde thy God gether the and from thence fett th
Deuteronomy 30:5 and brynge the into the lande which thy fathers possessed, & thou shalt enioye it. And he wyl shewe the kyndnesse and multiplye the aboue thy fathers.
Deuteronomy 30:6 And the Lorde the God wyll circumcise thine hert & the herte of thy sede for to loue the Lord thy God wyth al thyne hert & all thy soule, that thou mayst lyue.
Deuteronomy 30:7 And the Lorde thy God wyl put al these curses vpon thyne enemies & on them that hate the, & persecute the.
Deuteronomy 30:8 But thou shalt turne and herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde and do al his commaundementes which I commaund the this day.
Deuteronomy 30:9 And the Lorde thy God wyl make the plentuous in all the worckes of thyne hand & in the frute of thy body, in the frut of thy cattell & frute of thy land, & in ryches. For the Lord wyll turne agayne & reioyce ouer them to do the good, as he reioysed ouer thy fathers:
Deuteronomy 30:10 If thou herken vnto the voyce of the Lord thy God to kepe his commaundementes & ordinaunces whyche are wytten in the boke of thys lawe, if thou turne vnto the Lorde thy God with al thyne hert, and al thy soule.
Deuteronomy 30:11 For the commaundement whiche I commande the thys daye, is not separated from the, neither farre of.
Deuteronomy 30:12 It is not in heauen that thou neadest to saye: who shall goo vp for vs to heauen, and fett it vs, that we may heare it, and do it:
Deuteronomy 30:13 Neither is it beyond the sea that thou shouldest say: who shal go ouer sea for vs & fet it vs that we may heare it, and do it.
Deuteronomy 30:14 But the worde is verye nye vnto the: euen in thy mouth, & in thyne hert, that thou do it.
Deuteronomy 30:15 Beholde I haue set before you thys daye lyfe and good, death and euyll:
Deuteronomy 30:16 in that I commaunde the thys daye to loue the Lorde thy God, & to walke in hys waies & to kepe his commaundementes, his ordinaunces, and his lawes: that thou maist lyue and multiply, & that the Lord thy God may blesse the, in the land whither thou goest to possessess it.
Deuteronomy 30:17 But and if thyne hert turne away, so that thou wylte not heare: but shalt go astraye & worshyp straunge Goddes and serue them,
Deuteronomy 30:18 I pronounce vnto you thys daye, that ye shall surely perysh, and that ye shal not prolonge your daies vpon the land whither thou passest ouer Iordan to go and possesse it.
Deuteronomy 30:19 I cal to recorde thys daye vnto you, heauen and earth, that I haue set before you life and death, blessynge & cursinge: but chose lyfe, that thou, and thy sede may liue,
Deuteronomy 30:20 in that thou louest the Lord thi God, herkenest vnto his voyce, and cleauest vnto hym. For he is thy lyfe, & the length of thy daies, that thou mayst dwell vpon the earth whych the Lorde sware vnto thy fathers: Abraham, Isaac, & Iacob, to gyue them.

CHAPTER: 31

Deuteronomy 31:1 And Moses went and spake these wordes vnto al Israel
Deuteronomy 31:2 & sayd vnto them. I am an hundred & .xx. yeare thys day, & can no more go out & in. Also the Lorde hath sayd vnto me, thou shalt not go ouer thys Iordan.
Deuteronomy 31:3 The Lorde your God he wyll go ouer before the and he wyll destroye these nations before the, and thou shalt conquere them. And Iosua he shall go ouer before the as the Lord hath sayed.
Deuteronomy 31:4 And the Lorde shall go vnto them, as he dyd to Sehon & Og kynges of the Amorites, & vnto theyr landes whych kinges he destroyed
Deuteronomy 31:5 And when the Lorde hath deliuered them to the, se that ye do vnto theim accordyng vnto all the commaundementes which I haue commaunded you.
Deuteronomy 31:6 Plucke vp your hertes and be stronge, dread not, nor be afrayed of them: for the Lord thy God him selfe will go with the, & wil neither let the go nor forsake the.
Deuteronomy 31:7 And Moses called vnto Iosua and sayed vnto hym in the syghte of all Israell. Be stronge and bold, for thou must go with this people vnto the lande whych the Lord hath sworne vnto theyr fathers to giue them, and thou shalt gyue it them to enherett.
Deuteronomy 31:8 And the Lorde he shall go before the and he shall be with the, and wyll not let the go nor forsake the, feare not therfore nor be discomforted.
Deuteronomy 31:9 And Moses wrote thys lawe and deliuered it to the priestes the sonnes of Leui whyche bare the arcke of the testament of the Lorde and vnto all the elders of Israell,
Deuteronomy 31:10 and commaunded them saying. At the ende of .vij. yere, in the time of the fre yere, in the feast of the tabernacles,
Deuteronomy 31:11 when all Israell is come to appeare before the Lord thy god, in the place which he hath chosen: se that thou read thys lawe before al Israel in theyr eares.
Deuteronomy 31:12 Gather the people togyther: both men, women, and children, & the straungers that are in thi cityes that they may heare, learne, & fear the Lord your God, & be diligent to kepe al the words of thys lawe,
Deuteronomy 31:13 and that theyr children whyche knowe nothyng may heare & learne to feare the Lorde your God, as longe as ye lyue in the Lande whyther ye goo ouer Iordan to possesse it.
Deuteronomy 31:14 And the Lord sayd vnto Moses. Behold, thy dayes are come that thou must dye. Cal Iosua and come and stand in the tabernacle of wytnes, that I may giue hym a charge. And Moses and Iosua went and stode in the tabernacle of witnes.
Deuteronomy 31:15 And the Lord apeared in the tabernacle, euen in the piller of the cloud And the piller of the cloud stode ouer the dore of the tabernacle.
Deuteronomy 31:16 And the Lord sayed vnto Moses: beholde, thou must slepe wyth thy fathers, and thys people wyll go a whoring after straunge Goddes of the land whither they go, and wyl forsake me and breake the appoyntment which I haue made with them.
Deuteronomy 31:17 And then my wrath wyl waxe whot against them, and I wil forsake them, and wyl hide my face from them, & they shalbe consumed And when much aduersitie and tribulation is come vpon them, then they wyll saye: bycause our God is not among vs, these tribulations are come vpon vs.
Deuteronomy 31:18 But I wil hide my face that same time for all the euyls sake whych they shal haue wrought, in that they are turned vnto straunge Gods.
Deuteronomy 31:19 Now therfore wryte ye this song, & teach it the chyldren of Israell and putt it in theyr mouthes, that this song maye be my witnes vnto the children of Israel.
Deuteronomy 31:20 For when I haue brought them into the lande which I sware vnto theyr fathers that runneth with milke and hony, then they wyll eate and fyll them selues and waxe fatt and turne vnto straung Gods and serue theym and rayle on me and breake my testament.
Deuteronomy 31:21 And then when much mischyefe and tribulation is come vpon them thys song shall answere before them, and be a wytnes. It shall not be forgotten out of the mouthes of theyr sede: for I know their imagination which they goo aboute euen nowe before I haue brought theym into the lande whych I sware.
Deuteronomy 31:22 And Moses wrought thys song the same ceason, & taught it the children of Israel.
Deuteronomy 31:23 And the Lord gaue Iosua the sonne of Nun a charge & sayed: be bold & strong for thou shalt brynge the children of Israel into the landes which I sware vnto them, & I wylbe wyth the.
Deuteronomy 31:24 When Moses had made an ende of writyng out of these wordes of the law in a boke vnto the ende of theim,
Deuteronomy 31:25 he commaunded the Leuites whych bare the arcke of the testament of the Lorde sayinge:
Deuteronomy 31:26 take the boke of thys lawe, & put it by the syde of the arcke of the testament of the Lorde your God, & let it be there for a wytnesse vnto the.
Deuteronomy 31:27 I for knowe thy stubburnes and thy styffe necke: beholde whyle I am yet a lyue wyth you thys daye, ye haue bene disobediente vnto the Lorde: & howe much more after my death?
Deuteronomy 31:28 Gather vnto me all the elders of youre trybes, & youre offycers, that I may speake these wordes in theyr eares & call heauen and earth to record against them.
Deuteronomy 31:29 For I am sure that after my death, they wil vtterly marre them selues, and turne from the way which I commaunded you, & tribulation wyl come vpon you in the later daies, when ye haue wrought wyckednes in the syght of the Lorde to prouoke hym wyth the worckes of your handes.
Deuteronomy 31:30 And Moses spake in the eares of all the congregation of Israel the wordes of thys song, vnto the ende of them.

CHAPTER: 32

Deuteronomy 32:1 Heare O heauen, what I shal speake, and heare O earth, the wordes of my mouth.
Deuteronomy 32:2 My doctrine droppe as doth the raine and my speache flowe as doth the dewe, as the miselyng vpon the herbes, and as the droppes vpon the grasse.
Deuteronomy 32:3 For I wyl cal on the name of the Lord: Magnifye the myght of our God.
Deuteronomy 32:4 He is a rocke and perfect are his dedes for al hys wayes are with descrecion. God is faythful, & without wyckednes, both ryghtuouse and iust is he.
Deuteronomy 32:5 The frowarde and ouerthwart generacion hath marred them selfes to himward, & are not his sonnes for their deformities sak
Deuteronomy 32:6 Doest thou so rewarde the Lord? O foleish nation and vnwise, Is not he thy father and thyne owner? hath he not made the & ordeyned the?
Deuteronomy 32:7 Remembre the dayes that are past: consider the yeres from tyme to tyme. Aske thy father, and he wyl shewe the, thy elders and they wyl tel the.
Deuteronomy 32:8 When the most hyghest gaue the nations an enheritaunce, & deuided the sonnes of Adam, he put the borders of the nations, fast by the multitude of the children of Israell.
Deuteronomy 32:9 For the Lordes part is hys folke, & Iacob is the portion of hys enheritaunce.
Deuteronomy 32:10 He found hym in a desert land, in a voide ground, and a roring wildernes. He led him about, & gaue hym vnderstandynge, & kepte hym as the aple of hys eye.
Deuteronomy 32:11 As an Egle that steareth vp hir nest & flotereth ouer the yonge, he streatched out hys wynges & toke him vp, & bare him on his shoulders.
Deuteronomy 32:12 The Lorde alone was hys guide and there was no straunge God with hym.
Deuteronomy 32:13 He sett hym vp vpon an hye land, and he ate the encrease of the feyldes. And he gaue hym honye to sucke oute of the rocke, & oyle out of the hard stone.
Deuteronomy 32:14 With butter of kyne & mylcke of the shepe, with fatt of the lambes and fat rammes and he gotes wyth fat kidneies with wheate. And of the bloud of grapes thou dronkest wyne.
Deuteronomy 32:15 And Israel waxed fat and kycked. Thou wast fat, thycke and smothe. And he let God goo that made him & despised the rocke that saued him.
Deuteronomy 32:16 They angred him with straunge Goddes, and with abhominations prouoked him,
Deuteronomy 32:17 They offered vnto felde deuils and not to God, & to Gods whych they knewe not, & to newe Gods that came newly vp which theyr fathers feared not.
Deuteronomy 32:18 Of the rocke that begate the, thou arte vnmyndfull & hast forgote God that made the.
Deuteronomy 32:19 And when the Lord sawe it, he was angry bicause of the prouokyng of hys sonnes and daughters.
Deuteronomy 32:20 And he sayd: I wyl hyde my face frome them & wyll se what their ende shall be. For they are a frowarde generation & chyldren in whom is no faith.
Deuteronomy 32:21 They haue angred me wt that which is no God, & prouoked me wyth theyr vanities. And I agayne wyll anger them wyth them whiche are no people, and wyl prouoke them wyth a folysh nation.
Deuteronomy 32:22 For fyre is kindeled in my wrath, and shal burne vnto the bottome of hell. And shall consume the earth wyth hyr encrease, & set a fyre the bottomes of the mountaines.
Deuteronomy 32:23 I wyll heape mischeues vpon them & wyl spend al myne arrowes at them.
Deuteronomy 32:24 Burnt with hongre & consumed with heat and wt bytter pestelence. I wyll also sende the teeth of beastes vppon them and poyson serpentes.
Deuteronomy 32:25 Withoute forthe, the swerde shal robbe them of theyr chyldren: and wythin in the chamber, feare: both younge menne and yong womenne & the suckelynges wyth the men of gray heades.
Deuteronomy 32:26 I haue determined to skatter them thorowoute the worlde, and to make awaye the remembraunce of theym from amonge men.
Deuteronomy 32:27 Were it not that I feared the raylynge of theyr enemies, lest theyr aduersaries woulde be proude and saye: our hye hande hathe done all these worckes and not the Lorde.
Deuteronomy 32:28 For it is a nation that hath an vnhappye forcast, and hath no vnderstanding in them:
Deuteronomy 32:29 I would they were wyse and vnderstode thys & woulde consider their later ende.
Deuteronomy 32:30 How it cometh that one shal chace a thousande, and two putt ten thousande of theym to flyght, excepte theyr rocke had solde them, and bicause the Lord had deliuered them.
Deuteronomy 32:31 For oure rocke is not as theyr rocke, no thoughe oure enemies be iudge.
Deuteronomy 32:32 But theyr vynes are of the vynes of Sodome, & of the feldes of Gomorra. Theyr grapes are grapes of gall, and theyr clusters be bitter.
Deuteronomy 32:33 Theyr wyne is the poyson of dragons, and the cruel gall of aspes.
Deuteronomy 32:34 Are not such thynges layed in store wyth me, and sealed vp among my treasures?
Deuteronomy 32:35 Vengeaunce is mine, and I wyll reward: theyr fete shall slyde, when the tyme cometh. For the tyme of theyr destruccion is at hand, & the tyme that shal come vpon them maketh hast.
Deuteronomy 32:36 For the Lorde wyll do iustice vnto hys people, & haue compassion on hys seruauntes For it shalbe sene that theyr power shall fayle, & at the last they shalbe prisoned & forsaken.
Deuteronomy 32:37 And it shal be sayd, wher are their Gods and theyr rocke wherin they trusted?
Deuteronomy 32:38 The fatt of whose sacrifices they ate and dranke the wyne of theyr drynkeofferinges, let them ryse vp and helpe you and be youre protection.
Deuteronomy 32:39 Se nowe howe that I, I am he, and that there is no God but I. I can kyll and make a lyue, and what I haue smytten that I can heale: neyther is there that can deliuer anye man out of my hande.
Deuteronomy 32:40 For I wyll lyfte vp myne hand to heauen, and wyl say: I lyue euer.
Deuteronomy 32:41 If I whett the edge of my swerd, & mine hand take in hand to do iustice, I wil shewe vengeaunce on myne enemyes & wyl reward them that hate me.
Deuteronomy 32:42 I wyl make myne arowes dronken with bloud, and my swerde shal eate fleshe of the bloude of the slayne & of the captyue and of the bare head of the enemy.
Deuteronomy 32:43 Prayse ye heathen hys people, for he wil auenge the bloude of hys seruauntes, & wyl auenge hym of his aduersaries, and wyll be merciful vnto the land of hys people.
Deuteronomy 32:44 And Moses went & spake al these wordes of thys songe in the eares of the people, both he and Iosua the sonne of Nun.
Deuteronomy 32:45 And when Moses had spoken al these wordes vnto the ende to al Israel,
Deuteronomy 32:46 then he sayd vnto them. Set your hertes vnto all the wordes whych I testify vnto you thys daye: that ye commaund them vnto your chyldren, to obserue and do all the wordes of thys lawe.
Deuteronomy 32:47 For it is not a vayne worde vnto you: but it is youre lyfe, & thorow thys worde ye shall prolonge youre dayes in the lande whither ye go ouer Iordan to conquere it.
Deuteronomy 32:48 And the Lord spake vnto Moses the selfe same day, saying:
Deuteronomy 32:49 get the vp into thys mountayne Abarim vnto mount Nebo, whych is in the lande of Moab ouer against Iericho. And beholde the land of Canaan whyche I gyue vnto the children of Israel to possesse.
Deuteronomy 32:50 And dye in the mount which thou goest vpon and be gathered vnto thy people: As Aaron thy brother dyed in mount Hor & was gathered to his people.
Deuteronomy 32:51 For ye trespaced againste me amonge the children of Israel at the waters of strife, at Cades in the wildernesse of Zin, bicause ye sanctified me not among the children of Israel.
Deuteronomy 32:52 Thou shalte se the lande before the, but shalt not go thyther vnto the land which I giue the children of Israel.

CHAPTER: 33

Deuteronomy 33:1 This is the blessing wherwith Moses Goddes man blessed the chyldren of Israel before his deathe,
Deuteronomy 33:2 sayinge: The Lorde came frome Sinai, & shewed hys beames from Seir vnto them, & appered gloriously from mount Pharan, and he came wyth thousandes of saintes & in his right hand a lawe of fyre for them.
Deuteronomy 33:3 How loued he the people? Al his saintes are in hys hande. They ioyned theym selues vnto thy fote, and receyued thy wordes.
Deuteronomy 33:4 Moses gaue vs a lawe whiche is the enheritaunce of the congregation of Iacob.
Deuteronomy 33:5 And he was in Israel kyng when he gathered the heades of the people and the tribes of Israel togyther.
Deuteronomy 33:6 Ruben shall lyue and shall not dye: but his people shalbe fewe in numbre.
Deuteronomy 33:7 This is the blessynge of Iuda. And he sayed: hear Lord the voyce of Iuda, and bryng hym vnto his people: let hys handes fyght for hym: but be thou hys helpe agaynst hys enemies.
Deuteronomy 33:8 And vnto Leui he sayed: thy perfectnes and thy lyght be after thy merciful man whom thou temptedest at Masah wyth whome thou striuedest at the water of stryfe.
Deuteronomy 33:9 He that saith vnto hys father and mother. I saw hym not and vnto hys brethren, I knewe not, and to hys sonne I wot not: for they haue obserued thy worde and kepte thy testamente.
Deuteronomy 33:10 They shall teach Iacob thy iudgementes & Israell thy lawes. They shall putte cens before thy nose & whole sacrifices vpon thyne aultare.
Deuteronomy 33:11 Blesse Lord their power & accept the workes of theyr handes: smyte the backes of theim that ryse agaynst theim & of theim that hate them: they ryse not agayne.
Deuteronomy 33:12 Vnto BenIamin he sayed: The Lordes dearlynge shall dwell in safety by hym and kepe hym selfe in the hauen by him continually, & shal dwel betwene hys shoulders.
Deuteronomy 33:13 And vnto Ioseph he sayed: blessed of the Lord is hys hand wyth the goodly frutes of heauen, wyth dewe and with sprynges that lie beneath:
Deuteronomy 33:14 & with fruytes of the encrease of the sunne & with ripe frute of the monethes,
Deuteronomy 33:15 & wyth the toppes of mountaines that were from the begynnyng and wyth the dayntes of hylles that last euer
Deuteronomy 33:16 & wyth goodly frute of the earth and of the fulnes therof. And the good wyll of him that dwelleth in the bush shal come vpon the head of Ioseph and vpon the toppe of the head of hym that was separated from among hys brethren,
Deuteronomy 33:17 his beutye is as fyrsteborne oxe and hys hornes as the hornes of an vnycorne. And wyth them he shal push the nations togyther, euen vnto the endes of the world. These are the many thousandes of Ephraim and the thousandes of Manasses.
Deuteronomy 33:18 And vnto Zabulon he sayd: Reioyse Zabulon in thy goyng oute, and thou Isachar in thy tentes.
Deuteronomy 33:19 They shal call the people vnto the hyll, & there they shal offer offerynges of rightuousnes. For they shal sucke of the abundaunce of the sea and of treasure hid in the sande.
Deuteronomy 33:20 And vnto Gad he sayd: blessed is the rowmemaker Gad. He dwelleth as a lion and caughte the arme and also the toppe of the head.
Deuteronomy 33:21 He sawe hys begynninge, that a parte of the teacher was hydde there and came with the handes of the people, and executed the ryghtuousnes of the Lord and his iudgmentes wyth Israell.
Deuteronomy 33:22 And vnto Dan he sayed. Dan is a lyons whelpe, he shal flowe from Basan.
Deuteronomy 33:23 And vnto Nephthaly, he sad: Nephthali he shal haue aboundaunce of pleasure & shall be fylled with the blessing of the Lord & shal haue hys possessions in the southwest.
Deuteronomy 33:24 And of Aser he sayed. Aser shalbe blessed wyth chyldren, he shalbe accepted vnto hys brethren and shal dyppe hys fote in oyle:
Deuteronomy 33:25 Iron and brasse shall hange on thy shooes & thyne age shalbe as thyne youth.
Deuteronomy 33:26 There is none lyke vnto the God of Israell: he that sytteth vpon heauen shall be thyne helpe, whose glorye is in the cloudes,
Deuteronomy 33:27 that is the dwellyng place of God from the begynnynge, and from vnder the armes of the worlde: he hath caste out thyne enemyes before the and sayed destroy.
Deuteronomy 33:28 And Israell shal dwel in safety alone. And the eyes of Iacob shall loke vpon a lande of corne & wyne moreouer his heauen shal droppe with dewe.
Deuteronomy 33:29 Happye arte thou Israell, who is lyke vnto the? A people that arte saued by the Lord thy shyeld and helper & swerd of thy glory. And thyne enemyes shal hyde theym selues from the, and thou shalt walke vppon theyr hye hylles.

CHAPTER: 34

Deuteronomy 34:1 And Moses wente from the feyldes of Moab vppe into mount Nebo which is the top of Phasgath that is ouer against Iericho. And the Lord shewed hym al the lande of Galaad euen vnto Dan,
Deuteronomy 34:2 and al Nephthali, and the land of Ephraim, & Manasse, and al the land of Iuda: euen vnto the vtmost see,
Deuteronomy 34:3 and the south & the region of the plaine of Iericho the citye of palmetrees euen vnto Zoar.
Deuteronomy 34:4 And the Lorde sayed vnto him. This is the laud which I sware vnto Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob sayinge: I wyll giue it to thy sede. I haue shewed it the before thyne eyes: but thou shalt not goo ouer thyther.
Deuteronomy 34:5 So Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde dyed there in the Lande of Moab at the commaundement of the Lord.
Deuteronomy 34:6 And he buryed him in a valley in the land of Moab beside Beth Pheor: but no man wist of hys sepulchre vnto thys daye.
Deuteronomy 34:7 And Moses was an hundred and .xx. yere olde when he dyed, and yet hys eyes were not dym nor hys chekes abated.
Deuteronomy 34:8 And the children of Israell wepte for Moses in the feylde of Moab .xxx. dayes. And the dayes of wepynge and mournyng for Moses were ended.
Deuteronomy 34:9 And Iosua the sonne of Nun was full of the spirite of wysdome: for Moses had put hys hand vpon hym. And al the chyldren of Israel herkened vnto him & dyd as the Lord commaunded Moses.
Deuteronomy 34:10 But there arose not a prophete sence in Israell lyke vnto Moses, whom the Lorde knewe face to face,
Deuteronomy 34:11 in all the myracles and wonders which the Lord sent hym to do in the Lande of Egypte, vnto Pharao and all hys seruauntes, and vnto all his land:
Deuteronomy 34:12 and in al the myghty dedes and greate terrible thynges which Moses did in the syght of al Israel.

BOOK: Joshua

CHAPTER: 1

Joshua 1:1 Afterthe deathe of Moses the seruaunt of the Lord: the Lord spake vnto Iosua the sonne of Nun Moses minister saying:
Joshua 1:2 Moses my seruaunt is dead. Now therfore vp and go ouer Iordan, bothe thou & all this people, vnto the land the which I geue vnto the chyldren of Israel.
Joshua 1:3 Al the places that the sooles of youre fete shall treade vpon, haue I geuen you, as I sayd vnto Moses:
Joshua 1:4 from the wyldernes and thys Lybanon vnto the great ryuer Euphrates: & all the lande of the Hethites, euen vnto the great sea towarde the goyng donne of the sunne, shall be youre coostes.
Joshua 1:5 There shall not a man be able to wythstande the all the dayes of thy lyfe. For as I was with Moses, so wyll I be wt the and wyl nether leaue the, nor forsake the.
Joshua 1:6 Be strong and bolde: for vnto thys people shalt thou deuyde the land which I sware vnto theyr fathers to geue them.
Joshua 1:7 Aboue all thynge be strong and harden thy selfe, to obserue & to do, accordynge to all the lawes which Moses my seruaunt commaunded the. Tourne there from nether to the ryght hand nor to the lefte: that thou mayest haue vnderstandynge in all thou takest in hande
Joshua 1:8 let not the boke of thys lawe departe out of thy mouthe: But recorde therein daye & night that thou mayest be circumspect to do accordyng to all that is wrytten therein. For then shalt thou make thy waye prosperouse, & then thou shalt haue vnderstandyng.
Joshua 1:9 Beholde, I haue sayde vnto the, be strong and bolde: neyther feare, nor dreade. For the Lorde thy God is with the whether soeuer thou goest.
Joshua 1:10 Then Iosua commaunded the offycers of the people, saying:
Joshua 1:11 Go thorow the myddes of the hoste, and commaunde the people, saying: prepare you vytales: for after thre dayes ye shall passe ouer thys Iordan, to go and enioy the lande whiche the Lorde your God geueth you, to possesse it.
Joshua 1:12 And vnto the Rubenites, Gadites, and halfe the trybe of Manasses spake Iosua, sayinge:
Joshua 1:13 Remember that whiche Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde commaunded you, sayinge. The Lorde your God hath geuen you reast, & hath geuen you thys lande.
Joshua 1:14 Let youre wyues, youre chyldren, and youre catell remayne in the lande which Moses gaue you on thys syde Iordan: But go ye before youre brethren Armyd, all that be men of warre, & helpe them
Joshua 1:15 vntyll the Lorde haue geuen your brethren reast, as he hath you, and vntyll they also haue obtayned, the lande which the Lord youre God geueth them. And then retourne vnto the lande of youre possessyon and enioy it, which lande Moses the Lordes seruaunte gaue you on thys syde Iordan towarde the sunne rysynge.
Joshua 1:16 And they aunswered Iosua sayinge: All that thou byddest vs, we wyll do, and whether soeuer thou sendest vs, we wyll go.
Joshua 1:17 Accordyng as we obeyed Moses in all thynges, so we wyll obeye the, onelye the Lorde thy God be wyth the as he was wyth Moses.
Joshua 1:18 And whosoeuer dysobeye thy mouth, and wyll not herken vnto thy wordes in all that thou commaundest hym, let hym dye. Onely be stronge, and of good courage.

CHAPTER: 2

Joshua 2:1 Then Iosua the sonne of Nun sent out of Settim two spyes secretly saying: go & vewe the land & also Iericho. And they went, & came into a harlottes house named Rahab, and lodged there.
Joshua 2:2 And it was told the Kyng of Iericho, saying: Beholde there came men in hyther to nyght, of the chyldren of Israel, to spye oute the countreye.
Joshua 2:3 And the kyng of Iericho sent vnto Rahab, sayinge: brynge forth the men that are come to the, which are entred into thyne house: for they be come to searche out all the lande.
Joshua 2:4 And the woman toke the two men & hyd them. And sayde: in deade there came men vnto me but I wote not whence they were.
Joshua 2:5 And about the tyme of the shuttynge of the gate when it was darcke, they went out, whether they wente I wote not: but folowe after them quickly, & ye shal take them.
Joshua 2:6 And she brought them vp vpon the roofe of the house, & hydde them vnder flaxe (yet in the stalckes) which she had lyinge abroade vpon the roofe.
Joshua 2:7 And the men pursued after them, the waye to Iordan euen vnto the passage, and as sone as they which pursued after them were gone out, thei shutte the gates immediatlye.
Joshua 2:8 And or euer they were a slepe, she came vp vnto them vpon the roofe,
Joshua 2:9 and sayde vnto the men. I knowe that the Lorde hath geuen you the lande, bothe because that the feare of you is fallen vpon vs, and because that the enhabyters of the lande faynt at youre commyng.
Joshua 2:10 For we haue hearde how the Lorde dried vp the water of the red sea before you, when you came out of Egypte, & what you dyd vnto the two kinges of the Amorytes on the other syde Iordan Sehon, and Og, which ye vtterlye destroyed.
Joshua 2:11 And as sone as we had hearde these thynges, our hertes dyd faynte. And there remayned no more courage in any man for feare of youre commynge. For the Lorde your God, he is the GOD in heauen aboue: and on the earth beneth.
Joshua 2:12 Now therfore sweare vnto me by the Lorde because I haue shewed you mercye, that ye shall also shewe mercye vnto my fathers house, and geue me a true token.
Joshua 2:13 And that ye shall saue a lyue, boeth my father, and my mother, my brethren, and my systers, and all that pertayne vnto them. And that ye shall delyuer oure soules from death.
Joshua 2:14 And the men aunswered her: our lyues for you to dye, yf ye vtter not thys oure communicacyon. And so when the Lorde hath geuen vs the lande, we wyll deale mercyfully and truely wyth the.
Joshua 2:15 And then she let them doune wyth a coorde thorowe a wyndowe. For her house stode in the toune wall. And she dwelte in the towne wall.
Joshua 2:16 And she sayde vnto them: get you into the mountaynes, least the followers mete you, and hyde yourselues there .iij. dayes, vntyll the pursuars be returned, & then maye ye go youre wayes.
Joshua 2:17 And the men sayde vnto her: we will be blamelesse of thy othe, which thou hast made vs sweare.
Joshua 2:18 Beholde, when we come into the land, thou shalt bynde thys purple threden coorde in the wyndowe, which thou lettest vs doune by. And thou shalte brynge thy father, thy mother, thy brethren, and all thy fathers housholde, euen into the house to the.
Joshua 2:19 And then whosoeuer go oute at the dores of thy house, into the strete, hys bloud shalbe vpon hys owne head, and we giltlesse. And whosoeuer shalbe wyth the in the house, hys bloude be on oure heades yf any mannes hande be vpon hym:
Joshua 2:20 And euen so yf thou vtter these oure wordes, we wylbe quyte of thy othe which thou haste made vs sweare.
Joshua 2:21 And she sayde accordyng vnto your wordes so be it: and so sent them away, and they departed. And she bounde the purple coorde in the wyndowe.
Joshua 2:22 And they departed, and gotte them into the mountaynes, and there aboade thre dayes vntyll the pursuars were returned. And the pursuars sought thorowout al the waye, & found them not.
Joshua 2:23 And the two men returned & descended from the mountayn, and passed ouer, and came to Iosua the sonne of Nun, and tolde hym all that had chaunged them.
Joshua 2:24 And they sayde vnto Iosua: the Lorde hathe delyuered into oure handes all the lande, for all the inhabyters of the countreye faynt for feare of vs.

CHAPTER: 3

Joshua 3:1 And Iosua rose earlye: and they remoued from Settim, & came to Iordan, bothe he and al the chyldren of Israel, & soiourned there before they went ouer.
Joshua 3:2 And after thre dayes the offycers went thorowe out the hoste,
Joshua 3:3 and commaunded the people, sayinge: when ye se the arcke of the testament of the lord youre God, and the priestes that are Leuites bearyng it: then departe ye from your places & folowe after it.
Joshua 3:4 So yet that there be a space betwene you and it, aboute a two thousande cubytes by measure. And come not nye vnto it, that ye maye knowe the waye by which ye must go: for ye haue not gone by it in tymes past.
Joshua 3:5 And Iosua sayde vnto the people, puryfye your selues, for to morowe the Lord shall shewe wonders amonge you.
Joshua 3:6 Then Iosua spake vnto the priestes saying Take vp the arcke of the Testamente, and go before the people. And they toke vp the arcke of the testament, and wente before the people.
Joshua 3:7 And the Lorde sayd vnto Iosua: This day wyll I begynne to magnifye the, in the syghte of Israell, that they maye knowe howe that as I was wyth Moses, so wyll I be wyth the.
Joshua 3:8 And commaunde thou the priestes that beare the arcke of the testament, saying: when ye are entered a lytle into the water of Iordan then stande styll in it.
Joshua 3:9 Then spake Iosua to the chyldren of Israel sayinge: come hether, & heare the wordes of the Lorde youre God.
Joshua 3:10 And Iosua sayd: Herebye ye shall know, that the lyuyng God is among you, and that he wyll wythout fayle cast oute before you, the Cananites, the Hethites, the Heuites, the Pheresites, the Gergesites, the Amorytes, and the Iebusites.
Joshua 3:11 Behold, the arcke of the appoyntemente of the Lorde of all the worlde shal go before you into Iordan.
Joshua 3:12 And now take you twelue men of the chyldren of Israel, of euerye trybe a man.
Joshua 3:13 And as sone as the sooles of the fete of the priestes that beare the arcke of Iehouah (the Lord of al the world) treade in the water of Iordan, the water of Iordan shall deuyde it selfe: and the waters that commeth from aboue shall stande styll vpon an heape.
Joshua 3:14 And when the people were departed from theyr tentes to go ouer Iordan (the Pryestes bearynge the arcke of the appoyntement before the people)
Joshua 3:15 as sone as they that bare the arcke came vnto Iordan, and the fete of the Pryestes that bare the arcke were dypped in the brym of the water Iordan beyng full ouer all hys banckes all the tyme of harueste:
Joshua 3:16 the water that came doune from aboue dyd stoppe and stode vpon an heape, a great waye from Adam, a cytye besyde Zarthan. And the water that wente doune vanyshed into the sea of the wyldernes called the salte sea as sone as it was deuyded: & the people went ryght ouer agaynst Ierycho.
Joshua 3:17 And the priestes that bare the arcke of the appoyntemente of the Lorde stode styll vpon drye lande, vntyl all the people were cleane ouer Iordan.

CHAPTER: 4

Joshua 4:1 And as sone as the people were all gone ouer Iordan, the Lorde spake vnto Iosua, saying. Take you twelue men out of the people, of euery trybe a man. And commaunde you them saying:
Joshua 4:2 take you hence out of the middes of Iordan
Joshua 4:3 euen out of the place where the priestes stode in readines .xij. stones. And take ye them away wyth you & put them in the place where you lodge at nyght.
Joshua 4:4 And Iosua called vnto the twelue men whiche he had prepared of the chyldren of Israel, of euery trybe a man,
Joshua 4:5 & sayde vnto them: get you before the arcke of the Lorde youre God euen into the myddes of Iordan, and take vp euerye man a stone vpon hys shoulder, accordynge vnto the nombre of the trybes of the chyldren of Israel,
Joshua 4:6 that thys maye be a sygne amonge you. And when youre chyldren aske theyr fathers in tyme to come, sayinge: what meane ye wyth these stones:
Joshua 4:7 then say vnto them, how that the water of Iordan deuyded at the presence of the arcke of the appoyntmente of the Lord: euen while it went ouer Iordan, the water of Iordan deuyded. And these stones shalbe a memoryall vnto the chyldren of Israel for euer.
Joshua 4:8 And the chyldren of Israel dyd euen so as Iosua commaunded, and toke vp twelue stones oute of the myddes of Iordan, as the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua accordynge to the nombre of the trybes of the chyldren of Israel, & caryed them awaye wyth them vnto the place where they lodged, and layed them doune there.
Joshua 4:9 And thereto Iosua set vp twelue stones in the myddes of Iordan in the place where the fete of the pryestes which bare the arcke of the testament stode. And there they be euen vnto thys day.
Joshua 4:10 For the priestes whiche bare the arcke stoode in the myddes of Iordan, vntyll all was fynyshed that the Lorde commaunded Iosua to saye vnto the people, accordynge to all that Moyses charged Iosua. And the people hasted & went ouer.
Joshua 4:11 When all the people were cleane ouer then went ouer the arcke of the Lorde, and also the priestes before the people.
Joshua 4:12 And the chyldren of Ruben, and the chyldren of Gad, and halfe the trybe of Manasses went before the chyldren of Israel armed, as Moses charged them.
Joshua 4:13 Vpon a fourthy thousande trymmed for warre, went before the Lorde vnto battel, euen vnto the wylde feldes of Iericho.
Joshua 4:14 That daye the Lord magnyfyed Iosua in the syght of all Israell, and they feared hym, as they feared Moses all dayes of hys lyfe.
Joshua 4:15 And the Lorde spake vnto Iosua, saiyng:
Joshua 4:16 commaunde the priestes that beare the arcke of wytnesse to come vp oute of Iordan.
Joshua 4:17 And Iosua commaunded the priestes sayinge: Ascende vp oute of Iordan.
Joshua 4:18 And when the pryestes that bare the arcke of the appoyntemente of the Lorde were ascended out of Iordan: as sone as the sooles of the priestes fete were brought to drye lande, the water of Iordan retourned agayn vnto his place, & went ouer all his banckes as he dyd before.
Joshua 4:19 And the people came vp oute of Iordan the tenthe day of the fyrste moneth, and pytched in Galgal euen in the easte bordes of Iericho.
Joshua 4:20 And the twelue stones which they toke out of Iordan, Iosua pitched in Galgal.
Joshua 4:21 And he spake vnto the chyldren of Israel sayinge, when your chyldren aske you in tyme to come, sayinge: what meane these stones,
Joshua 4:22 shewe your chyldren and saye: Israel came ouer thys Iordan on drye lande.
Joshua 4:23 For the Lorde youre God dryed vp the water of Iordan before you, vntyll ye were ouer, as the Lorde youre GOD dyd vnto the red sea, whiche he dryed vp before vs, tyll we were ouer,
Joshua 4:24 that all the people of the worlde maye knowe the hande of the Lorde how myghtye it is, and that ye myght feare the Lorde youre God for euer.

CHAPTER: 5

Joshua 5:1 And when al the kinges of the Amorites which are on thys syde Iordan to the seaward, & al the kinges of the Cananites which lye on the sea hearde, howe the Lorde had dryed vp the water of Iordan before the chyldren of Israel, vntyl they were ouer, theyr hertes faynted in them. And there was no sprete in them any more, for feare of the commynge of the chyldren of Israel.
Joshua 5:2 That same tyme the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua. Make the knyues of stone, & go to agayne and circumcyse the chyldren of Israell the seconde tyme.
Joshua 5:3 And Iosua made hym knyues of stone & circumcysed the chyldren of Israel in the hyll of fore skynnes.
Joshua 5:4 And thys is the cause why Iosua cyrcumcysed. All the people that came out of Egypte that were males, all that were men of warre, dyed in the wyldernes by the waye after they came oute of Egypte.
Joshua 5:5 Nowe al the people that came out were circumcysed. But all the people that were borne in the wildernesse by the way after thei came out of Egypt, they circumcised not.
Joshua 5:6 For the chyldren of Israell walked fourthye yeares in the wildernesse, till all the people of men of warre that came out of Egypt were consumed which harkened not vnto the voyce of God, so that the Lorde sware, that he wold not shew them the lande whiche the Lorde sware vnto theyr fathers, that he wolde geue vs, euen a lande that floweth wyth mylke & honye.
Joshua 5:7 And theyr chyldren he set vp in theyr steade: them Iosua circumcysed: for they were vncircumcised, because they cyrcumcysed them not by the waye.
Joshua 5:8 And when al the people were ful circumcysed, they abode styll in theyr places in the hoste tyll they were whole.
Joshua 5:9 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua, thys daye I haue taken awaye the shame of Egypt from you, and called the name of the same place Galgal vnto thys daye.
Joshua 5:10 And the chyldren of Israel pytched theyr tentes in Galgall, and helde the feast of passe ouer the fourtene daye of the moneth at euen in the fieldes of Iericho.
Joshua 5:11 And they ate of the corne of the lande on the morowe after passeouer, swete cakes and parched corne in the selfe same daye.
Joshua 5:12 And Manna ceased on the morowe, after they had eaten of the corne of the lande, neyther had the chyldren of Israel Manna any more, but dyd eate of the frutes of the lande of Canaan that yeare.
Joshua 5:13 And when Iosua was come to Iericho, he lyfte vp his eyes and loked: and behold there stode a man before him with his swerd drawen in his hande. And Iosua went vnto hym, and sayde vnto hym: arte thou on our syde, or on our aduersaries.
Joshua 5:14 And he answered: Naye, but I am the captayne of the hoste of the Lorde, & am nowe come. And Iosua fell on hys face to the earth and dyd reuerence, and sayd vnto hym, what sayth my Lorde vnto hys seruaunt.
Joshua 5:15 And the captayne of the Lordes hoste sayde vnto Iosua: do thy shoes of thy feete, for the place wheron thou standest, is holye. And Iosua dyd so.

CHAPTER: 6

Joshua 6:1 And Iericho shut in her people, & was shut for feare of the chyldren of Israel, so that no man went out or in.
Joshua 6:2 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua: beholde, I haue geuen into thyne hand Iericho & her kynge & the men of warre.
Joshua 6:3 And ye shall compasse the citie, al that be men of warre, & go rounde about it once: & so shall you do syxe dayes.
Joshua 6:4 And seuen priestes shall beare seuen trompettes of rammes hornes before the arcke. And the seuenth daye ye shall compasse the cytye seuen tymes, & the Priestes shall blowe wyth theyr trompettes.
Joshua 6:5 And when there is a longe blaste blowen wyth the rammes horne, assone as ye heare the sounde of the horne, let all the people showte a myghtye showte. And then shal the walles of the cyty falle doune, and the people shall ascende vp, euerye man strayght before hym.
Joshua 6:6 And Iosua the sonne of Nun, called vnto the priestes, and sayde vnto them: take vp the arcke of the appoyntement, and let seuen Priestes beare seuen trompettes of rammes hornes before the arcke of the Lorde.
Joshua 6:7 And he sayd vnto the people, go and compasse the citie: and let the men of armes go before the arcke of the Lorde.
Joshua 6:8 And when Iosua had spoken vnto the people, the seuen Priestes that bare the seuen trompettes of rammes hornes before the arcke of the Lorde, wente forthe and blew wyth the hornes, and the arcke of the Testament of the Lorde folowed after them.
Joshua 6:9 And the men of armes wente before the priestes that blewe wyth the hornes, and the common people came after the arcke: & as they went, they blew with the hornes.
Joshua 6:10 And Iosua commaunded the people, sayinge: showt not nor let your voyce be hearde, or any worde proceade out of your mouthes, vntyll the daye I byd you showt: & then showte.
Joshua 6:11 And so the arcke of the Lorde compased the cytye and went aboute it once: and then they returned into the hoste and lodged there.
Joshua 6:12 And Iosua rose erly in the mornynge, and the preastes toke vp the arcke of the Lorde,
Joshua 6:13 & seuen priestes bare seuen trompettes of rammes hornes before the arcke of the Lord, & as they went blew with the hornes. And the men of armes went before them, & the common people came after the arcke of the Lorde, & as they wente, they blewe wyth the hornes.
Joshua 6:14 And the seconde day they compased the citie once, & returned agayne into the hoste, & so they dyd .vi. dayes longe.
Joshua 6:15 And the seuenth daye they rose erlye: euen with the dawnynge of the day, and compased the cytye after the same maner seuen tymes: onlye that they compased the cyty seuen times.
Joshua 6:16 And at the seuenthe tyme, the priestes blew wyth the hornes, & Iosua sayde vnto the people, showte for the Lorde hath geuen you the cytye.
Joshua 6:17 But the cytye shalbe excommunicate, bothe it and all that is therein, vnto the Lord: onelye Rahab the harlot shall lyue, bothe she and all that is wyth her in the house, because she hydde the messengers that we sent.
Joshua 6:18 And in any wyse beware of the excommunicate thynges, leaste ye make your selues excommunicate. For yf you take of the excommunicate thynges, so shall you make the hoste of Israel excommunicate and shall trouble it.
Joshua 6:19 But of the syluer, golde, vesselles of brasse, & yron shalbe holye vnto the Lorde, and shall go in to hys treasurye.
Joshua 6:20 And the people cryed, and blewe with hornes: for when the people hearde the sounde of the hornes, they showted a great showte: and the walles fell doune, and the people wente vp into the cytye, euerye man strayght before hym,
Joshua 6:21 and toke the cytye. And they vtterlye destroyed al that was in the cytye, bothe man and woman, younge & olde, oxe, shepe, & Asse, wyth the edge of the swerde.
Joshua 6:22 Then Iosua sayde vnto the two men that went to spye oute the countreye: go into the harlottes house, and bryng out thence, bothe the woman & all that pertayneth to her, as ye sware to her.
Joshua 6:23 And the younge men that were spyes wente in, and brought oute Rahab, and her father, and mother, and all her brethren and all that she had. And they brought oute al her housholde, and put them wythout the hoste of Israel.
Joshua 6:24 And they burnt the cytye with fyre, and al that was therein. Only the syluer, the golde, & the thynges of brasse, and yeron they put vnto the treasure of the house of the Lorde.
Joshua 6:25 And Iosua saued Rahab the harlotte, & her fathers housholde and all that pertayned vnto her, & she dwelte in Israel, euen vnto thys daye, because she hydde the messengers whiche Iosua sent to spye out Iericho.
Joshua 6:26 And Iosua cursed at that tyme, saying, cursed be the man before the Lorde, that ryseth vp and buyldeth thys citie Iericho: so that he laye the foundacyon wyth the death of hys eldest sonne, & with the death, of hys youngest set vp the gates.
Joshua 6:27 And the Lorde was wyth Iosua, and hys fame was hearde, thorowout all landes.

CHAPTER: 7

Joshua 7:1 But yet the children of Israel trespased in the excommunicate thinges for Acan the sonne of Carmi, the sonne of Zabdi, the sonne of Zareh of the trybe of Iuda, toke of the excommunicate thinges. And the wrath of the Lorde waxed whote agaynst the chyldren of Israel.
Joshua 7:2 Then Iosua sent men from Iericho to Ai which is besyde Bethauen, on the eastsyde of Bethel, and spake vnto them, sayinge: gette you vp and vewe the countreye. And the men went vp and spyed oute Ai.
Joshua 7:3 And returned vnto Iosua, and sayde vnto hym, let not all the people go vp, but let as it were a two or thre thousande men go vp and destroye Ai, and make not all the people to laboure thether, for they are but fewe.
Joshua 7:4 And so there went vp thether about a three thousande men, whiche fledde before the men of Ai.
Joshua 7:5 And the men of Ai smote of them vpon a thyrtye and sixe men. and chased them before the gates euen vnto Gabarim, and smote them in the goynge doune. And the hertes of the people were discouraged and mealted lyke water.
Joshua 7:6 And Iosua rent hys clothes, and fell to the earth vpon hys face before the arcke of the Lorde vntyll the euen tyde, bothe he and the elders of Israel, and put earth vpon their heades.
Joshua 7:7 And Iosua sayde, Ah, Lorde Iehouah, wherfore haste thou brought this people ouer Iordan to delyuer vs into the handes of the Amorytes to destroye vs: wolde to God we had aduentured & dwelt on the other side Iordan.
Joshua 7:8 Oh Lorde what shall I say, when Israel turneth theyr backes before theyr enemyes:
Joshua 7:9 Moreouer the Cananites, and all the inhabyters of the Lande shall heare of it, and shall come about vs, and destroye the name of vs out of the world. And then what wilt thou do vnto thy myghtye name.
Joshua 7:10 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua, gette the vp, wherfore lyest thou thus vpon thy face?
Joshua 7:11 Israel hath synned & also transgressed myne appoyntement, which I commaunded them, and haue taken of the excommunicate thinges and haue stolen and hydde them, and also put them vnto theyr owne stuffe:
Joshua 7:12 And therfore the chyldren of Israel cannot stande before theyr enemyes. They shall turne theyr backes before theyr enemyes, because they be excommunicate. Nether wyll I be with you any more, except ye destroye the excommunicate from among you.
Joshua 7:13 Vp & sanctifye the people and byd them to sanctifye them selues against the morowe for so sayth the Lorde God of Israel, the excommunicacyon is amonge you Israel, and therfore ye cannot stande before youre enemyes, vntyll ye haue put the excommunicacyon from amonge you.
Joshua 7:14 To morowe mornyng ye shall come by youre trybes. And the trybe which the Lord shall fynde gyltye, shal come by kynredes. And the kynrede which the Lorde shall fynde gyltye, shal come by housholdes. And the housholde whiche the Lorde shall fynde fautye, shall come man by man.
Joshua 7:15 And he that is founde in the excommunicacyon shalbe burnt with fyre, bothe he and al that pertayneth vnto hym, because he hath transgressed the couenaunt of the Lord, and because he hath wrought folye in Israel.
Joshua 7:16 And so Iosua rose vp erly in the mornynge and brought Israel by theyr trybes: and the trybe of Iuda was caught.
Joshua 7:17 Then he broughte the kynredes of Iuda, and founde the kynred of the Zarehites gyltye. And he brought the kynred of the Zarehytes by housholders, and Zabdy was caughte.
Joshua 7:18 And he brought hys housholde man by man, and Acan the sonne of Carmy, the sonne of Zabdi, the sonne of Zareh in the trybe of Iuda was caught.
Joshua 7:19 And Iosua sayde vnto Acan: my sonne, geue glorye to the Lorde God of Israell, & geue hym prayse, & shewe me what thou hast done, and hyde it not from me.
Joshua 7:20 And Acan answered Iosua, and sayde: of a truthe I haue synned agaynst the Lorde God of Israel, and so and so haue I done.
Joshua 7:21 I sawe amonge the spoyle a goodlye Babylonyshe garment, and two hundred sicles of syluer, and a tonge of golde of fyftye sicles weyghte: and I coueted them, and I toke them. And beholde they lye hydde in the earthe in my tente and the syluer there vnder.
Joshua 7:22 And then Iosua sent messengers whiche ranne vnto the tent. And behold, it was hidde in hys tent, and the syluer there vnder.
Joshua 7:23 And they toke them oute of the myddest of his tent, and brought them vnto Iosua, and vnto all the thyldren of Israel, and powred them oute before the Lorde.
Joshua 7:24 And Iosua toke Acan the sonne of Zareh, and the syluer, and the garment, and the tonge of golde, and hys sonnes and hys doughters, hys oxen, asses, shepe, hys tente and all that he had, and all Israell wyth him, & brought them vnto the valeye of Acor.
Joshua 7:25 And Iosua sayde: In as muche as thou hast troubled vs, the Lorde shal trouble the thys daye. And all Israell stoned hym wyth stones, and burnt them wyth fyre, and ouerwhelmed them wyth stones.
Joshua 7:26 And they caste vpon hym a great heape of stones that remaineth vnto thys daye. And so the Lorde turned from hys fearce wrath. Wherfore the name of the place is called the valeye of Acor vnto thys daye.

CHAPTER: 8

Joshua 8:1 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua: feare not, nor dread? but take al the men of warre wyth the, and vp and get the to Ai. Beholde I haue geuen into thy hande, the kynge of Ai, and hys people, hys cytye and hys lande.
Joshua 8:2 And thou shalt do to Ai and her kynge, as thou dydest vnto Ierico and her kyng. Neuerthelesse the spoyle & catell therof, ye shall take vnto youre selues. But laye a watche vnto the toune on the backsyde therof.
Joshua 8:3 And then Iosua arose, and al the men of warre, to go vp vnto Ai. And Iosua chose out thyrty thousand men of warre, and sent them by nyght.
Joshua 8:4 And he commaunded them saiyng: Se that ye lye awayte vnto the toune on the backsyde therof. Go not very farre from the cytye, and se that ye be al readye.
Joshua 8:5 And I and al the people that are wyth me, wil approche vnto the cytye. And when they come oute agaynst vs, as at the fyrste tyme, then will we flee before them.
Joshua 8:6 And they wyll come out after vs, vntyl we haue plucked them awaye from the cytye. For they wyll saye, they flee vs, as at the fyrste tyme,
Joshua 8:7 for we wyll flee before them. Then shall ye ryse vp from lying awayte & destroye the cyty: For the Lorde youre God wyll delyuer it into youre handes.
Joshua 8:8 Assone therfore as ye haue taken the cytye, se that ye set it on fyre. Accordinge to the commaundement of the Lord se that ye do, behold, I haue charged you.
Joshua 8:9 And Iosua sent them forth, and they went to lye awayte, and laye betwene Bethel and Ai, on the west syde of Ai. But Iosua lodged that nyght amonge the people.
Joshua 8:10 And he rose vp erlye in the mornynge and nombred the people and went vp, both he and the elders of Israel before the people, vnto Ai.
Joshua 8:11 And all the men of warre that were wyth hym, went vp and drue nye, and came before the cytye, and pytched on the north syde of Ai, a valeye beynge betwene them and Ai.
Joshua 8:12 And he toke vpon a fyue thousande men and put them to lye a wayte, betwene Bethel, and Ai, on the westsyde of the cytye.
Joshua 8:13 And he put the people euen al the hoste, on the northsyde of the cytye, and the lyers awayte on the weste. And Iosua went the same nyght into the myddesof the valeye.
Joshua 8:14 And when the kyng of Ai sawe that they hasted & rose vp erlye, then the people of the cytye went out agaynst Israel, to battel, both the Kynge & all hys people, at a tyme apointed, euen before the playne, and wyst not that there were lyers awayte on the backsyde of the cytye.
Joshua 8:15 And Iosua and Israell were put to the worsse before them, and flede towarde the wyldernesse.
Joshua 8:16 And al the people of the toune cryed to folow after them. And they folowed after Iosua tyll they were drawen awaye from the cytye:
Joshua 8:17 So that there was not a man leaft in Ai, or in Bethel, that went not out after Israel. And they leaft the cytye open and folowed after Israel.
Joshua 8:18 Then the Lorde sayd vnto Iosua, stretche out the bouckelar that is in thine hande towarde Ai, for I haue geuen the it. And Iosua stretched out the bouckelar that was in hys hande, toward the cyty.
Joshua 8:19 And the lyers awaite rose quycklye out of theyr places, and ranne, assone as Iosua had stretched out his hande, and they entred into the cyty, and toke it, and hasted and set it on fyre.
Joshua 8:20 And when the men of Ai loked backe after them and sawe, Beholde, the smoke of the cytye ascended vp to heauen. And they had no place to flee either this waye or that, for the people that fleed to the wyldernesse turned backe againe vpon the folowers.
Joshua 8:21 And when Iosua and al Israel sawe that the lyars awayte had taken the cyty and that the smoke of it ascended, They turned agayne and layed on the men of Ai.
Joshua 8:22 And the other yssued out of the cytye agaynst them. And so were they in the myddes of Israell, these beinge on the one syde of them, and the reste on the other. And they layed vpon them, so that they let none eyther remayne or skape.
Joshua 8:23 And the Kinge of Ai they toke a lyue and brought hym to Iosua.
Joshua 8:24 And when Israel had made an ende of slaying all the inhabyters of Ai in the feldes, and in the wyldernesse, by whych they chased them, and when they were all fallen on the Edge of the swerde, vntyll they were wasted. Then all Israel returned vnto Ai and smote it wyth the edge of the swerd.
Joshua 8:25 And al that fell that daye, both of men and women, were twelue thousand, euen all the men of Ai.
Joshua 8:26 For Iosua plucked not hys hande backe agayne, whyche he stretched out wyth the bouckelar, vntyll they had vtterlye destroeyd all the inhabitoures of Ai.
Joshua 8:27 Onelye the catell and the spoyle of the sayde cytye, Israell toke vnto them selues accordynge vnto the worde of the Lorde, whyche he commaunded Iosua.
Joshua 8:28 And Iosua set Ai on fyre and made it an heape for euer and a wyldernesse, euen vnto this daye.
Joshua 8:29 And the kynge of Ai he hanged on tree, vntill euen. And assone as the sonne was doune, Iosua commaunded and they toke the carkas doune of the tree, and caste it in the enteringe of the gate of the cytye, and cast theron a great heape of stones, that remayneth vnto thys daye.
Joshua 8:30 Then Iosua buylt an altare vnto the Lorde God of Israel, in mount Ebal,
Joshua 8:31 as Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde commaunded the chyldren of Israell, accordinge as it is wrytten in the boke of the law of Moses, an altare of rough stone, ouer whiche no tole of yeron was lyft. And they sacryfyced theron burntsacryfyce, and offered peace offringe
Joshua 8:32 And he wrote there vpon the stones the Seconde lawe of Moses, which he wrote in the presence of the chyldren of Israel.
Joshua 8:33 And al Israel and the elders therof, and their officers, and Iudges stode, parte on this syde the arke, and parte on that syde, before the priestes: that were Leuites, which bare the arcke of the appointment of the Lord, as wel the straunger, as they that were borne amonge them, halfe on them on the forefronte of the Mount of Garizim, and halfe of them on the forefronte of mount Eball, as Moses the seruaunte of the Lorde commaunded, fyrste to blesse the people Israell.
Joshua 8:34 And after that he reade al the wordes of the lawe, both the blessinge and cursynge, accordinge to all that is wrytten in the boke of the lawe,
Joshua 8:35 so that there was not one worde of all that Moses commaunded, whyche Iosua reade not, before all the congregacyon of Israell, wyth women and chyldren, and the straungers that were amonge them.

CHAPTER: 9

Joshua 9:1 And when all the kynges that dwel on this syde Iordan, in the hilles and valeys, and a longe by all the costes of the great sea, euen vnto Libanon, the Hethites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Pheresytes, the Heuytes, and the Iebusytes hearde,
Joshua 9:2 they gathered them selues together to fyght agaynst Iosua and Israel, with one accorde.
Joshua 9:3 But when the Enhabitoures of Gabaon heard what Iosua had done vnto Iericho, & Ai,
Joshua 9:4 they played wylylye, and went and sente Ambasadoures, and toke the olde sackes vpon their Asses, and wyne bottelles olde and rent and knyt together agayne,
Joshua 9:5 and olde clouted shoes vpon theyr fete, and olde rayment vpon them, and all their prouysyon of bread was dryed vp and hored.
Joshua 9:6 And they came vnto Iosua into the hoste, to Galgall and sayde vnto hym and vnto the men of Israell: we be come from a farre countreye, nowe therfore make agrement with vs.
Joshua 9:7 And the men of Israel said vnto the Heuites, paraduenture you dwelle amonge vs, and then how shoulde we make peace wyth you?
Joshua 9:8 And they sayde vnto Iosua, we are thy seruauntes. And Iosua saide vnto them, what are ye, and whence come ye.
Joshua 9:9 And they answered him. From a verye farre countrey the seruauntes are come in the name of the Lord thy God, for we haue heard the fame of him, and al that he dyd in Egypte,
Joshua 9:10 and al that he dyd to the two kinges of the Amorites beyonde Iordan, Sehon kynge of Hesbon, and Og kyng of Basan, whyche dwelte at Astharoth.
Joshua 9:11 Wherfore oure elders and al the Enhabitoures of oure countrey spake to vs, saying: take vitayles wyth you to serue by the waye, and go agaynst them, and saye vnto them: we are youre seruauntes. Nowe therfore make a couenaunt of peace with vs.
Joshua 9:12 This oure prouysion of bread, we toke wyth vs oute of oure houses, whote, the daye we departed to come vnto you. And now beholde it is dried vp and hored.
Joshua 9:13 And these bottelles of wyne, whiche we fylled were newe, and se, they be rente. And these oure garmentes and shoes are waxen olde by the reason of the exceading long Iourneye.
Joshua 9:14 And the men toke of their vitayles, and conceled not wyth the mouth of the Lorde.
Joshua 9:15 And Iosua made a peace wyth them, and made a couenaunte with them, to saue their lyues, and the Lordes of the congregacyon sware vnto them.
Joshua 9:16 But thre dayes after they had made peace with them, they hearde that they were neighboures vnto them, & that they dwelt amonge them.
Joshua 9:17 For the children of Israel toke their Iourney, and came vnto their cities the thirde daye, and their cities were Gabaon, Caphira, Beeroth, and Kariath Iarim.
Joshua 9:18 And the children of Israell slewe them not, because the Lordes of the congregacion had sworne vnto them by the Lord God of Israel. And therfore al the multitude murmured against the Lordes.
Joshua 9:19 But al the Lordes said vnto al the congregacion, we haue sworne vnto them by the Lorde God of Israel, and therfore we maye not hurte them.
Joshua 9:20 But thys we will do to them and let them liue, and so shal no wrath be vpon vs because of the othe which we sware vnto them.
Joshua 9:21 And the Lordes sayde vnto them, that they should lyue: And they were made hewers of woode and drawers of water vnto al the congregacion, as the Lordes sayde vnto them.
Joshua 9:22 Then Iosua sent for them, and talked wyth them, and sayde, wherfore haue ye begiled vs and yet ye dwel amonge vs?
Joshua 9:23 and nowe therfore cursed be you, and there shall not cease to be of you, bond men and hewers of woode & drawers of water vnto the house of my God.
Joshua 9:24 And they answered Iosua and sayde, it was tolde thy seruauntes, how that the Lorde thy God had commaunded his seruaunt Moses to geue you al the lande, and to destroye all the Enhabitoures therof oute of youre syghte, and therfore we were exceadinge sore afrayed of oure liues because of you,
Joshua 9:25 & nowe beholde, we are in thyne hande, as it semeth good and righte in thyne eyes to do vnto vs, so do.
Joshua 9:26 And he dealte as it is sayde, wyth them, and ridde them out of the handes of the chyldren of Israel, that they slewe them not.
Joshua 9:27 And Iosua made them that same daye hewers of woode and drawers of water vnto the congregacyon and vnto the aulter of God vnto this day, in the place which God should chose.

CHAPTER: 10

Joshua 10:1 And when Adonizedec Kynge of Ierusalem had heard howe Iosua had taken Ai, and had destroyed it, and how that as he had done to Iericho and her kynge, euen so he had done to Ai and her kynge, and how the Enhabitoures of Gabaon had made peace wyth Israel and dyd remayne amonge them, then they feared excedingly,
Joshua 10:2 for Gabaon was a great cyty, as any cytye of the kyngdome, and therto greater then Ai, and al her men were myghty.
Joshua 10:3 Wherfore Adonizedec kyng of Ierusalem sent vnto Hoham kynge of Hebron, and vnto Pharam kynge of Ierimoth, and vnto Iaphia kynge of Lachis, and vnto Dabir kinge of Eglon sayinge:
Joshua 10:4 Come vp vnto me & healpe me, that we may smyte Gabaon, for they haue made peace wyth Iosua and the chyldren of Israell.
Joshua 10:5 Then the .v. kynges of the Amorites the kyng of Ierusalem, the kinge of Hebron, the kynge of Ierimoth, the kinge of Lachys, the kyng of Eglon, gathered them selues together, both they and all their hostes & wente vp and beseged Gabaon, and made warre agaynst it.
Joshua 10:6 But the men of Gabaon sent vnto Iosua vnto the hoste to Galgal, saying: withdraw not thy handes from thy seruauntes, but come vp to vs, for all the kynges of the Amorythes, which dwell in the mountaynes are gathered together against vs.
Joshua 10:7 And Iosua ascended from Galgall, both he and al the people of warre wyth hym, and al the men of myghte,
Joshua 10:8 and the Lord sayde vnto Iosua: feare them not, for I haue delyuered them into thyne hande, there shal not a man of them stande before the.
Joshua 10:9 And Iosua came vnto them sodenlye, and iourneyed from Galgal all nyghte.
Joshua 10:10 And the Lorde turmoyled them before Israell, and slewe of them a greate slaughter at Gabaon, and chased them a longe the waye, that goeth vp to Bethoron, & slewe them tyll they came to Esaka and Makeda.
Joshua 10:11 And as they flede from Israel, euen in the goynge doune to Bethoron, the Lorde caste doune great stones from heauen vpon them vntyll they came vnto Esaka, that they dyed. And there were mo that dyed wyth hayle stones, then the chyldren of Israell slewe wyth the swerde.
Joshua 10:12 Then spake Iosua vnto the Lorde, the daye when the Lorde delyuered the Amorites before the chyldren of Israel, and he sayde in the sight of al Israel: Sunne stande thou still vpon Gabaon, & thou Mone, in the valeye of Aialon.
Joshua 10:13 And the sonne abode, and the mone stode styll, vntyll the people had aduenged them selues vpon their enemyes. Is not thys written in the boke of the ryghtwes, howe that the sunne abode in the middes of heauen, and hasted not to go doune by the space of a whole daye.
Joshua 10:14 And there was no daye lyke that, before it, or after it, that the Lorde obeyed the voyce of a man, and al because the Lorde fought for Israel.
Joshua 10:15 And Iosua returned, and all Israell wyth hym, vnto the hoste to Galgall,
Joshua 10:16 but the fyue Kinges flede and hyd them selues in a caue at Makeda.
Joshua 10:17 And it was tolde Iosua, saying, the fyue Kynges are founde hyd in a caue at Makeda.
Joshua 10:18 And Iosua sayde, roule great stones vnto the mouthe of the caue and appointe men therto, for to kepe them.
Joshua 10:19 And stande ye not stylle, but folowe after youre enemyes and smyte the hindmost of them. And suffre them not to entre into their cytyes, for the Lorde youre God hath delyuered them into youre handes.
Joshua 10:20 And when Iosua and the chyldren of Israel had made an ende of slaying them wyth a great slaughter, tyll they were wasted, yet there remayned a certain of them, whych entered into walled cytyes.
Joshua 10:21 And al the people returned to the hoste, to Iosua at Makeda in peace, so that no man durst moue his tonge agaynst the chyldren of Israel.
Joshua 10:22 Then sayde Iosua, open the mouth of the caue, and bringe out these .v. Kynges vnto me out of the caue.
Joshua 10:23 And they dyd so, & brought those fyue Kinges vnto him, out of the caue? the Kinge of Ierusalem, the King of Hebron, the Kinge of Ierimoth the Kinge of Lachys, and the Kynge of Eglon.
Joshua 10:24 And when they had brought out these kinges vnto Iosua: Iosua called for all the men of Israel, and sayde vnto the capytaynes of the men of warre, whych came wyth hym, come neare & put youre fete vpon the neckes of these kinges. And they came neare & put their fete vpon the neckes of them.
Joshua 10:25 And Iosua sayd vnto them feare not, nor dreade. But be stronge and plucke vp your hertes, for so shal the Lord serue all youre enemyes agaynst whyche ye fyghte.
Joshua 10:26 And then Iosua smote them and slewe them and hanged them on fyue trees tyll euen.
Joshua 10:27 And at the going doune of the sunne: Iosua gaue commaundement, and they toke them doune of the trees & cast them into the caue, where they hyd them selues, and layed great stones on the caues mouth, whych remaine vnto this daye.
Joshua 10:28 And that same day Iosua toke Makeda & smote hyt wyth the edge of the swerde, and the Kinge therof also, and vtterlye destroyed them and all the soules that were therin, and let nought remayne. And he dyd to the King of Makeda, as he dyd to the Kyng of Iericho.
Joshua 10:29 Then Iosua went from Makeda, and all Israel wyth hym vnto Libna, and foughte agaynst Libna.
Joshua 10:30 And the Lorde delyuered it also in theyr handes, wyth the Kynge also, & smote it with the edge of the swerde and all the soules that were therin, and let noughte remayne in it, and dyd vnto the kyng therof as he dyd vnto the kynge of Iericho.
Joshua 10:31 After that Iosua departed from Libna, and all Israel wyth hym, vnto Lachys, and beseged it, and assaulted it.
Joshua 10:32 And the Lord deliuered into the handes of Israel Lachis, that they toke it the seconde daye, and smote it with the edge of the swerde, and al the soules that were therin, accordinge to al that he dyd to Lybna.
Joshua 10:33 Then Horam kynge of Geser came vp to helpe Lachys: But Iosua smote him and his people, vntyll he lefte hym naughte remaynynge.
Joshua 10:34 And from Lachis Iosua departed vnto Eglon, and all Israel wyth hym, and there beseged it, and assaulted it,
Joshua 10:35 and toke it the same daye, and smote it wyth the edge of the swerde, and all the soules that were therin, & vtterlye destroyed them the same daye, accordinge to al that he dyd to Lachis.
Joshua 10:36 Then Iosua departed vp from Eglon and all Israel wyth him, vnto Hebron. And they fought againste it,
Joshua 10:37 and toke it, and smote it wyth the edge of the swerde, and the kynge therof, and al the tounes that pertayned to it, and all the soules that were therin, so that they lefte nought remayninge: but in al thinges as they dyd to Eglon, so they destroyed it vtterlye, and al the soules that were therin.
Joshua 10:38 Then Iosua returned and all Israel with him to Dabir, and they fought againste it,
Joshua 10:39 & toke it, and the kinge therof and al the tounes that pertained therto. And smote them wyth the edge of the swerde, and vtterly destroyed al the soules that were therin, and let nought remayne. And as he dyd to Hebron, so he dyd to Dabir and the King therof, and as he dyd to Libna and her Kynge.
Joshua 10:40 And Iosua smote all the hille countreyes and the south countreys, and the valeyes, and the springes of water, with al their kinges, & let nought remayne, but vtterlye destroyed all that breathed, as the Lorde God of Israel commaunded.
Joshua 10:41 And Iosua smote them from Cades barne vnto Asah, and all the countrey of Gosan, euen vnto Gabaon.
Joshua 10:42 And all those kynges and their lande, Iosua toke at one tyme, because the Lorde God of Israell fought for Israel.
Joshua 10:43 And then Iosua returned, and al Israel wyth hym, vnto the hoste to Galgall.

CHAPTER: 11

Joshua 11:1 And when Iabin Kyng of Hazor had hearde that, he sente to Iobab kynge of Madon, and to the kinge of Someron, and to the Kyng of Acsaph.
Joshua 11:2 And vnto the Kynges that are by north in the mountaynes, and playnes, on the southsyde of Ceneroth, and in the lowe countreyes, and in the regions of Dor vpon the sea,
Joshua 11:3 and vnto the Cananites both by Easte and weste: and vnto the Amorites, Hethites, Pheresites, and Iebusites in the mountaines, and vnto the Heuites vnder Hermon in the land of Mazphah,
Joshua 11:4 whiche came oute, and all their hostes wyth them, a multitude of folke, euen as the sandes of the sea in numbre with horsses and charettes excedinge manye.
Joshua 11:5 And all these Kynges met together, and came and pitched together vpon the water of Merom, for to fyghte wyth Israell.
Joshua 11:6 And the Lorde sayde vnto Iosua, be not afrayd of them, for to morowe aboute thys tyme I wyl delyuer them al slayne, before al Israel, and thou shalt hough their horsses, & burne their charettes wyth fyre.
Joshua 11:7 And Iosua came, and al the men of warre wt him against them, vnto the water of Merom, sodenlye, and felle vpon them.
Joshua 11:8 And the Lorde delyuered them into the handes of Israel, and they smote them and chased them, vnto great Sydon, and vnto the whote waters, and vnto the valey of Mazphah Eastward? and smote them vntyll they had none remaynynge of them.
Joshua 11:9 And Iosua serued them as the Lord bad him, houghed their horsses and burnt their charettes with fyre.
Joshua 11:10 Then Iosua at that tyme turned backe, & toke Hazor and smote her kyng wt the swerd. For Hazor before tyme was the heade of all those kyngedomes.
Joshua 11:11 And they smote all the soules that were therin with the edge of the swerd, vtterlye destroying them, that no breath was let remayne. And burnt Hazor wyth fyre
Joshua 11:12 and al the cyties of those Kynges, wyth al the kinges of them: Iosua toke and smote them with the edge of the swerde, and vtterlye destroied them as Moses the seruaunte of the Lorde commaunded.
Joshua 11:13 But Israel burnt none of the cytyes, that stode vpon hylles, saue Hazor onely, that Iosua burnt,
Joshua 11:14 but al the spoyle of the saide cyties and the catell, the children of Israell caughte vnto them selues: But the men onelye they smote with the edge of the swerde vntill they had destroyed them, and had lefte no breathe remaynyng.
Joshua 11:15 As the Lorde commaunded Iosua, and euen so dyd Iosua and minisshed no worde of all that the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Joshua 11:16 And so Iosua toke all that lande, the hilles and all the south countreye, and all the lande of Gosan, and the low countrey, and the playnes, and the mountayne of Israel, wt the lowe countrey of the same,
Joshua 11:17 euen from mounte Halak that goeth vp to Seyr, vnto Baal, Gad, in the valeye of Libanon, vnder mounte Hermon. And al the kinges of the same, he toke & smote them, and slewe them.
Joshua 11:18 Iosua made warre longe tyme with those kinges,
Joshua 11:19 for there was no cytye that made peace wyth the chyldren of Israell, saue those Hethites that enhabited Gabaon: All other they toke wyth battell,
Joshua 11:20 for it came of the Lorde to harden their hartes, that they shoulde come agaynst Israel in battell, euen to destroye them vtterlye, that they shoulde haue no mercy, but to bringe them to noughte. As the Lorde commaunded Moses.
Joshua 11:21 And that same ceason, Iosua wente and destroyed the Enakites oute of the mountaines, and out of Hebron, Dabir, and Auab, and oute of all the mountaines of Iuda, and oute of al the mountaynes of Israel. And Iosua destroyed them vtterlye wyth theyr cytyes.
Joshua 11:22 So that there was not one Enakyte left in the lande of the chyldren of Israel: onelye in Asah, Geth, and Asdod, there remayned of them.
Joshua 11:23 And Iosua toke the whole land accordynge to all that the Lorde sayde vnto Moses, and gaue it a possessyon vnto Israel, euerye man his parte in their trybes, and the lande rested from warre.

CHAPTER: 12

Joshua 12:1 These are the Kynges of the land whyche the chyldren of Israell smote and conquered their landes, on the other syde Iordan eastwarde, from the ryuer Arnon, vnto mounte Hermon, and all the plaine eastwarde:
Joshua 12:2 Sehon Kynge of the Amorytes, that dwelt in Hesbon, and ruled from Aroer, whyche lyeth on the brym of the ryuer of Arnon, and to the middel of the ryuer, and halfe Galaad, vnto the riuer Iabock, the border of the chyldren of Ammon:
Joshua 12:3 And in the playne vnto the sea of Ceneroth eastward, and vnto the sea in the playne called the salt sea eastwarde, the waye to Beth, Iesymoth and by south vnder the sprynges of phasgah.
Joshua 12:4 And the costes of Og, Kynge of Basan, whych was of the remnaunt of the Raphaytes, and dwelt at Astharoth, and Edray,
Joshua 12:5 and raygned in mounte Hermon, and in Salecah, and thorow out all Basan, vnto the borders, of the Gesurites, and the Macathites, & halfe Galaad, vnto the borders of Sehon, Kynge of Hesbon.
Joshua 12:6 Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde, and the children of Israel smote them, & Moses the seruaunt of the Lord, gaue their landes a possession, vnto the Rubenites, Gaddites, and halfe the tribe of Manasses.
Joshua 12:7 These are the Kynges of the countrey, which Iosua and the chyldren of Israel smote on this syde Iordan, westwarde, from Baal, Gad in the valeye of Lybanon, euen vnto mount Halak, that goeth vp to Seir. And Iosua gaue the lande vnto the trybes of Israell to possesse, to euery man his parte,
Joshua 12:8 in the vpper land, and nether lande, in playnes, and sprynges of water, in the wyldernesse, and south countrey, the Hethites, the Amorites, the Cananytes, the Pheresytes, the Heuytes, and the Iebusytes.
Joshua 12:9 The Kynge of Iericho: The Kynge of Ai besyde Bethel,
Joshua 12:10 The Kinge of Ierusalem, The Kynge of Hebron,
Joshua 12:11 The Kynge of Ierymoth, The Kynge of Lachys,
Joshua 12:12 The Kynge of Eglon, The Kynge of Gazer,
Joshua 12:13 The Kyng of Dabir, The Kynge of Gader,
Joshua 12:14 The Kyng of Horma, The Kynge of Ered,
Joshua 12:15 The Kynge of Libna, The King of Odolam,
Joshua 12:16 The Kinge of Makeda, The Kinge of Bethel,
Joshua 12:17 The King of Thaphuah, The Kyng of Hepher,
Joshua 12:18 The King of Aphek, The Kyng of Lasaron,
Joshua 12:19 The Kyng of Madan, The Kyng of Hasor,
Joshua 12:20 The Kynge Someron, Meron, The Kinge of Acsaph,
Joshua 12:21 The Kyng Thenach, The King of Magedo,
Joshua 12:22 The Kyng of Cades, The Kynge of Iakanam in Carmel,
Joshua 12:23 The Kynge of the countrey of Dor, The Kynge of the nacyons in Galgall,
Joshua 12:24 and Kynge Therzah: All the Kynges together thyrthy and one.

CHAPTER: 13

Joshua 13:1 When Iosua was waxen olde, & strycken in yeres, the Lorde sayde vnto hym, thou art olde, and stricken in yeres,
Joshua 13:2 and there remayneth yet excedinge much lande to be possessed: This is the land that remayneth, al the coostes of the Philistines, and al the Gesurites,
Joshua 13:3 from Nilus in Egypte vnto the borders of Akaron northwarde, whiche lande was counted to pertayne vnto the Cananites, euen to the fyue Lordes of the Phylistynes, the Asathites, the Asdadytes, Ascalonytes, Gethites, Akaronites, with the Euites, from the south.
Joshua 13:4 Al the land of the Cananites, and Maara, that pertayneth to the Sydons, euen vnto Aphek, and to the borders of the Amorites.
Joshua 13:5 And the lande of the Giblytes, and al Libanon towarde the sunne rysynge, from Baal, Gad, vnder mount Hermon, vntyll thou come to Hemath,
Joshua 13:6 al the enhabitoures of the hyll countrey, from Libanon vnto the whote waters euen al the Sydones I will cast them out from before the chyldren of Israel, and se that thou in anye wyse deuyde it by lotte vnto the children of Israel to enheret, as I haue commaunded the.
Joshua 13:7 Nowe therfore deuyde thys land to enherete, vnto the nyne trybes, and the halfe trybe of Manasses.
Joshua 13:8 For the other halfe wyth the Rubenytes, and the Gaddites haue receyued their enheritaunce allready, whiche Moses gaue them beyonde Iordan Eastwarde, euen as Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde gaue them,
Joshua 13:9 from Aroer that lyeth on the brym of the ryuer Arnon, wyth the cytye in the middes of the ryuer. And al the playne of Midba vnto Dibon,
Joshua 13:10 and al the cyties of Sehon, Kinge of the Amorites, which raygned in Hesbon, euen vnto the borders of the children of Ammon,
Joshua 13:11 and Galaad, and the landes that border vpon the Gesurytes and the Machathites, and al mount Hermon & al Basan vnto Salecah:
Joshua 13:12 euen al the kingdom of Og in Basan, which raigned in Astharoth & Edrai, which same remained yet of the Rest of the Raphaites. But Moses smote them and destroyed them.
Joshua 13:13 Neuerthelesse the children of Israel expelled not the Gesurites nor the Machathytes: But the Gesurites & the Machathytes dwelt amonge the Israelites euen vnto thys daye.
Joshua 13:14 Onely vnto the trybe of Leui, he gaue none enheritaunce, for the offerynge of the Lorde God of Israell is their enheritaunce as he sayde vnto them.
Joshua 13:15 And Moses gaue vnto the trybe of the children of Ruben by theyr kinredes.
Joshua 13:16 And theyr coastes were from Aroer that lyeth on the banck of the ryuer Arnon, and the cytye that lyeth in the ryuer, & al the playne aboute Madba,
Joshua 13:17 Hesbon, & al her tounes that lye in the plaine, Dibon Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon:
Joshua 13:18 Iahazah, Kedemoth and Mephaath,
Joshua 13:19 Kiriathaim, Sabamah & Zarath, Zahar, in mount Emak,
Joshua 13:20 and Beth Pheor, and the springes of Phasgah, and Bethiesymoth,
Joshua 13:21 and all the cyties in the playne. And all the kyngdome of Sehon, Kinge of the Amorites, whiche reigned in Hesbon, whom Moses smote wyth the Lordes of Madian, Eui, Rekem, Zur, Hur and Reba, the Lordes of Sehon, and the Enhabitoures of the countrey.
Joshua 13:22 And Balam also the sonne of Beor the sothsayer, the chyldren of Israel slewe wyth the swerde, among other that were slaine.
Joshua 13:23 And the borders of the chyldren of Ruben was Iordan wyth the countrey that lyeth theron. Thys is the enherytaunce of the chyldren of Ruben in their kynredes, wyth the cytyes and vyllages pertaynyng therto.
Joshua 13:24 And Moses gaue vnto the trybe of Gad, euen vnto the children of Gad he gaue by kinredes.
Joshua 13:25 And their coastes were Iazer, & all the cities of Galaad, and halfe the land of the chyldren of Ammon, vnto Aroer that lyeth before Rabah:
Joshua 13:26 And from Hesbon vnto Ramoth Mazphah, and Betonim, and from Mahanaim vnto the borders of Dabyr.
Joshua 13:27 And in the valeye they had Betharam, Bethnimra, Socoth, & Zaphon, the rest of the kyngdome of Sehon Kyng of Hesbon, and Iordan, and the coastes that lye theron, euen vnto the edge of the sea of Ceneroth, on the other syde Iordan eastward.
Joshua 13:28 This is the enheritaunce of the children of Gad in their kinredes, the cities wt their vyllages.
Joshua 13:29 And Moses gaue vnto the halfe trybe of Manasses. And the halfe trybe of Manasses had theyr parte by their kynredes.
Joshua 13:30 And theyr coastes were from Mahanaim, euen all Basan, the kyngdom of Og, Kynge of Basan, and al the tounes of Iayr, whiche lye in Basan, euen thre skore cities,
Joshua 13:31 and halfe Galaad and Astaroth, and Edrai, cities of the kyngedome of Og in Basan, which pertayne vnto the children of Machir the sonne of Manasses, and that vnto halfe the chyldren of Machyr by theyr kynredes.
Joshua 13:32 These are they to which Moses gaue enheritaunce in the feldes of Moab, on the other syde Iordan by Iericho Eastwarde.
Joshua 13:33 But vnto the tribe of Leui, Moses gaue none enherytaunce, for the Lord God of Israel he is their enheritaunce, as he said vnto them.

CHAPTER: 14

Joshua 14:1 And these are the countreyes whiche the children enhered in the land of Canaan, vnto which Eleazar the prieste, and Iosua the sonne of Nun, and the auncient heades of the trybes of the chyldren of Israel,
Joshua 14:2 gaue them their enheritaunce by lotte, as the Lorde commaunded by the hande of Moses, to geue vnto the nyne trybes, and vnto the halfe trybe of Manasses.
Joshua 14:3 For Moses had geuen enheritaunce vnto two tribes and an halfe on the other syde Iordan. But vnto the Leuites he gaue none enheritaunce among them.
Joshua 14:4 For the chyldren of Ioseph were two trybes, Manasses and Ephraim. And therfore they gaue no parte vnto the Leuites in the lande, saue cyties to dwelle in, and the suburbes of the same, for their beastes & cattel
Joshua 14:5 as the Lorde commaunded Moses, euen so the chyldren of Israel dyd when they deuided the lande.
Joshua 14:6 And the chyldren of Iuda came vnto Iosua in Galgall. And Caleb the sonne of Iephune the Kenesyte sayd vnto him, thou wotest what the Lord said vnto Moses the man of God, aboute me and the in Cades Barne.
Joshua 14:7 Fourty yere olde was I, when Moses the seruaunte of the Lorde sente me from Cades barne to spye oute the lande. And I brought him worde again, euen as I thought in myne herte.
Joshua 14:8 Neuerthelesse my brethren that wente vp wysh me discouraged the hertes of the people. But I folowed the Lord my God euen vnto the ende.
Joshua 14:9 And Moses sware the same ceason saying the lande wheron thy fete haue trooden, shalbe thyne enheritaunce, & thy children for euer because thou hast folowed the Lord my God continuallye.
Joshua 14:10 And now behold, the Lord hath kepte me lusty (as he sayd) this fourtye and fyue yeares, euen sence the Lorde spake vnto vnto Moses, whyle the chyldren of Israell wanderyd in the wyldernesse. And now se I am thys daye foure skore and fyue yeres,
Joshua 14:11 and yet am as stronge at thys tyme, as I was when Moses sent me: loke how strong I was then, so strong I am now, to warre and to do al maner of thynges.
Joshua 14:12 Now therfore geue me thys mountayne, whyche the Lorde at that tyme promysed, for thou herdest at that tyme, how the Enakims were there, and how the cytyes were greate & walled. I trust the Lord wylbe wyth me, and I shal dryue them out as the Lorde sayd.
Joshua 14:13 And Iosua blessed Caleb the sonne of Iephune & gaue him Hebron to enherete.
Joshua 14:14 And Hebron became the enheritaunce of Caleb the sonne of Iephune the kenesite, vnto this daye: because he folowed the Lorde God of Israell perpetually.
Joshua 14:15 And the name of Hebron, was called in the olde tyme, Kariatharbe, which was a huge man among the Enakims. And the lande ceased from warre.

CHAPTER: 15

Joshua 15:1 And the Lot of the trybe of the chyldren of Iuda in their kynredes was the wyldernesse of Zyn, that stretcheth to the coastes of Edon southward, and is the vtmost parte of the south coastes.
Joshua 15:2 And their suthcoastes were from the brinck of the salt sea, and from a certain poynte of the sea, that leaneth southwarde.
Joshua 15:3 And it went out on the south syde of the goyng vp to Acrabim, & went a longe to Zimma, and ascended vp on the south syde of Cades Barne, and wente a longe to Hezron, and wente vp to Adar, and fette a compasse to Karca,
Joshua 15:4 and went a longe to Azmon, and it went out to the riuer of Egipt: so that the ende of that coaste is the sea. And these are their south coastes.
Joshua 15:5 And their easte coastes are the salt sea, euen vnto the edge of Iordan.
Joshua 15:6 And their borders in the north quarter were from another pointe of the sea, where Iordan endeth. And wente vp to Bethhagla, and wente a longe by the northsyde of Betharabah, and went vp to the stone of Bohen the sonne of Ruben.
Joshua 15:7 And then went vp to Dabir from the valeye of Acor, & so northwarde, turnyng toward Galgal that lyeth before the goyng vp to Adonim, whych is of the southe syde of the Ryuer. And then went a longe to the water of Ensemes, and ended at the well of Rogell.
Joshua 15:8 And then went vp to the valeye of the sonne of Hennon, euen vnto the southsyde of the Iebusites the enhabitoures of Ierusalem. And then went vp to the toppe of the hylle, that lyeth before the valeye of Hennon westwarde, and by the edge of the valeye of Raphaim northwarde:
Joshua 15:9 And then it draweth from the sande hille vnto the fountaine of water called Nephthoah, and goeth oute at the cyties of mount Ephron, & draweth to Balah, otherwyse called Kariathiarim:
Joshua 15:10 and then it compasseth from Balah westwarde, vnto Eyr, and then goeth alonge vnto the syde of mounte Iarim, otherwyse called Chesalon, on the northsyde therof. And cometh doune to Bethsames and goeth to Thamnah,
Joshua 15:11 and goeth oute on the side of Akaron northwarde: And then draweth to Secron and goeth a longe to mounte Balah, and goeth oute at Iabnel, and the ende of the coastes is the sea.
Joshua 15:12 And the west borders are the great sea, & the coastes of that lye theron. And these are the coastes of the chyldren of Iuda round about in their kynredes.
Joshua 15:13 And vnto Caleb the sonne of Iephune was there a parte geuen amonge the children of Iuda, by the mouthe of the Lord to Iosua, euen the cyty of Kariatharbe father of Enack whyche cytye is called Hebron.
Joshua 15:14 And Caleb droue thence the thre sonnes of Enack, Sesai, Ahman, and Thalmai, the sonnes begotten of Enack.
Joshua 15:15 And he went vp thence, to the enhabitoures of Dabir, whose name in the olde tyme was kariathsepher.
Joshua 15:16 And Caleb sayde, he that smyteth kariathsepher and taketh it, to hym wyll I geue Acsah my doughter to wyfe.
Joshua 15:17 And Othinel, the sonne of Kenes, the brother of Caleb toke it. And he gaue hym Acsah his doughter to wyfe.
Joshua 15:18 And as she went she moued hym, to aske of her father a felde. And she alyghted of her asse. And Caleb sayde vnto her, what ayleth the.
Joshua 15:19 And she said, geue me a blessyng, for thou hast geuen me a southward and drye land, geue me also springes of water. Then he gaue her springes of water, both aboue and beneth.
Joshua 15:20 This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the chyldren of Iuda in their kynredes.
Joshua 15:21 And the cytyes of the trybe of the chyldren of Iuda in al quarters, towarde the coastes of Edom southwarde, ware: Kabzel, Eder, & Iagur,
Joshua 15:22 Kinah, Dimonah, and Adada,
Joshua 15:23 Kedes, Hazor and Iethnan:
Joshua 15:24 Ziph, Telem, and Baloth
Joshua 15:25 Hazor Hadathah, and Karioth, Hesron, otherwyse called Hazor:
Joshua 15:26 Eman, Sami and Moladah,
Joshua 15:27 Hazargadah, Hasmon and Bethpheleth,
Joshua 15:28 Hazarsual, Bersabe, and Baziothiah,
Joshua 15:29 Baalah, Iim, and Azen:
Joshua 15:30 Eltholad, Cesyll, and Horma:
Joshua 15:31 Zikelag, Medemenah and Sensenah:
Joshua 15:32 Labaoth, Selhim, Ain and Kemou: all these cytyes are twentye and nyne with their villages.
Joshua 15:33 And in the lowe countreye they had Esthaol, Zareah, and Asenah:
Joshua 15:34 Zoneah, Enganim, Thaphuah & Enam:
Joshua 15:35 Ierimoth, Adulam, Socoh, and Azkah:
Joshua 15:36 Saarem, Adiathim, Gederah, and Gederothaim: Fourtene cytyes wyth their villages.
Joshua 15:37 Zenan, Hadazah, and Magdalgad:
Joshua 15:38 Delean Mazphah, and Iektheel:
Joshua 15:39 Lachis, Bazcath & Eglon:
Joshua 15:40 Cabon, Lahamam, and Cethli
Joshua 15:41 Gaderoth, Bethdagon, Maamah and Makedah: Syxtene cytyes with their villages.
Joshua 15:42 Lebnah, Ether, and Asan:
Joshua 15:43 Iephthah, Asnah, and Nezib:
Joshua 15:44 Keilah, Kahezyp and Maresah: nyne cytyes wyth their vyllages.
Joshua 15:45 Akron wyth her tounes and vyllages.
Joshua 15:46 And from Akron out to the sea, al that lyeth about Asdod wyth theyr vyllages.
Joshua 15:47 Asdod with her tounes and villages. Azah with her tounes and villages, euen vnto the ryuer of Egypt: and the great sea wt the coastes that lieth theron.
Joshua 15:48 And in the mountaynes, they had Samir, Iathir, and Socoh:
Joshua 15:49 Danah, & Kariathsenath, which is Dabir:
Joshua 15:50 Anab, Elthemoh, & Anim:
Joshua 15:51 Gozen, Holon, and Giloh, eleuen cities with their villages.
Joshua 15:52 Arab, Dumah, and Esean:
Joshua 15:53 Ianim, Beththaphuah & Aphcah:
Joshua 15:54 Humatah, & kariatharbe: which is Hebron and Zior, nyne cities with their villages.
Joshua 15:55 Maon, Carmell, Siph, and Iutah:
Joshua 15:56 Iesrael, Iukadan, and Sanoeh:
Joshua 15:57 Cain, Gabaah, and Thamnah ten cytyes with their villages.
Joshua 15:58 Halhul, Bethzur & Gedor:
Joshua 15:59 Maarath, Bethanoth, and Elthecon: Syxe cities with their village
Joshua 15:60 Kariath Baal which is kariath Iarim, and Harabba two cytyes wyth their villages.
Joshua 15:61 And in the wyldernesse they had Betharabah, Meddin and Sacarah:
Joshua 15:62 Neblon the cytye of salt, and Engadi: Syxe cities wyth theyr villages.
Joshua 15:63 But the Iebusites that were the enhabiters of Ierusalem: the chyldren of Iuda could not caste oute. Wherfore the Iebusites dwelle among the children of Iuda vnto this daye.

CHAPTER: 16

Joshua 16:1 And the lot of the children of Ioseph felle from Iordan by Iericho, vnto the water of Iericho Eastward, and the wildernesse that goeth vp from Iericho, thorow out mount Bethel,
Joshua 16:2 and then goeth out from Bethel to Lus, & runneth a longe vnto the borders of Arciatharoth,
Joshua 16:3 and goeth doune westwarde, euen to the coastes of Iaphlethi, & vnto the coastes of Bethhoron the nether, & so to Gasor, & the endes of their coastes came to the sea.
Joshua 16:4 And so the children of Ioseph, Manasses & Ephraim toke their enheritaunce.
Joshua 16:5 An the children of Ephraim toke their coastes by kynredes. And the coastes of their enheritaunce Eastwarde were, Ataroth Ador, euen vnto Bethhoron the vpper,
Joshua 16:6 and went out westwarde to Machmathah on the Northsyde, and compassed Eastwarde vnto Thaanath Silo, & past it on the Eastside vnto Ianoah,
Joshua 16:7 & went doune from Ianoah to Ataroth & Naarath, and met at Iericho, & went out at Iordan.
Joshua 16:8 And their borders wente from Thaphuah westwarde vnto the Riuer Kanah, & the endes were the sea. This is the enheritaunce of the tribe of the children of Ephraim in theyr kynredes,
Joshua 16:9 & the bordering cities of the children of Ephraim, lye amonge the enheritaunce of the children of Manasses: euen al the cyties wt their villages.
Joshua 16:10 Notwithstandinge they draue not out the Cananites that dwelte in Gasor: but the Cananites dwelt among the Ephraites vnto this daye, and paye tribute.

CHAPTER: 17

Joshua 17:1 And the tribe of Manasses, whiche was the eldeste sonne of Ioseph receiued a lot. And Machyr the eldest sonne of Manasses, whiche was the father of Galaad (and a man of warre) had Galaad & Basan.
Joshua 17:2 And the reste of the children of Manasses receiued by their kynredes: whyche were the children of Abieser, the children of Helek, the chyldren of Asriel: the children of Sychem, the children of Hepher: the children of Semida. These are the male children of Manasses, the sonne of Ioseph in theyr kynredes.
Joshua 17:3 But Zelaphead the sonne of Hepher, the sonne of Galaad, the sonne of Machir, the sonne of Manasses, had no sonnes saue doughters. And these are the names of hys doughters: Mahela, Noa, Hagla Melcha and Thirza:
Joshua 17:4 which came before Eleasar the prieste, and before Iosua the sonne of Nun, and before the Lordes sayinge: the Lord commaunded Moses to geue vs an enheritaunce among oure brethren. And he gaue them at the mouth of the Lorde, an enheritaunce amonge the brethren of their fathers.
Joshua 17:5 And there felle ten porcyons to Manasses besyde the land of Galaad and Basan, whyche are on the other syde Iordan:
Joshua 17:6 because the doughters of Manasses dyd enherete amonge hys sonnes. And Manasses other sonnes had the lande of Galaad.
Joshua 17:7 And the coastes of Manasses reached from Aser to Machmathah, that lyeth before Sychem, & went a longe on the righte hande, euen vnto the enhabiters of Enthaphuah,
Joshua 17:8 and the lande of Thaphuah belonged to Manasses, which Thaphuah lay in the borders betwene Manasses, and the chyldren of Ephraym.
Joshua 17:9 And the coastes descended vnto the riuer Canah, on whose southsyde Ephraim hath cytyes amonge the cyties of Manasses. For the coastes of Manasses were on the northsyde of the ryuer, and the endes of them was the sea:
Joshua 17:10 so that the south pertayned to Ephraim, and the north to Manasses, and the sea is his border. And they mette together in Aser northwarde, and in Isacar Eastwarde.
Joshua 17:11 And Manasses had in Isacar and in Aser, Bethsean, and her tounes: and the enhabitoures of Dor, with the tounes pertaining to the same, and the enhabitoures of Endor, with the tounes of the same: and the enhabitoures of Thaanath with her tounes, and the enhabitoures of Magedo with the tounes of the same, euen thre countreys:
Joshua 17:12 yet the chyldren of Manasses coulde not ouercome those cytyes: But the Cananites began to dwel in the same lande.
Joshua 17:13 Neuerthelesse assone as the chyldren of Israel were waxed strong, they put the Cananytes to tribute, but expelled them not.
Joshua 17:14 And the children of Ioseph spake vnto Iosua, saying: why hast thou geuen vs but one lot, and one porcion to enheret, seynge we be muche people, and for as muche as the Lorde hath blessed vs so,
Joshua 17:15 and Iosua aunswered them: yf ye be much people, then get you vp to the wood countreye, and prepare for youre selues there in the lande of the Pheresytes and of the Raphaites, yf mounte Ephraym be to narowe for you.
Joshua 17:16 Then the chyldren of Ioseph sayde agayn: the hyll wyll not begoten of vs, for al the Cananites, that dwell in the lowe countreye haue charettes of yron, and so haue they that enhabite Bethsean, and the tounes of the same, and they also that dwel in the valeye of Iezreel.
Joshua 17:17 And Iosua aunswered the house of Ioseph, Ephraim and Manasses sayinge: ye be muche people and haue greate power and shall not therfore haue one lotte.
Joshua 17:18 But the hyll shalbe youres, for it is a woode countreye, and ye shall bryng it to fashion, and it shalbe youres euen vnto the endes of it, for ye shalbe able to cast out the Cananites for all their yron charettes, and for all they be so stronge.

CHAPTER: 18

Joshua 18:1 And the whole congregacion of the children of Israell came together at Siloh, and set vp the tabernacle of wytnesse there, and the lande was in subieccyon before them.
Joshua 18:2 But there remayned among the chyldren of Israel seuen tribes, which had not their enheritaunce deuyded oute.
Joshua 18:3 And Iosua sayd vnto the children of Israel, how long are ye so slacke to go & possesse the land whych the Lord God of youre fathers hath geuen you?
Joshua 18:4 Bring of euery tribe .iij. men, that I maye sende them. And that they may ryse & walke thorowe the land & distribute it by their enheritaunces, & come agayne to me.
Joshua 18:5 Deuide it into seuen partes. For Iuda shall abyde by theyr coastes in the south, & the house of Ioseph shal stande to their coastes in the north.
Joshua 18:6 Describe ye the lande therfore into seuen partes, & bring the descrypcion to me hether, that I may cast lottes for you here before the Lorde oure God.
Joshua 18:7 The Leuites haue no part amonge you, for the priestshype of the Lorde is theyr enheritaunce. And Gad, Ruben, and halfe the trybe of Manasses haue receiued their enheritaunce beyonde Iordan Eastward, which Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde gaue them.
Joshua 18:8 And the men arose and want their waye. And Iosua charged them that went to describe the lande saying, hence and go thorowe the lande and describe it, and come agayne to me hether: and I will cast lottes for you before the Lorde in Siloh.
Joshua 18:9 And the men departed, and walked thorow the lande and descrybed it by cyties into seuen partes in a boke, and returned to Iosua into the hoste at Siloh.
Joshua 18:10 And Iosua caste lottes for them in Siloh before the Lorde, and there he deuided the land vnto the chyldren of Israel, to eche their porcion.
Joshua 18:11 And the lotte of the trybe of the children of Beniamin came vp accordinge to their kynredes. And the coastes of their lot came out betwene the chyldren of Iuda, and the children of Ioseph.
Joshua 18:12 And their north coastes were from Iordan, & wente vp to the syde of Iericho on the northsyde, and went vp thorowe the mountaines westwarde, and they ended at the wyldernesse of Bethauen,
Joshua 18:13 and went from thence to the southsyde of Lus, other wyse called Bethel, and descended to Atharoth, Adar vpon the hylle that lieth on the southsyde of the neither Bethhoron.
Joshua 18:14 And the west coaste draweth and compasseth southward, euen from the hylle, that lyeth before Bethhoron, and goeth oute at Kariathbaal, which is kariath Iarim, a citye of the children of Iuda, and this is the west quarter,
Joshua 18:15 and the south coaste, goeth from the edge of Kariathiarim westwarde, & goeth oute to the waterwelle, of Nephthoah,
Joshua 18:16 and cometh doune to the edge of the hyll that lyeth before the valeye of the sonne of Hennon, whyche is in the valeye of Raphaim northwarde, and desceuded thorowe the valeye of Hennon vnto the syde of Iebusi southwarde, and goeth doune to the well of Rogell.
Joshua 18:17 And compasseth from the north, and goeth forthe to Ensames, and to the coastes, that lye before the going vp vnto Andomim, and goeth doune to the stone of Bohan the sonne of Ruben,
Joshua 18:18 & then goeth a longe towarde the syde of the playne, northwarde, and goeth doune into the plaine:
Joshua 18:19 and goeth a longe to the syde of Bethhaglah northwarde, and endeth at the pointe of the salt sea north therfrom, and at the ende of Iordan south therfrom. Thys is the south coaste.
Joshua 18:20 And Iordan is their easte coast, this is the enheritaunce of the children of Beniamin with their coastes rounde aboute, & by their kinredes.
Joshua 18:21 And these are the cytyes of the trybes of the chyldren of Beniamin in theyr kynredes: Iericho, Bethhaglah, and the valeye of Kaziz,
Joshua 18:22 Betharabah, Zamarim, and Bethel,
Joshua 18:23 Auim, Pharah, and Ophrag,
Joshua 18:24 Chepar Ammonai, Ophni, and Gabai, twelue cytyes wt their villages,
Joshua 18:25 Gabaon, Ramah, & Beroth,
Joshua 18:26 Mazphah, Caphairah, and Mozah:
Joshua 18:27 Rekem, Iarephel and Tharelah,
Joshua 18:28 Zela, Eleph, and the cytye of the Iebusites, whyche is Ierusalem, Gabaath, and Kariath, fourtene cytyes wyth theyr vyllages. Thys is the enherytaunce of the chyldren of Beniamin in their kynredes.

CHAPTER: 19

Joshua 19:1 And the seconde lot came out vnto the trybe of the chyldren of Simeon by their kynredes. And their enheritaunce felle in the myddes of the enheritaunce of the children of Iuda.
Joshua 19:2 And their enheritaunce was, Bersabe, Sabe, and Moladah,
Joshua 19:3 Hazorsual, Balah, and Azem,
Joshua 19:4 Eltholad Bethul and Hormah
Joshua 19:5 Zikelag, Bethmarcoboth and Hazelsusah,
Joshua 19:6 Bethlebaoth, and Saruhen, thertene cyties with their villages.
Joshua 19:7 Aim, Remon, Ether, and Asan, foure cities with their villages:
Joshua 19:8 & therto all the villages that lye rounde aboute these cities, euen vnto Balasath, Beor, & Ramath, southwarde. This is the enheritaunce of the tribe of the children of Simeon in their kynrede
Joshua 19:9 oute of the portion of the chyldren of Iuda, came the enheritaunce of the children of Simeon. For the parte of the chyldren of Iuda, was to much for them, and therfore the children of Simeon had their enheritaunce in the enheritaunce of them.
Joshua 19:10 And the thyrde lot came vnto the children of Zabulon, accordynge vnto theyr kynredes. And the coastes of their enheritaunce came to Saryd,
Joshua 19:11 and went vp to the Sea, and to Marialah, and touched at Dabaseth, and mette at the riuer that lyeth before Iokneuen,
Joshua 19:12 and turned from Sarid eastwarde, towarde the sunne rysyng vnto the border of Chisloth in mounte Thabor, and then goeth oute to Dabereth, and goeth vp to Iaphia,
Joshua 19:13 and from thence goeth a longe eastwarde, towarde the sunne rysyng, to Sethah, Hepher, Ithah, and Iazim, and goeth to Remon, Methoar, and Neah.
Joshua 19:14 And compasseth it on the northsyde, & goeth to Nathan, and endeth in the valeye of Iephthahel.
Joshua 19:15 And Iatath, Nahalol, Semron, Iedalah, and Bethlehem, twelue cityes wyth their vyllages.
Joshua 19:16 Thys is the enheritaunce of the chyldren of Zabulon, in their kynredes. The sayd cities with their villages.
Joshua 19:17 And the fourthe lotte came out to the chyldren of Isacar by their kynredes.
Joshua 19:18 And theyr coastes were Iesraelah, Casuloth, Sunem,
Joshua 19:19 Hapharaim, Sion, Anaharath,
Joshua 19:20 Harabith, Kysion and Abez,
Joshua 19:21 Rameth, Enganim, Enhadah, and Bethphazez.
Joshua 19:22 And his coastes mette at Thabor Sahazimah and at Bethsames & endeth at Iordan, sixtene cytyes with their villages.
Joshua 19:23 This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the chyldren of Isacar by theyr kynredes the cyties and their villages.
Joshua 19:24 And the fyfte lot came out vnto the trybe of the chyldren of Aser by their kynredes.
Joshua 19:25 And their coastes were Helkath, Hali, Beten, and Achsaph,
Joshua 19:26 Alamelech, Amaad & Miseal, and mette at Carmel on the sea, & at Syhor and at Labanath
Joshua 19:27 & turned towarde the sunne rysynge to Bethdagon, and mette at Zabulon and in the valeye of Iehthah, and toward the northsyde of Bethemek & Negel, & goeth oute on the lefte syde of Cabul,
Joshua 19:28 and Hebron, Rohob, Hamon, and Kanah euen vnto greate Sidon.
Joshua 19:29 And then the coast turneth to Ramah and to the stronge citie of Azor and turned to Hozah and endeth at the sea, by the possession of Achzibah:
Joshua 19:30 Amah, Aphek, and Rohob: Twentye and two cyties with their villages.
Joshua 19:31 This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the chyldren of Aser by theyr kinredes: These cities with their villages.
Joshua 19:32 And the syxte lot came oute vnto the chyldren of Nephthali by their kinredes.
Joshua 19:33 And their coastes were from Heleph and from Elon in Zaananim, and Adami, Nekeb and Iabneel euen to Lakum, and go oute at Iordan.
Joshua 19:34 And then the coaste turned westward to Asanoth in mounte Thabor, and then goeth oute from thence to Hukokah and meteth wyth Zabulon on the southe syde, and wyth Aser on the west, and at Iuda vpon Iordan towarde the sunne rysynge.
Joshua 19:35 And their stronge cyties are Zidim, Ber, Hamath, Racath and Cenereth,
Joshua 19:36 Adamah, Hermah and Hazor:
Joshua 19:37 Kedes, Edrai, and Enhazor:
Joshua 19:38 Ieron, Magdelel: Horem, Bethanah and Bethsames .xix. cyties with theyr villages.
Joshua 19:39 This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Nephthali by their kyuredes: these cytyes and their villages.
Joshua 19:40 And the seuenth lot felle to the trybe of the chyldren of Dan, by theyr kynredes.
Joshua 19:41 And the coastes of theyr enheritaunce was Zaraah, Esthaol, Irsames,
Joshua 19:42 Saelabin, Aialon & Iethlah:
Joshua 19:43 Eglon, Themnathah and Akaron:
Joshua 19:44 Elthekeh Gibethon and Baalath:
Joshua 19:45 Iehud, Banebarak and Gathermon,
Joshua 19:46 Meiericon & Harcon wyth the countreye that lyeth before Iapho.
Joshua 19:47 And the coastes of the children of Dan, went out from beyonde them. For the chyldren of Dan, went vp and foughte agaynste Lesen and toke it, and smote it wyth the edge of the swerde, and conquered it, and dwelte therin and called it Dan, after the name of Dan their father.
Joshua 19:48 This is the enheritaunce of the tribe of the chyldren of Dan in their kynredes, these cytyes wyth their villages.
Joshua 19:49 When they had made an ende of deuydinge the lande by her coastes then the chyldren of Israell gaue an enheritaunce vnto Iosua the sonne of Nun amonge them:
Joshua 19:50 at the mouthe of the Lord they gaue hym the cytie which he asked, euen Thamnathserah in mounte Ephraim. And he builte the cytye and dwelt therin.
Joshua 19:51 These are the enheritaunces whych Eleazar the priest and Iosua the sonne of Nun, and the auncient fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel deuided by lot in Siloh before the Lorde, in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse, and so made an ende of deuyding the countreye.

CHAPTER: 20

Joshua 20:1 Then the Lorde spake vnto Iosua saying:
Joshua 20:2 comen with the children of Israell and saye: Appoynte out free cities, of whiche I spake vnto you by Moses,
Joshua 20:3 that the slear that kylled any person vnwares and vnwyttynglye, may flee thether. And those cytyes shalbe your refuge from the auenger of bloude.
Joshua 20:4 And the slear shal flee vnto one of those cytyes and shal stande in the entring of the gate of the cytye, and shal shewe hys cause in the eares of the elders of the sayd cytye. And they shal take him into the cytye vnto them, and shal geue him a place, that he maye dwel amonge them.
Joshua 20:5 And when the auenger of bloude foloweth after him, they shal not deliuer the slear into his hande, because he smote his frende ignorantlye, and hated hym not before tyme.
Joshua 20:6 And he shal dwell in the sayde cytye vntyll he stand before the congregacyon in Iudgement, and vntyll the death of the hye prieste, that shalbe in those dayes. And then shal the slear returne and come vnto hys owne cytye, and vnto his owne house, and vnto the cytye from whence he flede.
Joshua 20:7 And they apoynted Kedes in Galile, in mount Nephthali, and Sychem in mount Ephraim, and kariatharbe, whiche is Hebron, in the mountaines of Iuda.
Joshua 20:8 And on the other syde Iordan ouer agaynste Iericho eastwarde, they gaue Bozor in the wyldernesse vpon the playue, out of the trybe of Ruben, and Ramuth in Galaad out of the trybe of Gad, and Golan in Basan out of the tribe of Manasses.
Joshua 20:9 These were the cyties apointed for al the children of Israel, and to the straungers, that soiourned amonge them, that whosoeuer kylled anye person ignorantlye, that same might flee thether, & should not dye by the hande of the auenger of bloude, vntyll he stode before the congregacyon.

CHAPTER: 21

Joshua 21:1 And then came the principal heades of the Leuites vnto Eleazar the prieste, and vnto Iosua the sonne of Nun, and vnto the auncient heades of the trybes of the chyldren of Israell,
Joshua 21:2 and spake vnto them at Siloh in the lande of Canaan sayinge: the Lorde commaunded by Moses, to geue vs cyties to dwell in, and the feldes aboute them, for oure catell.
Joshua 21:3 And the children of Israell gaue vnto the Leuites out of their enheritaunces, at the bidding of the Lorde, these cytyes folowing wyth their suburbes.
Joshua 21:4 And the lot came out vnto the kynredes of the Cahathites, and the children of Aaron, the priest, which were of the Leuytes had geuen them by lot, out of the trybe of Iuda, out of the trybe of Simeon, and out of the tribe of Beniamin .xiij. cytyes.
Joshua 21:5 And the reast of the children of Cahath had by lot, out of the kynredes of the trybe of Ephraim, out of the trybe of Dan, & out of the halfe trybe of Manasses ten cities.
Joshua 21:6 And the chyldren of Gerson had by lot out of the kynredes of the tribe of Isacar out of the tribe of Aser, out of the tribe of Nephthali, and out of the other halfe trybe of Manasses in Basan .xiij. cities.
Joshua 21:7 And the chyldren of Merari by theyr kynredes, had out of the trybe of Ruben, out of the trybe of Gad, and out of the trybe of Zabulon, twelue cities.
Joshua 21:8 And the children of Israel gaue by lot vnto the Leuites, these cytyes wyth their suburbes as the Lorde commaunded by Moses.
Joshua 21:9 And they gaue oute of the trybe of the chyldren of Iuda, and out of the trybe of the children of Symeon, these cytyes by name,
Joshua 21:10 which the chyldren of Aaron beynge of the kynredes of the Cahathytes, and of the chyldren of Leui, obtayned, for theyrs was the fyrste lot.
Joshua 21:11 And they gaue them Kariath Arbe of the father of Enack, whych is Hebron, in the hyll countrey of Iuda, wyth the suburbes of the same rounde about it.
Joshua 21:12 But the countreye that pertayned the cytye and the villages therof, they gaue to Caleb the sonne of Iephune, to be his possession.
Joshua 21:13 And thus they gaue to the chyldren of Aaron the pryeste the fraunchesed cytyes of the slear, Hebron wyth her suburbes, and Lybna wyth her suburbes,
Joshua 21:14 and Iathir wyth her suburbes, and Estymoa wyth her suburbes,
Joshua 21:15 and Holon wyth her suburbes, and Dabyr wyth her Suburbes,
Joshua 21:16 and Aybna wyth her Suburbes, and Iutah wyth her Suburbes, and Bethsames wyth her Suburbes, nyne cytyes out of those two trybes.
Joshua 21:17 And out of the trybe of Beniamin, they gaue Gabaon wyth her suburbes, Gaba wyth her Suburbes,
Joshua 21:18 Anatoth wyth her Suburbes, Almon wyth her Suburbes: foure cytyes.
Joshua 21:19 All these cytyes of the chyldren of Aaron priestes were .xiij. cytyes wyth theyr Suburbes.
Joshua 21:20 And the kynredes of the chyldren of Cahath that were Leuites, that is to saye, the other chyldren of Cahath had the cytyes of theyr lot, out of the trybe of Ephraim.
Joshua 21:21 And they gaue them the fre cytye of the slear: Sichen wyth her Suburbes, in mounte Ephraim, and Gazer wyth her Suburbes,
Joshua 21:22 and Kabzaim wyth her Suburbes, Bethhoron wyth her Suburbes, foure cytyes.
Joshua 21:23 And out of the trybe of Dan, Eltheke wyth her Suburbes, Gybthon wyth her Suburbes,
Joshua 21:24 Aialon wyth her Suburbes, and Gathremon wyth her Suburbes, foure cytyes.
Joshua 21:25 And out of the halfe trybe of Manasses, Thanach wyth her Suburbes, Gathremon wyth her Suburbes, two cytyes.
Joshua 21:26 So that all the cytyes, whyche were geuen vnto the kynredes of the other chyldren of Cahath, were ten with theyr Suburbes.
Joshua 21:27 And vnto the children of Gerson, which were of the kynredes of the Leuytes, they gaue out of the other halfe trybe of Manasses, the cytye of refuge for the slear, Golan in Basan wyth her Suburbes, Beestherah wyth her Suburbes, two cyties.
Joshua 21:28 And oute of the trybe of Isacar, Kysyon wyth her Suburbes, Daberath wyth her Suburbes,
Joshua 21:29 Iarymoth wyth her Suburbes, Enganim wyth her Suburbes, foure cytyes.
Joshua 21:30 And out of the trybe of Aser, Miseal with her Suburbes, Abdon wyth her Suburbes,
Joshua 21:31 Halakath wyth her Suburbes, Rohob wyth her Suburbes, foure cytyes.
Joshua 21:32 And out of the trybe of Nephthali, the cytye of refuge of the flear, Kedes in Galyle, wyth her Suburbes, Hamothdor, wyth her Suburbes, Carthan wyth her Suburbes, thre cytyes.
Joshua 21:33 So that all the cytyes of the Gersonites in theyr kynredes were .xiij. wyth theyr Suburbes.
Joshua 21:34 And vnto the kynredes of the chyldren of Merari, the reste of the Leuytes, they gaue out of the trybe of Zabulon: Iecnam wyth her Suburbes, Carthah with her Suburbes,
Joshua 21:35 Damna wyth her Suburbes, and Nahalal wyth her Suburbes, foure cytyes.
Joshua 21:36 And out of the trybe of Ruben, they gaue Bozor wyth her suburbes, Iahesah with her suburbes,
Joshua 21:37 Kedmoth with her suburbes, and Maphaath wyth her suburbes, foure cytyes.
Joshua 21:38 And oute of the trybe of Gad, they gaue the fraunchysed cytye of the slear, Romoth in Galaad wyth her suburbes, Mahanaim with her suburbe
Joshua 21:39 Hesbon wyth her suburbes,
Joshua 21:40 and Iaser wyth her suburbes, foure cytyes in all, so that al the cytyes of the chyldren of Merari in their kinredes, which were the reste of the kynredes of the Leuites, were by theyr lot, twelue cyties.
Joshua 21:41 And all the cytyes, that the Leuites had in the possessyon of the chyldren of Israell were .xlviij. wyth theyr suburbes.
Joshua 21:42 And these cyties had eche theyr suburbes, round aboute her thorow out al the sayde cyties.
Joshua 21:43 And the Lorde gaue vnto Israell all the lande, whiche he sware to geue vnto their fathers. And they conquered it, and dwelt therin.
Joshua 21:44 And the Lorde gaue them rest roundabout accordyng to all that he sware vnto their fathers. So that there stode not a man of all theyr enemyes before them. But the Lorde delyuered all their enemyes into theyr handes.
Joshua 21:45 There skaped nothynge of all the good thinges, whyche the Lorde had sayde vnto the house of Israell. But all came to passe.

CHAPTER: 22

Joshua 22:1 Then Iosua called vnto the Rubenites, the Gaddites and to the halfe trybe of Manasses,
Joshua 22:2 & sayd vnto them, ye haue kept al that Moses the seruaunt of the Lord commaunded you, and haue obeied my voyce in all that I commaunded you,
Joshua 22:3 ye haue not lefte youre brethren of a long ceason vnto this daye but haue kepte the commaundement of the Lord youre God.
Joshua 22:4 And now the Lord hath geuen reste vnto youre brethren as he promised them. Wherfore returne and go vnto youre tentes & vnto the lande of youre possessyon, whych Moses the seruaunt of the Lord gaue you on the other syde Iordan.
Joshua 22:5 But in any wyse take exceding good heade, that ye do the commaundement & law whych Moses the seruaunt of the Lord charged you: whyche is, that ye loue the Lorde youre God, and walke in hys wayes & kepe his commaundementes, and cleaue vnto him, and seaue hym wyth all youre hertes, and all youre soules.
Joshua 22:6 And so Iosua blessed them, and sent them awaye. And they went vnto their tentes.
Joshua 22:7 Vnto the one halfe of the trybe of Manasses, Moses gaue possession in Basan, and vnto the other half therof gaue Iosua with their brethren on this syde Iordan westward. And also when Iosua sent them awaye vnto theyr tentes and blessed them,
Joshua 22:8 he sayde vnto them, returne with much rychesse vnto youre tentes, and with very muche catell, wyth syluer gold, brasse, yeron, and with rayment aboue measure, and deuide the spoyle of youre enemyes wyth youre brethren.
Joshua 22:9 And the chyldren of Ruben, the chyldren of Gad, and halfe the trybe of Manasses, returned and departed from the chyldren of Israel out of Syloh, which is in the lande of Canaan, to go vnto the countreye of Galaad, and to the lande of their possessyon, wherin they were possessed at the mouth of the Lorde by the hande of Moses.
Joshua 22:10 And when they came vnto the coastes of Iordan, that lye in the lande of Canaan, there the chyldren of Ruben, the chyldren of Gad, and the halfe trybe of Manasses, buylt an altare faste by Iordan, and that a great altare to se to.
Joshua 22:11 And when the children of Israel hearde saye: beholde the chyldren of Ruben, the chyldren of Gad, and the halfe trybe of Manasses haue buylte an altare in the forefrounte of the land of Canaan in the borders of Iordan on the syde of the chyldren of Israell,
Joshua 22:12 the whole congregacyon of the chyldren of Israel gathered them together to Siloh, to go vpon them wyth batell.
Joshua 22:13 And the children of Israell sent vnto the chyldren of Ruben, to the chyldren of Gad, and to the halfe trybe of Manasses into the lande of Galaad, Phinehes, the sonne of Eleazar the prieste,
Joshua 22:14 and wyth him ten Lordes of euery chefe house, a Lorde thorowout al the trybes of Israell, whych heades of their father housholdes were ouer the thousandes of Israell.
Joshua 22:15 And they wente vnto the chyldren of Ruben, of Gad and to the halfe trybe of Manasses, vnto the lande of Galaad, and spake wyth them sayinge.
Joshua 22:16 Thus saye the whole congregacion of the Lord: what transgression is this, that ye haue transgressed againste the God of Israell, to turne awaye this daye from after the Lorde and to buylde you an altare for to rebelle this day againste the Lorde,
Joshua 22:17 Is the wicked deade of Peor to lyttell for vs, wherof we are not cleansed vnto this daye, & there was a plage in the congregacion of the Lorde:
Joshua 22:18 But that ye also shoulde turne awaye this daye from folowing the Lorde: ye shall rebelle to daye agaynste the Lorde, and to morow he shall be wroth wyth all the congregacyon.
Joshua 22:19 Not withstanding yf the lande of youre possessyon be vncleane, then come ouer vnto the lande of the possessyon of the Lorde, where the Lordes tabernacle dwelleth, and be possessed amonge vs. But rebell not againste the Lorde nor agaynst vs, to buylde you anye other aulter saue the aulter of the Lorde oure God.
Joshua 22:20 Dyd not Acan the sonne of Zareth trespase in the excommunicate thinges, and wrath fell on all the congregacyon of Israel, so that he alone peryshed not for hys wyckednesse?
Joshua 22:21 Then the chyldren of Ruben and of Gad, and halfe the trybe of Manasses aunswered and sayde vnto the heades ouer the thousandes of Israel:
Joshua 22:22 The myghtye God Iehouah he knoweth, and Israel shall knowe yf it be to rebelle or transgresse agaynste the Lorde, then the Lorde saue vs not thys daye.
Joshua 22:23 Or els yf we haue buylt vs an aulter to tourne from folowynge the Lorde, or to offer thereon burntofferynge or meate offerynges, or to offer peace offerynges thereon: let the Lorde requyre it:
Joshua 22:24 And haue not rather done it for feare of thys: least in tyme to come youre chyldren shulde saye vnto oures: what haue ye to do wyth the Lorde God of Israel, seynge:
Joshua 22:25 that the Lorde hath made Iordan a border betwene vs and you ye chyldren of Ruben & of Gad: ye haue no parte therfore in the Lorde: and so shall youre chyldren make our chyldren cease from fearynge the Lorde.
Joshua 22:26 And therfore we sayde: Let vs cause an aulter to be made, not for burntofferynges, nor sacryfyces,
Joshua 22:27 but it shalbe a wytnesse betwene vs, and you and oure generacyons after vs, that we shulde serue the Lorde, wyth our offerynges, sacryfyces and peace offerynges: and that youre chyldren shulde not say to oures in tyme to come, ye haue no parte in the Lorde.
Joshua 22:28 And we thought yf they shuld so say to vs or to oure generacyons in tyme to come, that we wolde saye agayne: Beholde the fashyon of the aulter which our fathers made, neither for burntofferynges nor sacryfyces, but that it shulde be a wytnesse betwene vs and you
Joshua 22:29 God forbydde that we shulde rebell agaynst the Lorde, and that we shulde turne this day from after him, and buyld an aulter for burntofferynges or sacryfyces, saue the aultare of the Lorde, oure God that is before hys tabernacle.
Joshua 22:30 And when Phinehes the Prieste, and the Lordes of the congregacion and heades ouer the thousandes of Israell whiche were wyth hym, hearde the wordes that the chyldren of Ruben, the chyldren of Gad and the chyldren of Manasses spake, they were well contente.
Joshua 22:31 And Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the priest sayde vnto the chyldren of Ruben, of Gad & of Manasses thys daye we perceyue that the Lorde is among vs, because ye haue not done thys trespase agaynst the Lorde. And now ye haue rydde the chyldren of Israell out of the handes of the Lorde.
Joshua 22:32 And Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar the Prieste and the Lordes returned from the chyldren of Ruben and of Gad oute of the lande of Galaad vnto the lande of Canaan, to the chyldren of Israell, and brought them worde agayne.
Joshua 22:33 And the aunswere pleased the chyldren of Israel well, and they praysed GOD and dyd not entende to go agaynste them in battayle, to destroye the lande which the chyldren of Ruben and Gad dwelte in.
Joshua 22:34 And the chyldren of Ruben & the chyldren of Gad called the aulter Ed, because it is a wytnesse betwene vs, that the Lorde is God.

CHAPTER: 23

Joshua 23:1 And it came to passe a long ceason after that the Lorde had geuen reste vnto Israel from all theyr enemyes rounde aboute, that Iosua waxed olde and was strycken in yeares.
Joshua 23:2 Wherfore he sent for all Israell, & for theyr elders, theyr heades, theyr Iudges & offycers, and sayde vnto them: I am olde and strycken in yeares.
Joshua 23:3 And ye haue sene all that the Lorde youre God hath done vnto al these nacyons before your faces: For the Lord your God he foughte for you.
Joshua 23:4 Beholde I haue appoynted these nacyons that remayne, to be the enherytaunce of youre trybes: euen from Iordan, and all the nacyons that I haue destroyed, euen vnto the great Sea.
Joshua 23:5 And the Lorde youre God he shall expell and cast them oute before you, and ye shall conquere theyr landes, as the Lorde your God hath sayde vnto you.
Joshua 23:6 Be therfore excedynge stronge that ye take hede to do all that is wrytten in the boke of the lawe of Moses, that ye bowe not asyde there from, to the ryght hande or to the lefte:
Joshua 23:7 and that ye go not vnto these nacyons that remayne wyth you: and that ye neyther make mencion or sweare by the names of theyr goddes: and that ye neyther serue them, nor bow your selues vnto them.
Joshua 23:8 But that ye sticke fast vnto the Lorde youre God, as ye haue done vnto thys daye.
Joshua 23:9 So shall the Lorde cast oute before you great nacyons and myghty, as ye se how no man hath stande before you hytherto.
Joshua 23:10 One of you shall chase a thousande: for the Lorde your God he fyghteth for you, as he hath sayde vnto you.
Joshua 23:11 Take good hede therfor vnto youre soules, that ye loue the Lord your God.
Joshua 23:12 But and yf ye shall go backe and cleaue vnto the reste of these nacyons that remayne wyth you, and shall make maryages wyth them, and shall go to them, and they come to you:
Joshua 23:13 be sure that the Lorde youre God wyll not caste out al the nacyons from before you. But they shalbe snares and trappes vnto you, and scourges for youre sydes, & prickes in youre eyes, vntyll ye peryshe from of thys good lande whiche the Lorde your God hath geuen you.
Joshua 23:14 Beholde I walke thys daye, by the waye of all the worlde: call ye to mynde in all your hertes and in all your soules, that nothynge hath fayled of all the good thynges whiche the Lord your God promysed you. All are come to passe, and nothyng hath fayled therof.
Joshua 23:15 And as all good thynges are come vpon you, which the Lorde youre God promysed you: so shall the Lorde brynge vpon you all euyll vntyl he haue destroyed you from of thys good lande which the Lorde your God hath geuen you
Joshua 23:16 when ye haue transgressed the appoyntment of the Lorde youre God, which he commaunded you, and haue gone and serued straunge Goddes, and bowed your selues to them. Then shal the wrath of the Lord waxe whote vpon you, and ye shall peryshe quickly, from of the good lande which he hath geuen you.

CHAPTER: 24

Joshua 24:1 And Iosua gathered all the trybes of Israel to Sichem, & called for the elders of Israel, and for theyr heades Iudges and offycers whiche presented them selues before God.
Joshua 24:2 And Iosua sayde vnto all the people, thus saith the Lord God of Israel: your fathers dwelt on the other syde of the floude in olde tyme euen Thareh the father of Abraham and Nachor, and serued straunge Goddes.
Joshua 24:3 But I toke youre father Abraham from the other syde of the floude, and brought hym into the lande of Canaan, & multyplyed hys seede, and gaue hym Isaac
Joshua 24:4 Iacob and Esau And I gaue vnto Esau mounte Seyr to possesse it. But Iacob and hys chyldren wente doune into Egypte.
Joshua 24:5 Then I sent Moses and Aaron. And I plaged Egypte, after the maner as I dyd amonge them,
Joshua 24:6 and after that I broughte you out, & I brought youre fathers out of Egypt And ye came vnto the sea: and the Egypcyans folowed after youre fathers wyth Charettes and horsmen, vnto the red sea.
Joshua 24:7 And they cryed vnto the Lord. And he put darckenesse betwene you and the Egypcyans, and brought the sea vpon them, and couered them. And youre eyes haue sene what I haue done in Egypte. And ye dwelte in the wyldernesse a longe ceason.
Joshua 24:8 And I brought you into the lande of the Amorites which dwelte on the other syde Iordan. And they foughte with you: and I gaue them into youre handes. And ye conquered theyr contre. And I destroyed them in your syghte.
Joshua 24:9 Then Balak the sonne of Ziphor, Kynge of Moab arose and warred agaynste Israell and sent & called Balam the sonne of Beor for to cursse you.
Joshua 24:10 But I wold not agre to herken vnto Balam, and therfore he blessed you: And I delyuered you out of hys hande.
Joshua 24:11 And when ye went ouer Iordan, and came vnto Iericho, the cytezens of Iericho foughte against you: the Amorytes, Pheresytes, Canaanytes, Hethytes, Girgosites, Heuites, Iebusites whiche I delyuered into youre handes.
Joshua 24:12 And I sent hornettes before you and ye cast out before you euen the two Kynges of the Amorites: but not with youre owne swerd or wyth your owne bowe.
Joshua 24:13 And I gaue you a lande in whiche ye dyd no laboure, & cytyes which you buylt not, & ye dwelte in them. And vynes, and Olyue trees which ye planted not, and ye ate of them.
Joshua 24:14 And nowe feare the Lorde and serue hym in purenesse and truthe: And put awaye the Goddes which youre fathers serued on the other syde of the floude, and in Egypt, & serue the Lorde.
Joshua 24:15 But yf it seme euyll vnto you to serue the Lorde, then chose you thys day whom you wyll serue whether the Goddes whiche youre fathers serued that were on the other syde of the floude, eyther the Goddes of the Amorytes in whose lande, ye dwelte, and I & my house wyll serue the Lorde.
Joshua 24:16 And the people aunswered and sayd, God forbyd that we shulde forsake the Lorde and serue straunge Goddes.
Joshua 24:17 For the Lorde oure God he it is that brought vs and our fathers out of the lande of Egypte, the house of bondage, and whiche dyd those myracles in oure syght, and preserued vs in all the waye we went and amonge all the nacyons whiche we came thorow.
Joshua 24:18 And the Lorde dyd cast out before vs all the nacyons wyth the Amorytes, whiche dwelt in the lande, wherfore we wyll serue the Lorde, for he is oure God.
Joshua 24:19 But Iosua sayde vnto the people, ye can not serue the Lorde: for he is an holye God & cannot beare youre transgressyon and synne.
Joshua 24:20 But when ye haue forsaken the Lorde and haue serued straunge Goddes, he wyll turne and do you euyll, and consume you, after that he hath done you good.
Joshua 24:21 And the people aunswered Iosua: naye, but we wyll serue the Lorde.
Joshua 24:22 Then Iosua sayde vnto the folke, ye are wytnesses vnto youre selues, that ye haue chosen you the Lorde, to serue hym: and they said we are wytnesses.
Joshua 24:23 Then put awaye, sayde he the straung Goddes which are among you, and bowe your hertes vnto the Lorde God of Israell.
Joshua 24:24 And the people aunswered Iosua: the Lorde oure God we wyll serue, & hys voyce we wyl obey.
Joshua 24:25 And so Iosua made a couenaunt wyth the people the same daye, and set ordynaunces and lawes before them in Sichem.
Joshua 24:26 And Iosua wrote these wordes in the boke of the lawe of God, and toke a great stone and pytched it on ende in the sayde place euen vnder an ocke that stode in the sanctuarye of the Lorde.
Joshua 24:27 And Iosua sayde vnto all the people: beholde, thys stone shalbe a wytnesse vnto vs, for it hath hearde all the wordes of the Lorde whiche he spake wyth vs. It shalbe therfore a wytnesse vnto you, leste ye lye vnto youre God.
Joshua 24:28 And so Iosua let the people departe euery man vnto hys enherytaunce.
Joshua 24:29 And after these thynges the tyme came that Iosua the sonne of Nun and the seruaunte of the Lorde dyed beynge an hundreth and ten yeares olde.
Joshua 24:30 Whom they buryed in the cuntrey of hys enherytaunce, euen in Thamnath sareh whiche is in mount Ephraim, on the north syde of the hyll of Gaas.
Joshua 24:31 And Israel serued the Lorde all the dayes of Iosua, and all the dayes of the elders that ouer lyued Iosua, and whiche had sene al the worckes of the Lorde that he had done to Israell.
Joshua 24:32 And the bones of Ioseph, whiche the chyldren of Israell brought oute of Egypte, they buryed in Sichem, in a parcell of ground which Iacob bought of the sonnes of Hemor the father of Sichem, for an hundreth peaces of syluer, which parcell became the enherytaunce of the chyldren of Ioseph.
Joshua 24:33 And Eleazar the sonne of Aaron dyed, whom they buryed in Gabaath that pertained to Phinehes hys sonne, and was geuen hym in mounte Ephraim.

BOOK: Judges

CHAPTER: 1

Judges 1:1 After the death of Iosua the children of Israel asked the Lord saying Who shal go vp first vnto the Cananites to fyghte agaynst them?
Judges 1:2 And the Lorde sayde: Iuda shall go vp: beholde I haue delyuered the land into hys handes.
Judges 1:3 Then Iuda sayde vnto Simeon hys brother: come wyth me into my lotte, and let vs fyghte agaynste the Cananites: And I lykewyse wil go with the into thy lotte. And so Simeon wente wyth hym.
Judges 1:4 And Iuda went vp, and the Lord deliuered the Cananites and Pheresites into theyr handes. And they slewe of them in Bezek .x. thousand men.
Judges 1:5 And they found Adonibezek in Bezek. And they fought against him, & slewe the Cananites & Pheresites.
Judges 1:6 But Adonibezek fled, and they folowed after him, & caught him, and cut of hys thombes and hys greate toes.
Judges 1:7 Then Adonibezek sayd: thre score & .x. kynges hauynge theyr thombes & greate toes cut of, gathered theyr meate vnder my table: wherfore as I haue done so, God hath done to me agayne. And they brought him to Ierusalem and there he dyed.
Judges 1:8 The children of Iuda fought agaynst Ierusalem, and toke it, & smote it wyth the edge of the swerde, and set the cyty on fyre.
Judges 1:9 And after that the chyldren of Iuda went euen to fyght agaynst the Cananites that dwelt in the mountayne, in the southe, & in the lowe countreye.
Judges 1:10 And Iuda went vnto the Cananites that dwelt in Hebron, whiche before tyme was called Karyath Arbe. And slewe Sesai, Ahiman and Thalmai.
Judges 1:11 And from thence they went to the inhabyters of Dabir, whose name in olde tyme was called Kariathsepher.
Judges 1:12 And Caleb sayde: he that smyteth Kariathsepher, & taketh it, to him wyll I geue Acsah my doughter to wyfe.
Judges 1:13 And Othonyel the sonne of Kenez Calebs younger brother toke it: to whome he gaue Acsah hys doughter to wyfe
Judges 1:14 and as they wente she counceled hym to aske of her father a felde. And then she lyghted of her asse: and Caleb sayde vnto her: What ayleth the?
Judges 1:15 She sayde vnto hym: geue me a blessynge: for thou hast geuen me a Southwarde & drye land, geue me also sprynges of water. And Caleb gaue her sprynge bothe aboue & beneth.
Judges 1:16 And the chyldren of the Kenyte Moses father in lawe went vp out of the cytye of paulme trees, with the chyldren of Iuda into the wyldernesse of Iuda that lyeth in the Southe of Arad, and dwelte among the people.
Judges 1:17 And Iuda went & Simeon with him, & they slewe the Cananytes that enhabyted Zephah, and vtterly destroyed it, and called the name of the cytye Hormah.
Judges 1:18 And Iuda toke Azah with the coastes thereof, and Askalon wyth the coastes therof, and Akaron with the coastes thereof.
Judges 1:19 And the Lorde was wyth Iuda that he conquered the mountaynes, but they coulde not dryue oute the enhabyters of the valeys, because they had charettes of yron.
Judges 1:20 And they gaue Hebron vnto Caleb as Moyses sayde. And he expelled thence the thre sonnes of Enack.
Judges 1:21 And the chyldren of Ben Iamin dyd not caste oute the Iebusites that enhabyted Ierusalem, but the Iebusites dwell wyth the chyldren of Ben Iamin in Ierusalem, vnto thys daye.
Judges 1:22 And in lyke maner the house of Ioseph went vp to Bethell and the Lorde wyth them
Judges 1:23 and the house of Ioseph serched out Bethell which before tyme was called Lus.
Judges 1:24 And the spyes sawe a man come out of the cytye and they sayde vnto hym: shew vs the waye into the cytye. And we wyl shewe the mercy.
Judges 1:25 And he shewed them the waye into the cytye, and they smote it with the edge of the swerde, but let the man and all hys houshold go free,
Judges 1:26 And the man wente into the lande of the Hethites, and buylt a cytye and called the name thereof Lus whiche is the name thereof vnto thys daye.
Judges 1:27 Neyther dyd Manasses expelle Bethsean wyth her tounes, nether Tanaach wyth her tounes, neyther the enhabytoures of Dor wt her tounes, neyther the enhabytours of Ieblaam with her tounes, neyther the enhabitours of Magedo wyth her tounes, and so the Cananites went to and dwelt in the sayde lande.
Judges 1:28 But as sone as Israell was waxed myghtye they put the Cananites to trybute: But expelled them not.
Judges 1:29 In lyke maner Ephraim expelled not the Cananites that dwelt in Gazer, but the Cananites dwelt stylle in Gazer among them.
Judges 1:30 Neyther dyd Zabulon expell the enhabytoures of Ketron, neyther the enhabytours of Naholol: But the Cananites dwelt amonge them, and be came trybutaryes.
Judges 1:31 Neyther dyd Aser cast out the enhabitours of Acho, neyther the enhabitours of Zidon, of Ahalab, Aczib, Halbah, Aphek, nor of Rohob,
Judges 1:32 but the Aserytes dwelte amonge the Cananites the enhabytours of the lande, & draue them not out.
Judges 1:33 Neyther dyd Nephtalim dryue oute the enhabytoures of Bethsames, nor the enhabytoures of Bethanath, but dwelle amongest the Cananytes the enhabytours of the lande. Neuerthelesse the enhabytours of Bethsames & of Bethanath be came trybutaryes vnto them.
Judges 1:34 And the Amorites kept the chyldren of Dan in the mountaynes, and suffered them not to come doune to the valeys.
Judges 1:35 And so the Amorites went to and dwelled in mount Heres in Haylon and in Galabim. Neuerthelater the hand of Ioseph waxed heuye vpon them, so that they became trybutaryes.
Judges 1:36 And the coastes of the Amorytes was from the goyng vp to Acrabim, and from the rocke vpwarde.

CHAPTER: 2

Judges 2:1 And the angell of the Lorde came vp from Galgall to Bocim, and sayde, I broughte you oute of Egypt and haue brought you vnto the lande whiche I sware vnto your fathers. And I sayde that I wolde neuer breake myne appoyntment wyth you,
Judges 2:2 but ye shulde haue made no couenaunt with the enhabytours of thys lande, ye shuld haue broken doune theyr aultares: But ye haue not obeyed my voyce, why haue ye thys done?
Judges 2:3 wherfore I haue lykewyse determyned that I wyll not cast them out before you: but they shalbe in the sydes of you, and theyr Goddes shalbe snares vnto you.
Judges 2:4 And when the Angel of the Lorde had spoken these wordes vnto al the chyldren of Israel, the people cryed oute & wepte.
Judges 2:5 And called the name of the sayd place, Bocim and offered there vnto the Lorde.
Judges 2:6 And when Iosua had sente the people awaye the chyldren of Israell wente euerye man into hys enheritaunce to possesse the land.
Judges 2:7 And the people serued the Lorde all the dayes of Iosua, and all the dayes of the elders that oute lyued Iosua, and had sene all the great workes of the Lorde that he dyd to Israel.
Judges 2:8 And Iosua the sonne of Nun the seruaunte of the Lorde dyed when he was an hundred & ten yeares olde:
Judges 2:9 whome they buried in the coastes of hys enherytaunce: euen in Thamnath hares in mounte Ephraim on the northsyde of the hyll Gaas.
Judges 2:10 And euen so all that generacyon were put vnto theyr fathers, & there arose another generacyon after them which nether knewe the Lord, nor yet the worckes which he dyd vnto Israel.
Judges 2:11 And then the chyldren of Israel dyd wyckedlye in the syght of the Lorde, and serued Baalim,
Judges 2:12 & forsoke the Lorde God of theyr fathers, whiche brought them out of the land of Egypt, and folowed straunge Goddes, euen of the Goddes of the nacyons that were rounde aboute them, and bowed them selues vnto them, and angred the Lorde.
Judges 2:13 And so they forsoke the Lorde, and serued Baal and Astharoth.
Judges 2:14 Wherfore the Lorde waxed angry with Israel, & delyuered them into the handes of raueners to spoyle them, and solde them into the handes of theyr enemyes rounde about them, so that they had no power any longer to stande before theyr enemyes.
Judges 2:15 But vnto whatsoeuer thynge they went, the hand of the Lorde was vpon them wyth euyl lucke, euen as the Lord promysed them, and as he sware vnto them. And they were sore vexed.
Judges 2:16 Neuerthelesse the Lord raysed vp Iudges which delyuered them oute of the handes of theyr oppressers,
Judges 2:17 and yet for al that they wold not harken vnto theyr iudges: But wente a whorynge after straunge Goddes & bowed them selues vnto them, and turned quicklye oute of the waye which theyr fathers walked in obeyinge the commaundementes of the Lord and dyd not so.
Judges 2:18 And when the Lorde raysed them vp Iudges, he was wyth the Iudge, and delyuered them out of the handes of theyr enemyes al the dayes of the Iudge: for the Lorde had compassyon ouer theyr sorowynges whiche they had by the reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them:
Judges 2:19 yet for all that as sone as the iudge was dead they turned and dyd worsse then theyr fathees in folowing straunge goddes, and in seruynge them, and ceased not from theyr inuencyons nor from theyr malycyouse wayes.
Judges 2:20 Wherfore the Lorde was angrye with Israel and sayde: because thys people hath transgressed myne appoyntment whiche I commaunded theyr fathers, and haue not obeyed my voyce,
Judges 2:21 therfore henceforth I wyll not cast out one man before them of the nacyons which Iosua lefte when he dyed,
Judges 2:22 and that to proue Israel through them whether they wyll kepe the waye of the Lord to walke therin, as their fathers dyd or not.
Judges 2:23 And so the Lord lefte those nacyons alone, and droue them not oute ymmedyatlye, neyther delyuered them into the handes of Iosua.

CHAPTER: 3

Judges 3:1 These are the nacyons whiche the Lord left to tempt Israel: euen as many of Israel as had not knowen al the warres of Canaan:
Judges 3:2 Onelye for the learnyng of the generacyon of the children of Israel: which before knewe nothyng of warre,
Judges 3:3 he lefte the fyue Lordes of the Philistines, & all the Cananites, the Sidonites, the Heuites that dwelt in mount Lybanon: euen from mount Baal Hermon and Hemath.
Judges 3:4 Those remayned to proue Israel by, to wete whether they wolde herken vnto the commaundementes of the Lorde, whiche he commaunded theyr fathers by the hand of Moses.
Judges 3:5 And as the chyldren of Israel dwelt among the Cananites hethytes, Amorites, Pheresites, Heuytes, and Iebusytes,
Judges 3:6 they toke the doughters of them to be theyr wyues, & gaue theyr owne doughters to theyr sonnes, & serued theyr Goddes.
Judges 3:7 And so the chyldren of Israell dyd wyckedlye in the syght of the Lord and forgate the Lorde theyr God and serued Baalim & Aseroth.
Judges 3:8 Therfore the Lorde was angrye wyth Israel, and deliuered them into the handes of Chusan Rasathaim Kynge of Mesopotamia. So that the chyldren of Israel serued Chusan Rasathaim .viij. yeares.
Judges 3:9 And then the chyldren of Israel cryed vnto the Lorde. And the Lord stered them vp a sauer, and saued them: one Othonyel the sonne of Kenes, Calebs younger brother.
Judges 3:10 And the spryte of the Lorde came vpon hym. And he iudged Israell, and wente oute to warre. And the Lorde solde Chusan Rasathaim Kyng of Mesopotamia in hys hande. So that his hand was myghtye ouer Chusan Rasathaim.
Judges 3:11 And the lande had rest fourtye yeares. And Othonyel the sonne of Kenes dyed.
Judges 3:12 And then the children of Israel went to agayne, & commytted wyckednesse in the syght of the Lorde. And then the Lord hardened Eglon the Kyng of the Moabytes, agaynst the chyldren of Israel, because they had committed wyckednesse before the Lorde.
Judges 3:13 And this Eglon gathered vnto him the chyldren of Ammon, and the Amalekites & went & smote the chyldren of Israel, & conquered the cytye of paulme trees.
Judges 3:14 And the chyldren of Israell serued Eglon the king of the Moabytes .xviij. yeares.
Judges 3:15 And then they cryed vnto the Lorde. And the Lord stered them vp a sauer, Ahud the sonne of Gera the sonne of Iemini, a man that could do nothyng handsomly with his ryght hande. By whome the chyldren of Israell sente a present vnto Eglon the kyng of the Moabites
Judges 3:16 which Ahud made hym a dagger wyth two edges, of a cubyte lengthe, & he dyd gyrde it vnder hys cote vpon hys ryght thigh
Judges 3:17 and caried the present vnto Eglon the Kynge of the Moabytes, whych Eglon was a very fatte man.
Judges 3:18 And when he had presented the present, he sent the people that bare it awaye,
Judges 3:19 but he hym selfe turned agayne from the Idolles by Galgal, and sayde. I haue a secret vnto the O Kynge: and the kynge commaunded hym to holde his peace vntyl all that stode aboute hym, were gone out from hym.
Judges 3:20 And Ahud came in vnto hym into a somer parler, whyche he had seueral vnto hym selfe alone, and sayde: I haue a message vnto the from God. And he arose out of hys seate.
Judges 3:21 And Ahud put forth hys lefte hande and toke the dagger from hys ryght thyghe and thrust it into hys belye;
Judges 3:22 so that the hafte went in after the blade. And the hafte stopped in the fatte, for he drue not the dagger out of hys belye. And the dyrt came out.
Judges 3:23 But Ahud gat hym oute at a posterne dore, and shutte the dores of the parler vpon hym and locked them.
Judges 3:24 When he was gone out, hys seruauntes came and loked. And beholde, the dores of the parler were locked. And they sayde. A, he is a doiynge of hys easement in hys somer chomber.
Judges 3:25 And when they had taried tyl they were a shamed, for noman dyd the dores of the parler open: then they toke a keye and opened them. And beholde theyr Lorde was fallen doune dead, vnto the earth.
Judges 3:26 But Ahud eskaped whyle they taryed & was gone beyonde the Idolles and eskaped into Seirath.
Judges 3:27 And when he was come he blew a trompette in mount Ephraim. And the chyldren of Israell went doune wyth him of the hille and he before them.
Judges 3:28 And he sayd vnto them, folowe me, for the lord hath delyuered your enemies, the Moabytes into your handes. And they descended after hym and toke the passages of Iordan from the Moabites, & suffered not a man to passe ouer.
Judges 3:29 And they slew of the Moabites the same tyme vpon a ten thousande men, all fatte, & men of might: that there skaped not a man
Judges 3:30 and so the Moabytes were subdued that daie vnder the handes of Israell, and the land had rest .lxxx. yeares.
Judges 3:31 And after hym came Samgar the sonne of Anath, whiche slewe of the Phylistines syxe hundred men wyth an oxe gode, and delyuered Israel also.

CHAPTER: 4

Judges 4:1 And the chyldren of Israel began agayne to do wickedly in the sight of the Lorde, when Ahud was dead.
Judges 4:2 And the Lorde solde them into the handes of Iakin Kynge of Canaan, that raygned in Hazor, whose captaynes of warre was Sisara, which dwelt in Haroseth of the gentyles.
Judges 4:3 And the chyldren of Israel cryed vnto the Lorde: for he had nyne hundred charettes of yron, he oppressed the chyldren of Israel wyth power .xx. yeares.
Judges 4:4 And Debora a Prophetysse, the wyfe of Lapidoth iudged Israell the same tyme,
Judges 4:5 and dwelt vnder the paulme tree of Debora, betwene Ramath & Bethell, in mount Ephraim. And the chyldren of Israel came to her for iudgement.
Judges 4:6 And she sent and called Barak the sonne of Abinoam, out of Kedes Nephtalim, and sayde vnto hym. The Lorde God of Israel commaundeth the, that thou go and drawe to mounte Thabor, and take wyth the ten thousande men, of the chyldren of Nephtalim and of the chyldren of Zabulon.
Judges 4:7 And I wyll brynge vnto the ryuer Kyson Sisara, the captayne of warre vnto Iabin, wyth hys charettes, and hys people, and wyll delyuer them into thyne handes.
Judges 4:8 And Barak sayde vnto her, yf thou wylt go wt me, I wyll go: But & yf thou wilt not go wyth me, then I wyll not go.
Judges 4:9 And she answered, I wyll surely go wyth the, but then the prayse shall not be thyne, in the waye whiche thou goest, for the Lorde shall delyuer Sisara into the handes of a woman. And she arose and went wyth Barak to Kedes.
Judges 4:10 And Barak called Zabulon and Nephthalim to Kedes. And he went vp a foote wyth ten thousande men: and Debora went wyth hym.
Judges 4:11 But Haber the kenyte was remoued oute of Kin, which was of the chyldren of Hobab the father in lawe of Moyses, and pytched hys tente vntyll he was come to the Ocke of Zaanaim, by Kedes.
Judges 4:12 And then it was shewed vnto Sisara how that Barak the sonne of Abinoam was gone vp to mounte Thabor.
Judges 4:13 And Sisara called for all hys charettes, euen .ix. hundred charettes of yron, and for all the people that he had, from Haroseth of the gentyles vnto the ryuer of Kyson.
Judges 4:14 Then sayde Debora vnto Barak: vp for thys is the daye in whiche the Lord hath delyuered Sisara, into thyne handes: for the Lorde is gone out before the. And so Barak went doune from mount Thabor, and ten thousande men after hym.
Judges 4:15 But the Lorde trounsed Sisara and al his charettes and all hys hoste wyth the edge of the swerde, before Barak. And Sisara lyghted doune of hys charet and fled afore.
Judges 4:16 But Barak folowed after the charettes and after the hoste euen vnto Haroseth of the Gentiles. And all the hoste of Sisara fell vpon the edge of the swerde, that there was not a man lefte.
Judges 4:17 Now be it Sisara fled a fote to the tent of Iael the wyfe of Haber the kenite: for there was peace betwene Iabin the kynge of Hazor, and the housholde of Haber the kenyte.
Judges 4:18 And Iael went oute agaynst Sisara and sayde vnto hym, turne in my Lorde, turne into her into her tente: and she couered him with a mantell.
Judges 4:19 And he sayde vnto her, geue me a lyttell water to drincke, for I am thrysty. And she opened a bottel of mylke, & gaue him drincke, and couered hym.
Judges 4:20 And he sayde vnto her: stande in the dore of thy tente, & yf anye man come, and aske the, or enquere of the whether there be any man here, saye naye.
Judges 4:21 Then Iael Habers wyfe toke a nayle of the tente, and an hamer in her hande, & wente softlye vnto hym, and smote the nayle thorow the temples of his head into the grounde, as he slombered beyng wery. And so he dyed.
Judges 4:22 And beholde as Barak folowed after Sisara, Iael came oute agaynste hym, and sayd vnto him: come and I wyll shew the the man whom thou sekest. And when he came into her tente: Beholde, Sisara laye dead & the nayle thorow his temples.
Judges 4:23 And so God broughte Iaben the kyng of Canaan into subieccyon that daye, before the chyldren of Israel.
Judges 4:24 And the hande of the chyldren of Israel prospered and was sore vpon Iaben the kyng of Canaan, vntyll they had broughte hym to naught.

CHAPTER: 5

Judges 5:1 Then Debora & Barak the sonne of Abinoam, sange the same day: saying.
Judges 5:2 Prayse the Lorde in them that were wyllyng whyle other sate stylle in Israel.
Judges 5:3 Heare kynges Lordes, I wyl synge, and geue prayse vnto the Lorde God, of Israell.
Judges 5:4 Lorde when thou departedest out of Seir and camest from the feldes of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heauen rayned, & the cloudes dropped water:
Judges 5:5 the mountaynes mealted before the Lorde, euen mounte Sinai before the Lorde God of Israel.
Judges 5:6 In the dayes of Samgar the sonne of Anath and in the dayes of Iael, the hye wayes were vnoccupyed. And they that walked by pathes, went by wayes that fet compases aboute.
Judges 5:7 The vyllages were vnenhabyted in Israell, were vnenhabyted, vntyl I Debora arose vntyll I arose a mother in Israell.
Judges 5:8 God chose new fashyons of warre, for when they had warre at theyr gates: there was not sene amonge fourtye thousande, eyther shyld or spere in Israel.
Judges 5:9 Myne hert loueth the maynteners of the lawe in Israell, that are wyllynge amonge the people. Blesse the Lorde
Judges 5:10 ye that ryde on goodly Asses, and sitte in iudgement. And ye that walcke by the wayes make dytyes.
Judges 5:11 How the archers dyd crye, where men draw water, there shall they tell of the iustice of the Lorde, and of the iustyce of his vplandyshe folcke in Israel. And then the people of the Lorde went doune vnto the gates.
Judges 5:12 Vp vp Debora, vp vp and synge a songe, vp Barak, & take thy praye, thou sonne of Abinoam.
Judges 5:13 Then they that had escaped, raygned ouer the proudest of the people: The Lorde raygneth ouer the stronge.
Judges 5:14 Ephraim was the fyrst agaynst Amaleck, And after them BenIamin, among the people. Of Machir came learned men in the lawe, and of Zabulon that well coulde drawe with the penne of a scrybe.
Judges 5:15 The Lordes of Isakar were wyth Debora. And as Barak, euen so was Isacar sente into the valeye a fote. But in the diuisions of Ruben, were great ymagynacyons of hert.
Judges 5:16 Wherfore abodest thou amonge the shepe foldes, to heare the bleatynges of the flockes. In the deuysions of Ruben, greate were the ymaginacions of herte.
Judges 5:17 Galaad abode on the other syde Iordan, and why taryed dan in shyppes. And Aser sate in the heauens of the sea, and abode styll in hys owne rostes.
Judges 5:18 But Zabulon is a people that put theyr lyues in ieopardye of deathe, and Nephtalim in lyke maner, euen vnto the toppe of the feldes
Judges 5:19 Kinges came and fought. Then fought the Kyng of Canaan at Thanach, vpon the water of Magedo. But the syluer that they coueted, they caryed not awaye.
Judges 5:20 From heauen came battell: for the sterres beynge in theyr course, fought agaynst Sisara.
Judges 5:21 The ryuer of Kison caught them awaye: that auncyent ryuer the ryuer Kyson. My soule: treade thou the myghtye vnder fote.
Judges 5:22 Then they malled the horsses legges, that theyr myghtye coursers lefte praunsyng.
Judges 5:23 Curse Meroz bad the angell of the Lorde Curse, Curse the enhabytours therof because they came not forth to helpe the Lorde, to help the Lorde amonge the myghtye.
Judges 5:24 Blessed be Iael the wyfe of Haber the kenyte, aboue other women: aboue other wemen blessed be se in the tente.
Judges 5:25 He asked water, but she gaue him mylcke, and brought butter in a goodlye dyshe.
Judges 5:26 She caught a nayle in her lefte hande, and a workynge hammer in her ryght, and nayled Sisara and wounded hys head and pearced & went thorowe hys temples.
Judges 5:27 Betwene her fete he bowed hym self, fell doune and laye styll: Betwene her fete he bowed hym selfe, and fell. And whether he bowed hym selfe, thyther he felle brought to nought.
Judges 5:28 Thorow a wyndow loked Sisaras mother and howled thorow a lattesse, why abydeth his charet so long, that it cometh not, why tarye the wheles of his waggans?
Judges 5:29 The wyseste of her ladyes answered her: yea & she answered her owne wordes her self
Judges 5:30 haply they haue found, & deuyde the spoyle: A mayde, ye two maydes for a pece: a spoyle of diuerse colours for Sisara, a spoyle of dyuerse coloures wyth brodered workes, dyuerse coloured browdered workes for the necke for a praye.
Judges 5:31 So perysh all thyne enemyes Lord: but they that loue the, let them be as the sunne rysyng in his might. And the lande had reste fourthye yeares.

CHAPTER: 6

Judges 6:1 And the children of Israel committed wickednesse in the sight of the Lord. And the Lord deliuered them into the handes of the Madianites seuen yeres.
Judges 6:2 And when the hand of the Madianites was sore vpon Israel, the children of Israel made them dennes in the mountaynes & caues & strong holdes.
Judges 6:3 For when Israel had sowen, then came the Madianites the Amalechites, & they of the east contreye vpon them & pitched their tentes agaynste them
Judges 6:4 & destroyed the encrease of the earth euen vnto Azah, & left no sustinaunce in Israel, neyther shepe, oxe or asse,
Judges 6:5 for they came wyth theyr cattell & housholdes euen as greshopers in multitude: so that both they & also theyr camels were wythoute nombre. And they entrede the land to destroy it.
Judges 6:6 And so was Israel excedyngly impoueresshed by the Madianites & cryed vnto the Lord.
Judges 6:7 And when the chyldren of Israell cryed vnto the Lorde because of the Madianites,
Judges 6:8 the Lorde sent a Prophete vnto them, & sayde vnto them: Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: I fette you from Egipt & brought you out of the house of bondage,
Judges 6:9 and I rydde you out of the hand of the Egypcians & out of the handes of all that oppressed you, and cast them out before you, & gaue you theyr landes.
Judges 6:10 And I said vnto you: I am the Lorde your God, & therfore fear not the Goddes of the Amorytes, in whose lande you dwel. But you haue not obeyed my voice
Judges 6:11 And the Angel of the Lorde came and sate vnder an Ocke in Ephrah, that pertayned vnto Ioas the father of the Eserytes. And his sonne Gedeon pressed out whete out of the eares in a presse, for to flee from the Madianites.
Judges 6:12 And the angel of the Lord apeared vnto him, & sayd: the Lorde is with the, thou man of myght.
Judges 6:13 And Gedeon answered him: Oh my Lorde, yf the Lord be with vs, why is al this come vpon vs: ye & where be hys myracles whiche oure fathers tolde vs of & sayde, the Lorde brought vs out of Egyypt. But now the Lorde hath forsaken vs, & delyuered vs into the handes of the Madianites.
Judges 6:14 And the Lorde loked vpon hym, and sayde: Go hence in thys thy myght & delyuer Israel out of the handes of the Madianites: Behold I haue sent the:
Judges 6:15 And he aunswered hym: Oh Lord wherewith shuld I saue Israel? Behold my kynred is the poorest in Manasses, & am the least in my fathers house.
Judges 6:16 But then the Lord sayd vnto him: I wil be with the: & thou shalt smyte the Madianites, as they were but one man.
Judges 6:17 And he answered him, yf I haue found grace in thy syght, then shew me a sygne, that thou art the Lorde that talketh with me.
Judges 6:18 Depart not hence, vntil I come agayne vnto the & bryng myne offryng, & haue set it before the. And he sayde I wyll tarye vntyll thou come agayne.
Judges 6:19 And Gedeon went & made redy a kydde, & swetekakes of an Epha of flour & put the fleshe in a basket, & the broth in a pot & brought it oute vnto hym vnder the Ocke, & presented it.
Judges 6:20 And the angell of God sayd vnto hym: take the fleshe and the swete kakes, & put them vpon thys rocke, & powre oute the broth. And he dyd so.
Judges 6:21 Then the aungell of the Lord put forth the ende of the staffe that was in his hand, & touched the flesh & the kakes. And there arose vp fyre out of the rocke & consumed the fleshe and the kakes. And the angel of the Lord vanyshed out of his sight.
Judges 6:22 And when Gedeon perceyued that it was an angel, he sayd: Alas my Lorde Iehouah, that I haue sene an angell of the Lord face to face.
Judges 6:23 And the Lorde sayde vnto him: peace be with the & feare not, for thou shalte not dye.
Judges 6:24 Then Gedeon made an aultar there vnto the Lorde & called it Iehouah Salom, which vnto thys daye is yet in Ephrath that pertayneth vnto the father of the Eserites.
Judges 6:25 And that same nyght the Lord sayd vnto him, take an oxe of thy fathers & another of .vij. yeares olde & destroye the aultare of Baal that belongeth vnto thy father, and cutte doune the groue that is about it,
Judges 6:26 & make an aultare vnto the Lord thy God vpon the toppe of this rocke & furnesshe it. And take the seconde oxe & offer burnt sacryfyce wt the wood of the groue which thou shalt haue cut doune.
Judges 6:27 Then Gedeon toke ten men of his seruauntes & did as the Lorde bad hym. But because he durst not do it by day for feare of his fathers houshold and of the men of the citie, he dyd it by night.
Judges 6:28 When the men of the citie were vp erlie in the mornynge, beholde the aultare of Baal was broken, & the groue that stode about it cut doune. And the seconde oxe offered vpon the aulter that was made.
Judges 6:29 And they sayd one to another, who hath done thys thyng, and they enquered & asked. And it was tolde them that Gedeon the sonne of Ioas had done it.
Judges 6:30 Then the men of the cytie sayde vnto Ioas, brynge out thy sonne that he maye dye, because he hath broken the aultare of Baal, & cut doune the groue that was about it.
Judges 6:31 And Ioas sayde vnto all that stode by hym, wyll ye fighte for Baal, or wyl ye be hys defenders: he that stryueth for hym, shal dye thys mornyng. If he be a God, let him stryue wyth him that caste doune his aulter.
Judges 6:32 And he called Gedeon Ierobaal the same tyme, saying: let Baal stryue wt hym because he hath broken doune his aulter.
Judges 6:33 When al the Madianytes, the Amalekites and they of the east, were gathered together, & had gone and pitched in the valeye of Ierael:
Judges 6:34 the spryte of the Lorde entered into to Gedeon. And he blew a trompette, & called Abiezer to folowe hym,
Judges 6:35 & sent messengers thorou out all Manasses, & called them vp to folowe hym also. And he sent messengers vnto Aser, Zabulon and Nephtalim, which came also to mete hym.
Judges 6:36 And Gedeon sayd vnto God: yf thou wilt saue Israel by my hande as thou haste sayde:
Judges 6:37 Beholde I wyll put a flece of wolle in the threasshing place. And yf the dewe be on the flece onelye, and drye vpon al the earth beside then I shalbe sure that thou wilt saue Israell by my hande, as thou saydest.
Judges 6:38 And it came so to passe. And he rose vp erlye on the morowe, and he thruste the flece together and wronge the dew thereout, and filled a boole of water.
Judges 6:39 And Gedeon sayde vnto God: be not angrye with me that I speake once more, let me proue onelye once agayne with the flece. Let it be drye onelye vpon the flece, and dewe vpon al the ground about.
Judges 6:40 And God dyd so that same nyght: so that it was drye vpon the flece only and on all the grounde aboute, dewe.

CHAPTER: 7

Judges 7:1 Then Ierobaal otherwyse called Gedeon rose erlye & all the people that were with hym, & pytched besyde the well of Harad, so that the hoste of the Madianites were in a valeye on the northsyde of the hyll Hamoreh.
Judges 7:2 And the Lorde sayde vnto Gedeon: the people that are wyth the, are to many for me to geue the Madianites into theyr handes, lest Israel make theyr vawnte to my dishonoure & saye, our owne hande hath saued vs.
Judges 7:3 Now therfor make a proclamacyon in the eares of the people & saye: yf any man dreade or be afrayde, let hym returne and get hym sone from mounte Galaad. And there departed and returned of the people .xxij. thousand, and there abode ten thousande.
Judges 7:4 And the Lorde sayd vnto Gedeon, the people are yet to many, brynge them doune vnto the water, and I wyll trye them vnto the there. And of whom I saye vnto the, thys shall go with the, the same shal go with the. And whosoeuer I saye vnto the, thys shall not go wyth the, the same shall not go.
Judges 7:5 And when he had brought doune the people vnto the water, The Lorde sayde vnto Gedeon: as many as lappe the water with theyr tounges, as dogges do them put by them selues, and so do them that knele doune vpon theyr knees to dryncke.
Judges 7:6 And the nombre of them that put theyr handes to theyr mouthes and lapped, were .iij. hundred men. And all the remnaunt of the people kneled doune vpon theyr knees to drynke water.
Judges 7:7 And the Lorde sayde vnto Gedeon: wyth the thre hundred men that lapped wyll I saue you, and delyuer the Madianites into thyne hande. And all the other people shall go euery man vnto hys owne whome.
Judges 7:8 And they toke vytayles wyth them for the folke, & theyr trompettes. And he sente all the reste of Israel, euery man vnto hys tente, and kepte the thre hundred wyth hym. And the hoste of Madian was beneth hym in a valeye.
Judges 7:9 And the same nyght the Lorde sayde vnto him, vp & go doune vnto the hoste, for I haue delyuered it into thyne hande.
Judges 7:10 But and yf thou feare to go doune, then go thou doune vnto the host & Pharah thy ladde,
Judges 7:11 & herken what they say, and so shal thyne handes be strong, and then thou shalt go doune vnto the hoste. Then he went doune wt Pharah his ladde euen harde vnto the men of armes that were in the hoste.
Judges 7:12 And the Madianites, the Amalekites, and all they of the east, laye a long in the valeye, lyke vnto greshopers in multitude & theyr camelles were wythout nombre, euen as the sande by the sea syde in multitude.
Judges 7:13 And when Gedeon was come: Behold, there was a man that tolde a dreame vnto hys felowe & sayde: Beholde I dreamed a dreame, and me thoughte that a broyled looffe of barley bread tombled into the hoste of Madian, and came vnto a tente & smote it that it fell, and ouerturned it, that the tente laye a longe.
Judges 7:14 And his felowe aunswered, & sayde, thys is nothynge elles saue the swerde of Gedeon the sonne of Ioas a man of Israel, into whose hande the Lord hath delyuered Madian & all the hoste.
Judges 7:15 When Gedeon hearde the tellynge of the dreame & the interpretacyon of the same, he bowed hym selfe to the earth & returned vnto the hoste of Israel, and sayde: vp for the Lord hath delyuered into youre handes the hoste of the Madianites.
Judges 7:16 And he deuyded the thre hundred men into thre companyes, & gaue euerye man a trompet in hys hand, wyth an emptye pitcher & lampes therin,
Judges 7:17 and sayd vnto them: loke on me & do lykewyse: & beholde, when I come to the syde of the hoste, euen as I do, so do you.
Judges 7:18 And when I blow wyth a trompet and all that are wyth me, blowe ye with trompettes also on euerye syde the hoste and saye: here be the Lorde and Gedeon.
Judges 7:19 And so Gedeon & the thre hundred men that were wyth hym, came vnto the syde of the host in the begynnynge of the myddell watche, & reysed vp the watche men. And they blewe wt their trompettes & brake the pytchers that were in theyr handes.
Judges 7:20 And all thre companyes blew wt trompettes & brake the pitchers, & held the lampes in theyr left handes, & the trompettes in their right, to blowe wyth all. And they cryed the swerd of the Lord & of Gedeon.
Judges 7:21 And they stode stille, euery man in hys place rounde aboute the host. And al the host ranne & cryed & fleed.
Judges 7:22 And as the thre hundreth blew wyth trompettes, the Lorde set euerye mannes swerde vpon hys neyghboure, thorow out all the hoste. And the hoste fleed vntyll they came to Bethsitah, to Zererath, & to the edge of Abelmeholah besyde Tabath.
Judges 7:23 And the men of Israel gathered together of the trybe of Nephtalim, of Aser, & of all Manasses, & folowed after the Madianites.
Judges 7:24 For Gedeon had sent messengers thorow out al mount Ephraim sayinge: come doune agaynst the Madianites & take from them the waters both of Bethbarath and also of Iordan Then all the men of Ephraim gathered together, & came doune & toke the waters bothe of Bethbarath & also of Iordan.
Judges 7:25 And they toke two captaynes of the Madianites, Oreb and Zeb, & slew Ored vpon the rocke Oreb, and Zeb at the presse Zeb, and folowed after Madian. And brought the heades of Oreb & Zeb to Gedeon on the other syde Iordan.

CHAPTER: 8

Judges 8:1 And the men of Ephraim sayd vnto hym. Why haste thou serued vs thus, that thou calledst vs not, when thou wentest to fyght with the Madianites. And they chode with hym a good.
Judges 8:2 And he sayde vnto them: What dead haue I done lyke vnto yours: are not the clusters of Ephraim better then the wyne heruest of Abiezer?
Judges 8:3 God hath deliuered into your handes the Lordes of Madian, Oreb & Zeb. And what was I able to do lyke as you haue done. And then their spyrytes abated from of hym, when he had sayde that.
Judges 8:4 And then Gedeon came to Iordan & passed ouer, bothe he & the thre hundred men that were with him very faynte, & yet folowed the chace.
Judges 8:5 And he sayde vnto the men of Socoth: geue I praye you kakes of bread vnto the people that folowe me: for they be fayntye, that I maye folowe after Zebath and Zalmona kinges of Madian.
Judges 8:6 And the Lordes of Socoth sayd: are the handes of Zebath & Zalmona now in thyne handes that we shuld geue bread vnto thy company.
Judges 8:7 And Gedeon sayde, therfore when the Lorde hath deliuered Zebath and Zalmona into myne hand I wyl teare the flesh of you wyth the thornes of the wyldernes & wyth breers.
Judges 8:8 And he went thence to Phanuel, & spake vnto them lykewise. And the men of Phanuel answered him, as dyd the men of Socoth.
Judges 8:9 And he sayd also vnto the men of Phanuel, when I come agayne in peace, I wyll breake doune thys toure.
Judges 8:10 Zebah and Zalmona were in Arkar & theyr hostes wyth them, vpon a .xv. thousand, whiche were all that were lefte of al the hostes of them of the Easte. And they that were slayne were a hundred & twentye thousand men that drew swerdes.
Judges 8:11 And Gedeon went thorow them that dwell in tabernacles on the east syde of Nobah and Iebahah, & smote the hoste: for the hoste dyd cast no perelles.
Judges 8:12 Zebah and Zalmona fledde. But he folowed after them, and toke the two Kynges of the Madianites, Zebah and Zalmona and discomforted all the hoste.
Judges 8:13 And Gedeon the sonne of Ioas returned from battel, the sonne beyng yet vp,
Judges 8:14 & caughte a ladde of the men of Socoth, and enquered of hym. And he wrote him of the Lordes & Elders of Socoth .lxxvij. men.
Judges 8:15 Then he came vnto the men of Socoth and sayde: Beholde Zebah and Zalmona wyth whiche ye caste me in the tethe, sayinge: are the handes of Zebah & Zalmona all redye in thyne hande, that we shulde geue bread vnto thy faynte men.
Judges 8:16 And he toke the elders of the cytie, and thornes of the wyldernesse & breers, and al to tare them therewyth.
Judges 8:17 And he brake doune the toure of Phanuel, and slewe the men of the cytye.
Judges 8:18 And then sayde vnto Zebah and Zalmona, what maner men were they whyche ye slew at Thabor? and they aunswered, the lykenesse of the & them is all one, euen after the fashyon of the chyldren of a kyng.
Judges 8:19 And he sayd: they were my brethren, euen my mothers chyldren, & as trulye as the Lord lyueth, yf ye had saued theyr liues, I wolde not sleye you.
Judges 8:20 And he sayd vnto Iether hys eldest sonne, vp, and slee them. But the ladde drue not hys swerde, for he feared, because he was yet young.
Judges 8:21 Then Zebah and Zalmona sayde. Ryse thou & fall vpon vs, for as the man is so is hys strength. And Gedeon arose & slewe them: & he toke awaye the Chaynes that were on theyr camels neckes.
Judges 8:22 Then the men of Israel sayde vnto Gedeon Raygne ouer vs, both thou, thy sonne and thy sonnes sonne, for thou hast delyuered vs oute of the handes of the Madianites.
Judges 8:23 And Gedeon said vnto them, I wyl not raygne ouer you, nether shall my chyldren raygne ouer you, but the Lorde shall raygne ouer you.
Judges 8:24 Neuerthelater Gedeon sayde vnto them: I wolde desyre a certayne requeste of you euen that you wolde geue me euerye man the earynges of hys praye. For they had golden earynges, because they were Ismaelites.
Judges 8:25 And they sayd: we wyll do it. And they spreed a mantell, and dyd cast there into euerye man the earynges of hys pray.
Judges 8:26 And the weyght of the golden earynges was a thousande & seuen hundred sycles of golde, besydes brouches, ouches and garmentes of skarlet that were of the kynges of Madian, & besyde the chaynes, that were about theyr camels neckes.
Judges 8:27 And Gedeon made an Ephod therof, & put it in hys cytye Ephrah. And all Israell went a whoring after hym there, whiche thyng was the ruyne of Gedeons house.
Judges 8:28 Thus were the Madianinites brought lowe before the chyldren of Israel, so that they lift vp theyr heades no more And the contreye was in quyetnesse fourtye yeares in the dayes of Gedeon.
Judges 8:29 And Ierobaal the sonne of Ioas went and dwelte in hys owne house.
Judges 8:30 And Gedeon had .lxx. sonnes of hys bodye begotten, for he had many wyues.
Judges 8:31 And hys concubyne that dwelt in Sichem bare him a sonne also, whose name he called Abimelech.
Judges 8:32 And Gedeon the sonne of Ioas dyed, when he was of a good age, & was buryed in the buryal of Ioas hys father euen in Ephrah that pertayned vnto the father of the Ezrytes.
Judges 8:33 But as sone as Gedeon was dead, the chyldren of Israel turned away, and went a whoryng after Baal, and made Baal berith theyr God,
Judges 8:34 & thought not on the Lorde theyr God which had delyuered them out of the handes of all theyr enemyes on euery syde.
Judges 8:35 Nether shewed they mercy on the house of Ierobaal, otherwyse called Gedeon, accordyng to all the goodnesse which he shewed them.

CHAPTER: 9

Judges 9:1 For Abimelech the sonne of Ierobaal went to Sichem, vnto hys mothers brethren, & communed wt them, & with al hys mothers, fathers kynred saying:
Judges 9:2 say I pray you, in the eares of all the enhabytours of Sichem: whether is better for you that al the sonnes of Ierobaal whiche are .lxx. personnes raigne ouer you, eyther that one raygne ouer you. And remember therto, that I am youre bones and your flesh.
Judges 9:3 And his mothers brethren rehersed of hym in the audience of al the Citezens of Sichem, all these wordes, & moued theyr hartes to folowe Abimelech, in that they sayd how he was theyr brother.
Judges 9:4 And thei gaue him .lxx. peces of syluer out of the house of Baal Berith, wyth whiche Abimelech hyred Iehel, and lyght persons which went with him.
Judges 9:5 And they went vnto his fathers house at Ephrah, & slewe all his brethren, the sonnes of Ierobaal, euen .lxx. personnes wyth one stone. Notwithstandynge yet Ioatham the youngest sonne of Ierobaal escaped: for he hyd hym selfe.
Judges 9:6 And all the cytezens of Sichem gathered together wyth all the house of Mello, & went and made Abimelech kynge at a certen ocke that was by Sichem.
Judges 9:7 And when it was tolde Ioatham, he went & stode in the toppe of mount Garizim, & lyfte vp hys voyce & called, & sayd vnto them: Herken vnto me you citezens of Sichem, that God may herken vnto you.
Judges 9:8 The trees went to anoynt a Kynge ouer them, & sayde vnto the olyue tree raygne ouer vs.
Judges 9:9 But the olyue tree sayd vnto them: shuld I leaue my fattenesse which both God & man prayseth in me, and go to be promoted ouer the trees.
Judges 9:10 Then sayde the trees to the fygge tree, come thou and be kyng ouer vs.
Judges 9:11 And the fygge tree aunswered them, shuld I forsake my swetnes & my good frute, & shuld go to be promoted ouer the trees.
Judges 9:12 Then sayde the trees vnto the vyne, come thou & be Kyng ouer vs.
Judges 9:13 And the vyne aunswered, shulde I leaue my wyne that cheareth both God & man & go to be promoted ouer the trees.
Judges 9:14 Then said all the trees vnto the fyrre bushe come thou and ragne ouer vs.
Judges 9:15 And the fyrre bushe sayd vnto the trees: yf it be true that ye wyl anoint me Kynge ouer you, then come and reste vnder my shadowe, & ye shall se that a fyre shall come out of the fyrre bushe, & waste the Cyper trees of Lybanon.
Judges 9:16 And euen so now, yf ye haue done trulye & vncorruptlye to make Abimelech kyng. And yf ye haue dealte well wyth Ierobaal & hys house, & haue done vnto hym according to the deseruynge of hys handes,
Judges 9:17 for as muche as my father fought for you, and aduentured his lyfe And rydde you out of the handes of the Madianites.
Judges 9:18 And ye are rysen vp agaynst my fathers house thys daye. And haue slayne hys chyldren, euen .lxx. persones wyth one stone and haue made Abimelech the sonne of hys mayde seruaunt Kynge ouer the cytezens of Sichem, because he is youre brother,
Judges 9:19 yf then ye haue dealte purelye and truelye wyth Ierobaal & wyth hys house this day: then reioyce ye in Abimelech, and let hym also reioyce in you.
Judges 9:20 But yf you haue not dealte trulye, then I praye God a fyre maye come oute of Abymelech & consume the cytezens of Sichem and the house of Mello. And that there come a fyre out of the cytezens of Sichem, and oute of the house of Mello, and consume Abimelech.
Judges 9:21 And Ioatham ranne awaye and fledde & wente to Beer, & dwelte there, for feare of Abimelech hys brother.
Judges 9:22 When Abimelech had raygned thre yere
Judges 9:23 God sent an hate betwene Abymelech & the cytezens of Sichem. And the cytezens of Sichem rayled vpon Abimelech,
Judges 9:24 and wyshed that the wyckednes done to the .lxx. sonnes of Ieroboal myght come on hym, and layde the bloude of them vnto Abimelech theyr brother which slewe them, & vnto the other citezens of Sichem whiche ayded hym in the kyllyng of his brethren.
Judges 9:25 And the cytezens of Sichem set men to laye awayte for hym in the toppe of the mountaynes, which men robbed all that came a longe the waye by them. And it was tolde Abymelech.
Judges 9:26 And Gaal the sonne of Abed & his brethren went & gat them to Sichem. And the men of Sichem, put theyr confidence in hym.
Judges 9:27 And they went out into the feldes, & gathered in theyr grapes & troade them, & made mery: and went into the house of theyr God, & dyd eate & dryncke & cursed Abimelech.
Judges 9:28 And Gaal the sonne of Abed sayde: what is Abimelech? and what is Sichem? that we shuld serue him, is he not the sonne of Ierobaal? and Zebul is his offycer? serue suche as come of Hemor the father of Sichem, for what reason is it that we shulde serue him?
Judges 9:29 wold God thys people were vnder my hande, then I wolde take Abimelech oute of the waye. And one sayd vnto Abimelech: make thyne hosts greater and go oute.
Judges 9:30 And when Zebul the ruler of the cytye hearde the wordes of Gaal the sonne of Abed he was wroth
Judges 9:31 and sent messengers vnto Abimelech pryuely saying: Beholde Gaal the sonne of Abed and hys brethren be come to Sichem: and beholde they set the cytye agaynste the.
Judges 9:32 Now therfore vp by nyghte, bothe thou and all the people that is wyth the, and lye in wayte in the feldes.
Judges 9:33 And ryse erly in the mornynge as sone as the sunne is vp, and come vpon the cytye. And when he & the people that is with him come out agaynst the, do to him what thyne handes shalbe able.
Judges 9:34 And Abimelech rose vp, & all the people that were with him, by nyght. And they layde awayt to the cytye in foure companies,
Judges 9:35 And Gaal the sonne of Abed went oute & stode in the entrynge of the gate of the cytye. And Abimelech rose vp & the folcke that were with hym, from laying awayt.
Judges 9:36 And when Gaal sawe the people, he sayd to Zebul: Beholde there come people doune from the toppe of the mountaynes. And Zebul sayde vnto him: the shadow of the hylles seme men vnto the.
Judges 9:37 And Gaal aunswered agayne & sayd: se there come folcke doune by the mydle of the land, & another companye come a longe by the charmars Ocke.
Judges 9:38 Then sayde Zebul vnto hym: where is now thy mouthe that sayde, what felow is Abimelech, that we shulde serue him. These are the people that thou so despysedest. Go oute now a feloushyppe & fyght with them.
Judges 9:39 And Gaal went out before the cytezens of Sichem, & fought with Abimelech
Judges 9:40 And Abimelech chased him that he fled before him & manye were ouerthrowen and slayne, euen vntyll they came vnto the enteryng of the gate.
Judges 9:41 And then Abimelech went & dwelt at Arumah. And then Zebul thrust out Gaal & his brethren, & wolde not suffer them to dwelle in Sichem.
Judges 9:42 And on the morowe the people went out into the felde. And it was tolde Abimelech.
Judges 9:43 And he toke his people & deuyded them into thre companies, and laye awayte in the feldes. And when he sawe that the people were come out of the citye, he ranne vpon them and layde vpon them.
Judges 9:44 And Abimelech and the companyes that were wt him, ranne & stode in the entrynge of the gate of the cytie. And the two other companyes ranne vpon all the people that were in the feldes & slue them.
Judges 9:45 And then Abimelech fought agaynste the cytye all that daye, & toke it, & slew the people that was therin, & destroyed the cytye & sowed salt in the place.
Judges 9:46 And when all the men of the toure of Sichem hearde that, they entred into a stronge holde of the house of theyr God Baal Berith.
Judges 9:47 And when it was tolde Abimelech, that all the men of the toure of Sichem were gathered together,
Judges 9:48 he gat hym to mount Zelmon, both he & al that were wt him, & toke axes with him, & cut doune an arme of a tree, & toke it vp, & put it on hys shoulder, & sayde vnto the folcke that were wyth hym, whatsoeuer ye se me do, spede youre selues & do lykewyse.
Judges 9:49 And all the people cut doune also euery man a bough, & folowed Abimelech, and put them into the holde, and set the holde a fyre vpon them: so that al the men of the toure of Sichem were slayne, vpon a thousande persones what of men and wemen together.
Judges 9:50 Then went Abimelech to Thebez & beseged it, & toke it.
Judges 9:51 But there was a strong toure in the myddes of the cytye, & thyther ranne al the men & wemen, & al the cytezens of the cytye & shut it to them, and gotte them vp vpon the toppe of the toure.
Judges 9:52 Then came Abimelech vnto the toure & foughte agaynst it, & went harde vnto the enteryng of the gate, to set it on fyre.
Judges 9:53 But a woman cast a pece of a mylstone vpon hys head, & all to brake hys brayne panne.
Judges 9:54 Then Abimelech called hastelye vnto the younge man that bare hys harnes, and sayde vnto him: drawe thy swerde and slee me, that men saye not of me, a woman slewe him. And hys ladde thrust hym thorowe, and he dyed.
Judges 9:55 And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed, euerye man vnto hys owne house.
Judges 9:56 And thus al the wickednesse of Abimelech which he hyd vnto hys father, in sleyng his .lxx. brethren,
Judges 9:57 & therto al the wyckednesse of the men of Sichem, God dyd bryng vpon theyr heades: And vpon them came the curse of Ioatham the sonne of Ierobaal.

CHAPTER: 10

Judges 10:1 After Abimelech there arose, to defende Israel, one Thola, the sonne of Phuah, the sonne of Dodo, a man of Isacar, which dwelt in Samir in mounte Ephraim.
Judges 10:2 And he iudged Israel .xxiij. yere, & then dyed & was buryed in Samir.
Judges 10:3 And after him arose Iair a Galaadyte, which iudged Israel .xxij. yeare.
Judges 10:4 And he had .xxx. sonnes that rode on .xxx. Asse coltes, & had .xxx. cytyes for them, which are called the tounes of Iair vnto this daye, & are in the lande of Galaad.
Judges 10:5 And Iair dyed, and was buryed in Kamon.
Judges 10:6 And the chyldren of Israel wrought wyckednesse yet agayne, in the syght of the Lorde & serued Baalim & Astharoth, & the Goddes of Syria, & the Goddes of Sidon, the Goddes of Moab, the Goddes of the chyldren of Ammon, & the Goddes of the Philystines, & forsoke the Lord & serued him not.
Judges 10:7 And the Lord was wroth wyth Israell, & solde them into the handes of the Philistines, and into the handes of the chyldren of Ammon:
Judges 10:8 which pyld & oppressed the chyldren of Israel in those dayes .xviij. yeare, all that were on the other syde Iordan in the lande of the Amorytes in Galaad.
Judges 10:9 Moreouer the chyldren of Ammon went ouer Iordan to fyghte agaynste Iuda, Beniamin, and the house of Ephraim: so that Israel was sore combred.
Judges 10:10 Then the chyldren of Israel cryed vnto the Lorde, sayinge: we haue synned agaynste the: for we haue forsaken oure owne God, and haue serued Baalim.
Judges 10:11 And the Lorde sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel: dyd not the Egypcyans, the Amorytes, the chyldren of Ammon, the Phylystynes,
Judges 10:12 the Sidonites, the Ameleckytes, & the Maonites, oppresse you? And ye cryed to me, & I delyuered you out of theyr handes.
Judges 10:13 And for all that ye haue forsaken me, and serue straunge Goddes, wherfore I wyl help you no more.
Judges 10:14 But go, and crye vnto the Goddes which ye haue chosen, and let them saue you in the tyme of youre trybulacyon.
Judges 10:15 But the chyldren of Israel sayde vnto the Lorde we haue synned: do thou vnto vs whatsoeuer please the, & delyuer vs onelye at thys tyme.
Judges 10:16 And they put awaye the straunge Goddes from them, and serued the Lorde. And the myserye of Israel greued hys soule.
Judges 10:17 Then the chyldren of Ammon gathered together, & pitched in Galaad. And the chyldren of Israell gathered them together & pytched in Mazphah.
Judges 10:18 And the companye of the Lordes of Galaad sayd eche to other, whosoeuer wyl begynne the battel agaynst the chyldren of Ammon, the same shalbe head ouer all the enhabiters of Galaad.

CHAPTER: 11

Judges 11:1 And there was one Iephthath a Galaadite, a strong man, which was the sonne of an harlot. How be it Galaad begatte Iephthah.
Judges 11:2 But Galaades wyfe bare hym sonnes, which when they were come to age, thrust out of Iephthah, & sayd vnto him: thou shalt not enheret in our fathers house, for thou art the sonne of a straunge woman.
Judges 11:3 Then Iephthah fledde from hys brethren, & dwelt in the lande of Tob. And there gathered Idle people to Iephthah, & went out with him.
Judges 11:4 But it chaunced in processe of tyme, that the children of Ammon made warre agaynst Israel,
Judges 11:5 then the elbers of Galaad went & fet Iephthah out of the lambe of Tob,
Judges 11:6 & sayd vnto hym: come & be oure captayne, & let vs fyght with the chyldren of Ammon.
Judges 11:7 And Iephthah sayd vnto the elders of Galaad. Dyd not ye hate me, & expell me out of my fathers house? how happeneth it then that you come vnto me now in tyme of your trybulacyon?
Judges 11:8 And the elders of Galaad aunswered Iephthah. Therfore we turne agayne to the now, that thou go with vs, & fight against the chyldren of Ammon, & be oure head ouer al the enhabiters of Galaad.
Judges 11:9 And Iephthah said vnto the elders of Galaad: If ye brynge me home agayne to fyght wyth the chyldren of Ammon then yf the Lord delyuer them before me, I shalbe your head.
Judges 11:10 And the elders of Galaad sayde to Iephthah, the Lorde be witnesse betwene vs, yf we do not accordynge to thy wordes.
Judges 11:11 Then Iephthah went with the elders of Galaad. And the people made hym heade and ruler ouer them. And Iephthah rehersed all hys wordes in Mazphah.
Judges 11:12 Then Iephthah sent messengers vnto the Kynge of the chyldren of Ammon, sayinge: what aileth the with me that thou comest vpon me to fyght agaynst my lande?
Judges 11:13 And the King of the chyldren of Ammon aunswered vnto the messengers of Iephthah, because Israel toke away my land, when they came out of Egipt: euen from Arnon vnto Iabok, & from thence vnto Iordan. Now therfore restore those landes agayne wyth fayre meanes.
Judges 11:14 And Iephthah sent messengers agayne vnto the chyldren of Ammon,
Judges 11:15 & sayde vnto hym: thus sayth Iephthah. Israel toke not awaye the lande of Moab, nor the land of the chyldren of Ammon.
Judges 11:16 But when Israel came out of Egypt, they walked thorow the wyldernesse, euen vnto the red sea & came to Cades,
Judges 11:17 & sente messengers vnto the kynge of Edom sayinge: let vs we praye the go thorow thy lande. But the kynge of Edom wolde not agre therto. And in lyke maner they sente vnto the Kynge of Moab, but he wolde not consent. And so Israel abode styll in Cades.
Judges 11:18 And then they wente a longe thorowe the wildernesse, and compased the lande of Edom, & the lande of Moab, and came a longe by the eastsyde of the land of Moab, and pitched on the other syde the riuer of Arnon, and came not wythin the coastes of the Moabites: for Arnon was their vtmost border.
Judges 11:19 And then Israel sent messengers vnto Sehon, Kynge of the Amorites, and Kynge of Hesbon, and said vnto him: Let vs passe thorow thy land vnto our owne countreye.
Judges 11:20 But Sehon trusted not Israel, to go thorow hys coastes, but gathered all his people together and pytched in Iazah, and fought wyth Israell.
Judges 11:21 But the Lord God of Israel delyuered Sehon and al his folcke into the handes of Israel. And so Israel smote them and conquered al the lande of the Amorites, the enhabiters of the sayde countreye.
Judges 11:22 And they conquered al the coastes of the Amorites, from Arnon vnto Iabok, and from the wyldernesse vnto Iordan.
Judges 11:23 So now seyng the Lorde God of Israel hath cast out the Amorites before his people, shouldeste thou possesse the land?
Judges 11:24 Naye, but what people Camos thy God dryueth out, that land possesse thou. But whatsoeuer nacyons the Lorde oure God expelleth, that land ought we to enioye.
Judges 11:25 And therto art thou better then Balack the sonne of Zephor Kynge of Moab? dyd he stryue wyth Israell or fyghte againste them?
Judges 11:26 all the wyle Israell dwelte in Hesbon and her tounes, and in Aroer and her tounes, and in all the cytyes that be a longe by the coastes of Arnon .iij. hundred yeres? why dydest thou not recouer them in all that space,
Judges 11:27 wherfore I haue not synned agaynste the. But thou doest me wronge, to warre agaynste me. The Lorde therfore be iudge this daye, betwene the chyldren of Israel, and the children of Ammon.
Judges 11:28 How be it the Kynge of the children of Ammon harkened not vnto the wordes of Iephthah, which he sent him.
Judges 11:29 Then the spirite of the Lorde came vpon Iephthah. And he passed ouer Galaad & Manasses, & came to Mazphah that lyeth in Galaad, and from thence vnto the children of Ammon.
Judges 11:30 And Iephthah vowed a vowe vnto the Lorde and sayd: If thou shalt deliuer the children of Ammon into my handes,
Judges 11:31 then that thinge that cometh out of the dores of my house agaynst me, when I come home in peace, from the children of Ammon, shalbe the Lordes, and I wil offer it vp a burntoffering.
Judges 11:32 And so Iephthah went vnto the children of Ammon to fyght wyth them. And the Lord deliuered them into his handes.
Judges 11:33 And he smote them from Aroer vnto Menith .xx. cytyes. And so forth to the plaine of the vineiardes, and made an exceding great slaughter. And thus the chyldren of Ammon were brought vnder, before the chyldren of Israel.
Judges 11:34 Then Iephthah came to Mazphah vnto hys house. And se, his doughter came oute agaynste hym, wyth tymberelles & daunses, which was his onely child, so that beside her, he had neyther sonne nor doughter.
Judges 11:35 And when he sawe her, he renth his clothes, & said: Alas my doughter, thou hast made me stoupe and art one of them, that trouble me. For I haue opened my mouth vnto the Lorde, & can not go backe.
Judges 11:36 And she sayd vnto him: my father, yf thou haue opened thy mouth vnto the Lord, then do wyth me accordinge to that proceded out of thy mouthe, for as muche as the Lorde hath aduenged the of thyne enemyes the children of Ammon.
Judges 11:37 And she sayde vnto her father, do this muche for me: let me alone two monethes, that I may go doune to the mountaines, and bewaile my virginite with my felowes.
Judges 11:38 And he sayde: go, and so he sente her away two monethes. And she went with her companyons, and lamented her maydenhead vpon the mountaines.
Judges 11:39 And after the two monethes, she turned againe vnto her father, which dyd with her accordinge to his vowe, which he had vowed, & so she knewe no man. And it became an ordinaunce in Israell yere by yere,
Judges 11:40 that the doughters of Israel shoulde go and lamente the doughter of Iephthah the Galaadite, foure dayes in a yere.

CHAPTER: 12

Judges 12:1 And the men of Ephraim gathered themselues together, & wente northwarde, and sayde vnto Iephthah: Wherfore wenteste thou to fyght with the children of Ammon, & dydest not cal vs to go wt the? we wil therfore burne thine house vpon the, wyth fyre.
Judges 12:2 And Iephthah sayde vnto them: I & my people were at greate stryfe with the children of Ammon. And I called you. But ye deliuered me not out of their handes.
Judges 12:3 And when I sawe that ye delyuered me not, I put my lyfe in my handes & went vpon the chyldren of Ammon, And the Lorde delyuered them into my handes. Wherfore then are ye come vpon me to fyght wyth me.
Judges 12:4 And Iephthah gathered together all the men of Galaad, and fought with the Ephraites. And the men of Galaad smote the Ephraites, because they sayd: Ye Galaadites are but runneagates of Ephraim among the Ephraites, and the Manassites.
Judges 12:5 Moreouer the men of Galaad toke the passages of Iordan from the Ephraytes. And when those Ephraytes, that were escaped, sayde: let vs go ouer. Then the men of Galaad sayde vnto them: Ye are Ephraytes, and they sayde naye.
Judges 12:6 Then the other answered: then saye Scyboleth. And they sayde Syboleth, and coulde not so pronounce, where vpon the other toke them, and slewe them at the passages of Iordan. And there were ouerthrowen at the tyme of the Ephraytes fourty thousande.
Judges 12:7 And when Iephthah had iudged Israel .vi. yere. he died, and was buryed in one of the cytyes of Galaad.
Judges 12:8 After thys man iudged Israel one Abezan of Bethlehem,
Judges 12:9 and he had .xxx. sonnes, & .xxx. doughters, & sent also hys .xxx. doughters out, & toke .xxx. other in, for hys sonnes. And when Abezan had iudged Israel .vij. yere
Judges 12:10 he dyed, and was buryed at Bethlehem.
Judges 12:11 And after him Elon a Zabulonite iudged Israel ten yere, and he dyed,
Judges 12:12 and was buried in Aialon, in the countreye of Zabulon.
Judges 12:13 And after him, Abdon the sonne of Hellel a Pharathonite iudged Israell.
Judges 12:14 And he had fourtye sonnes, and thyrtye neuewes, that rode on .lxx. asse coltes. And when Abdon the sonne of Helle the Pharatonite had iudged Israell .viij. yere,
Judges 12:15 he dyed, and was buried in Pharthon, the land of Ephraim in the mount of the Amaleckites.

CHAPTER: 13

Judges 13:1 And the chyldren of Israell began again to committe wickednesse in the syght of the Lorde. And the Lorde delyuered them into the handes of the Phylistynes fourtye yere.
Judges 13:2 And there was a man in Zaraah of the kynred of the Dannites, named Manoah, whose wyfe was barren and bare not.
Judges 13:3 And the Angel of the Lord apeared vnto his wyfe and sayd vnto her: Behold, thou art barren and bearest not: But thou shalt conceyue and beare a sonne.
Judges 13:4 And nowe beware, and dryncke no wyne, nor stronge drincke, neither eate any vncleane thinge:
Judges 13:5 for se, thou shalt conceiue and beare a sonne. And there maye no rasor or sherers come on his head: For the lad shalbe an abstayner vnto God, euen from the tyme of his byrth. And he shal begynne to delyuer Israel out of the handes of the Phylystynes.
Judges 13:6 Then the wyfe wente and tolde her husbande saying: a man of God came vnto me, and the fashyon of him was lyke the fashyon of an Angel of God, exceading fearful: But I asked him not whence he was, neyther told he me his name.
Judges 13:7 And he sayd vnto me: beholde thou shalt be wyth chylde and beare a sonne, and now dryncke no wyne nor stronge drincke, neyther any vncleane thinge: for the lad shalbe an abstayner to God euen from hys byrth to the daye of his death.
Judges 13:8 Then Manoah made intercession to the Lorde, and sayde: I praye the my Lorde let the man of God, which thou sendest come ones more vnto vs and teache vs, what we shal do vnto the lad when he is borne.
Judges 13:9 And God heard the voice of Manoah, and the angel of God came agayne vnto the wyfe, as she sat in the feldes: But Manoah her husbande was not wyth her.
Judges 13:10 Then the wyfe made haste and ranne and shewed her husbande and sayde to hym: Beholde the man apeared vnto me that came the other daye vnto me.
Judges 13:11 And Manoah arose and wente after hys wyfe, and came to the man and sayde vnto him: art thou the man that spakeste vnto my wyfe? And he sayd, ye.
Judges 13:12 Then Manoah sayde, now when thy saying is come to passe, what shalbe the maner of the chylde, and what shal he do?
Judges 13:13 And the Angel of the Lorde sayd vnto Manoah: thy wife must abstaine from al that I sayde vnto her:
Judges 13:14 she maye eate of nothynge, that cometh of the vyne tree, nor drincke wine or stronge dryncke, nor eate anye vncleane thynge: But must obserue all that I bad her.
Judges 13:15 Then sayde Manoah vnto the Angell of the Lord, graunte vs to tarye vntil we haue made redye a kyd and haue set it before the.
Judges 13:16 And the angel of the Lorde sayd vnto Manoah: though thou make me abyde, I will not eate of thy meate. And moreouer, yf thou wylt prepare a burntoffryng, that thou must offer vnto the Lord. For Manoah wist not that it was an angel of the Lorde.
Judges 13:17 And Manoah sayd vnto the angel of the Lord: what is thy name, that when thy sayinge is come to passe, we maye do the some worshippe?
Judges 13:18 And the angell of the Lorde sayde vnto him: why askest thou after my name? when it is maruelouse.
Judges 13:19 And Manoah toke a Kydde wyth a meate offering, and offered it vpon a rocke vnto the Lord. And the angel dyd wonderslye, Manoah and his wyfe lokyng vpon.
Judges 13:20 For when the flamme came vp out of the aultare, the angel of the Lord ascended vp in the flame of the aultare. And Manoah and hys wyfe loked vpon and fell flat on their faces vnto the grounde:
Judges 13:21 But the angel of the Lord dyd no more apeare vnto Manoah and hys wyfe. And then Manoah knew that it was an angel of the Lord,
Judges 13:22 and sayd vnto hys wyfe: we shal surelye dye, because we haue sene God.
Judges 13:23 But his wyfe said vnto him: If the Lorde woulde kylle vs, he woulde not haue receyued a burntoffrynge & a meat offryng of our handes, neyther would he haue shewed vs all these thynges, nor would haue tolde vs as he hath of thinges to come.
Judges 13:24 And the wyfe bare a sonne, and called his name Samson. And the lad grewe, and the Lord blessed him.
Judges 13:25 And the spirite of the Lorde beganne fyrste to be wyth the house of Dan, betwene Zaraah and Esthaol.

CHAPTER: 14

Judges 14:1 Samson wente doune to Thamnath, & sawe a woman in Thamnath of the doughters of the Philistines,
Judges 14:2 and came vp and tolde hys father and his mother, and sayde: I haue sene a woman in Thamnath of the doughters of the Philistines. And nowe geue her me to wyfe.
Judges 14:3 Then hys father and mother sayde vnto him, is there neuer a woman of the douhgters of thy brethren, among al my people, but that thou muste go and fette a wyfe of the vncircumcised Philistines? And Samson sayd vnto hys father, geue me thys woman for she pleaseth me well.
Judges 14:4 But hys father and mother wist not that it was the Lordes doing, and that he sought an occasyon of the Phylystines, which at that tyme raigned ouer Israel.
Judges 14:5 Then went Samson and his father and hys mother doune to Thamnath. And when they came to the vyneyardes of Thamnath: beholde a young Lyon rored vpon hym.
Judges 14:6 And the spirite of the Lorde came vpon hym. And he tare hym, as a man woulde rent a Kydde, and yet had nothing in his hande. Neuerthelater he tolde not his father & mother, what he had done.
Judges 14:7 And he went doune and talked wyth the woman, whiche semed well fauored in the syght of Samson.
Judges 14:8 And within a shorte space after, as he went thether againe to take her to wyfe, he turned out of the waye, to se the carkasse of the Lion. And beholde there was a swarme of bees in the carkasse of the Lyon, and honye.
Judges 14:9 And he toke of the honye in hys handes and wente eatyng, and came to hys father and mother and gaue them also. And they dyd eate. But he tolde not them, that he had taken the hony out of the carkasse of the Lyon.
Judges 14:10 And when his father was come vnto the woman, Samson made there a feaste, for so vsed the younge men to do.
Judges 14:11 And when her frendes sawe him, they brought .xxx. companyons to beare felowshippe.
Judges 14:12 And Samson sayde vnto them: I wyll put furthe a ryddle vnto you. And yf you can declare it wythin .vij. dayes of the feast and fynde it out, I wyll geue you thyrtye shertes, and thyrtye chaunge of garmentes:
Judges 14:13 But and yf you can not declare it me, then shal ye geue me thyrtye shertes & thyrtye chaunge of garmentes. And they answered him, put forth thy rydle and let vs heare it.
Judges 14:14 And he sayde vnto them. Out of the eater came meate: and out of the stronge came swetnesse. And they coulde not in thre dayes expounde the rydle.
Judges 14:15 And when the seuenth day was come, they sayde vnto Samsons wyfe. Flatter wyth thyne husbande, that he maye declare vs the rydle, or elles we wyll burne the and thy fathers house wyth fyre, haue ye called vs to make vs beggers or not?
Judges 14:16 Then Samsons wyfe wepte vnto hym and he said, it can not be, but that thou hatest me & loueste me not: for thou haste put forth a rydle vnto the children of my folke, and wylt not tell me what it meaneth. And he sayde: Beholde, I haue not tolde it my father nor my mother, & should I tell it the?
Judges 14:17 And she wepte vnto him .vij. dayes, while the feaste lasted. And the seuenth day he told her, because she laye so sore vpon him. And she tolde it the chyldren of her folke.
Judges 14:18 And the men of the cytye sayde vnto him the seuenth daye before the sonne went doune. What is sweter then honye, and what is stronger then a Lion? Then sayde he vnto them: If ye had not plowed wyth my caulfe, ye had not founde oute my rydle.
Judges 14:19 Then the spirite of the Lorde came vpon him. And he went doune to Askalon, & slewe thyrtye men of them, and spoyled them, and gaue their garmentes vnto them whiche expounded the rydle. And he was wroth and went vp to his fathers house.
Judges 14:20 But Samsons wyfe was geuen to one of his companyons that bare him companye.

CHAPTER: 15

Judges 15:1 Bvt it chaunsed wythin a while after, euen in the tyme of whete herueste, that Samson visited his wyfe wyth a Kydde. And when he supposed to haue gone in vnto hys wife into the chamber, her father woulde not suffre hym to go in:
Judges 15:2 But sayde: I thought that thou haddest hated her, & therfore gaue I her vnto one of thy companions. Howe be it, her younger syster is fayrer then she. Take her in steade of the other.
Judges 15:3 Then said Samson vnto them: Nowe I am blamelesse concerninge the Phylystynes, though I do them euill.
Judges 15:4 And Samson wente oute and caughte thre hundred Foxes, and toke fyrebrandes, and fastened tayle to tayle, and put a fyre brande in the middes, betwene two tayles.
Judges 15:5 And he set the fyrebrandes on fyre, and put them into the corne of the Philistines, and burnte vp both the reped corne and also the standinge, wyth bynes and olyues.
Judges 15:6 Then the Philistines asked, who had done that? And it was tolde them, that Samson the sonne in lawe of the Thamnite, because he had taken hys wyfe, and geuen her to one of his companions. And the Philistines came and burnte her and her father wyth fyre.
Judges 15:7 And Samson sayde vnto them: shoulde ye do so? I wyl surelye be aduenged of you, and then I wyl cease.
Judges 15:8 And he smote them legge and thygh wyth a mightye plage. And then he wente and dwelte in the caue of the rocke Etam.
Judges 15:9 Then the Philistines came vp and pytched agaynst Iuda and laye in Lehi.
Judges 15:10 And the men of Iuda sayde, why are ye come agaynst vs? And they answered: to binde Samson are we come, euen to do him as he hath done to vs.
Judges 15:11 Then thre thousande men of Iuda wente doune to the caue of the rocke Etam, and said to Samson: wotest thou not that the Phylystines are rulers ouer vs? Wherfore then hast thou serued vs thus? And he answered them, as they serued me, so haue I serued them.
Judges 15:12 And they sayde vnto him, we are come to bynde the and to delyuer the into the handes of the Philistines. And Samson sayde vnto them: swere vnto me, that ye shal not hurt me youre selues.
Judges 15:13 And they sayde we wyll not hurte the, saue onelye bynde the and delyuer the vnto their handes: But we wyll not kylle the. And so they bounde him wyth two newe cordes and broughte him vp from the rocke.
Judges 15:14 And when he came to Lehi, the Philystines shouted agaynst him. And the spirite of the Lord came vpon him, and the cordes that were vpon hys armes became as flaxe that was burnt with fyre, and the bandes loused from of his handes.
Judges 15:15 And he founde a Iaw bone of a rotten Asse, & put forth hys hande & caught it, and slue a thousand men therwyth.
Judges 15:16 And Samson sayde: wyth the Iawe of an asse, haue I made heapes: wyth the Iawe of an asse haue I slayne a thousande men.
Judges 15:17 And when he had left speakyng, he cast awaye the Iawe oute of hys hande and called the place Ramath Lehi.
Judges 15:18 And he was sore a thyrste, & called on the Lorde and sayde: Thou Lorde hast geuen this greate victorye, thorowe the hand of thy seruaunt. And now I muste dye for thyrst, and falle into the handes of the vncircumcised.
Judges 15:19 But God brake a greate tothe, that was in the Iawe, and there came water therout. And when he had droncke, his spirite came againe, and he was refresshed, wherfore the name therof was called, the welle of the caller on, which is in Lehi vnto this day.
Judges 15:20 And he iudged Israel in the dayes of the Philistines twentye yeres.

CHAPTER: 16

Judges 16:1 Then went Samson to Gaza, & saw there an whore, and wente in vnto her.
Judges 16:2 And it was told the Gazytes, that Samson was come thether. And they wente aboute and layde awayte for him al nighte in the gate of the cyty, but were styll at the night saying: Tarye tyl the morning that it be day, and then let vs kyl him.
Judges 16:3 And Samson toke his rest tyl midnyght, and arose at midnight and toke the dores of the gate of the cytye, and the two syde postes, and rent them of, barres and all, and put them vpon his shoulders, and caryed them vp to the toppe of an hyll that lyeth before Hebron.
Judges 16:4 And after that he loued a woman, vpon the ryuer of Sorek, called Dalilah,
Judges 16:5 vnto whom came the Lordes of the Philistines, and sayd vnto her: Flatter wyth hym and se wherin hys greate strength lyeth, and by what meane we maye haue power ouer hym, that we may bynde hym, to brynge hym vnder, and we wyll geue euerye man eleuen hundred syluerlynges.
Judges 16:6 And Dalilah sayde to Samson. Oh, tell me where thy great strength lyeth, & yf thou were bounde, wherwith men might constraine the.
Judges 16:7 And Samson sayde vnto her. If men bounde me wyth seuen grene wyththes that were neuer dryed, I shoulde be weake and as another man.
Judges 16:8 And then the Lordes of the Philistines brought her seuen wyththes that were yet grene and neuer dried, and she bound him therwyth.
Judges 16:9 Notwythstandynge she had men lyinge in waite wyth her in the chambre. And she sayde vnto him, the Philistines be vpon the Samson. And he brake the cordes as a stryng of towe breaketh, when it fealeth fyre. And so his strength was not knowen.
Judges 16:10 Then sayde Dalilah to Samson: Se thou hast mocked me and tolde me lyes. Nowe yet tell me I praye the, wherwith thou mighteste be bounde.
Judges 16:11 And he sayde: If I were bounde wyth newe ropes that neuer were occupyed, then shoulde I be weake, and as another man.
Judges 16:12 And Dalilah toke newe ropes and bounde hym therwyth, and sayde vnto hym: the Philistines be vpon the Samson. And there were lyers of wayte in the chamber, and he brake them from of hys armes, as they had bene but a threde.
Judges 16:13 And Dalilah sayde vnto Samson, hetherto thou hast begyled me and tolde me lyes: I praye the yet tell me wherwyth men maye bynde the. And he sayde vnto her. If thou plattedest the seuen lockes of my head with an heare lace
Judges 16:14 and fastnedest them wyth a nayle. And she sayde vnto hym, the Philistines be vpon the Samson. And he awaked out of hys slepe, and plucked and went away wyth the nayle, that was in the plattyng and wyth the heare lace.
Judges 16:15 Then she sayd vnto him: How canst thou say that thou louest me, when thyne hert is not with me: for thou hast mocked me this thre tymes, and haste not tolde, wherin thy great strength lyeth.
Judges 16:16 And as she laye vpon him with her wordes, contynually vexinge of him, his soule was encombred euen vnto the death.
Judges 16:17 And he tolde her all his herte, and sayde vnto her: there neuer came raser nor sheres vpon myne head, for I haue bene and abstayner to God euen from my mothers wombe. If myne heare were cut of, my strength woulde go from me, and I shoulde waxe & be lyke all other men.
Judges 16:18 And when Dalilah sawe that he had tolde her all hys herte, she sent for the Phylystynes, sayinge: come vp yet thys ones, for he hath shewed me all hys herte. Then the Lordes of the Philistines came, and brought the money in their handes.
Judges 16:19 And she made hym slepe vpon her lappe, and sent for a man, and cut of the seuen lockes of hys head, and beganne to vexe hym. But hys strength was gone from hym.
Judges 16:20 And she sayd the Philistines be vpon the Samson. And he awoke out of hys slepe, and thoughte to go oute as at other tymes before and shake hym selfe, and wiste not that the Lord was departed from hym.
Judges 16:21 But the Philistines toke hym and put out his eyes, and brought him doune to Gaza, and bounde hym wyth fetters And he was made to grynde in the pryson house,
Judges 16:22 how be it the heare of his head began to grow agayn, after that he was shorne.
Judges 16:23 Then the Lordes of the Philistines gathered them together, for to offer a solempne offringe vnto Dagon their God, and to reioice: for they sayd, our God hath deliuered Samson oure enemie into oure handes.
Judges 16:24 And when the people sawe hym, they praised their God: for they sayd oure God hath delyuered into our handes oure enemye, that destroied oure countreye and slue manye of vs.
Judges 16:25 And when theyr hertes were merye, they sayd: sende for Samson, and let hym playe for vs. And they sette Samson out of the prisonhouse, and he plaied before them, and they set him betwene the pillers.
Judges 16:26 And Samson sayde vnto the lad, that ledd him by the hande: set me that I maye touche the pyllers that the house stand vpon, and that I maye leane to them.
Judges 16:27 And the house was ful of men and women. And there was al the Lordes of the Philistines. And there were vpon the roufe a thre thousand men and women, that behelde how Samson played.
Judges 16:28 And Samson called vnto the Lorde, and sayde: my Lorde Iehouah thynke vpon me, and strengthen me, at this tyme only o God, that I maye be aduenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.
Judges 16:29 And Samson caughte the two middel pyllers, on which the house stode and on which it was borne vp, the one in hys right hande, and the other in hys lefte,
Judges 16:30 and sayde: my soule dye with the Philistines, and bowed them wyth myght. And the house fell vpon the Lordes, and vpon al the people that were therin. And so the dead which he slewe at his death, were mo then they, which he slew in his lyfe.
Judges 16:31 And then his brethren and all the house of his father came doune and toke him vp, and brought hym & buried him betwene Zarah and Esthaol, in the burying place of Manoah his father. And he iudged Israell twenty yere.

CHAPTER: 17

Judges 17:1 There was a man in mount Ephraim, named Micah,
Judges 17:2 which sayde vnto his mother, the eleuen hundred syluerlinges that were taken from the, about which thou cursedst and saidest in myne eares: Beholde the syluer is wyth me for I toke it awaye. Then sayd his mother: blessed be thou my sonne, in the Lord.
Judges 17:3 And so he restored the eleuen hundred syluerlinges to his mother againe. And hys mother sayde: I vowed the syluer vnto the Lord of myne hande for my sonne: to make a grauen ymage and an ymage of metall. Now therfore I geue it the agayne.
Judges 17:4 And he restored the money againe vnto his mother. Then his mother toke two hundred syluerlinges, & put them to a goldsmith, to make therof a grauen ymage and a ymage of metal, whiche remayned in the house of Micah.
Judges 17:5 And the man Micah had a chapel of Gods, and made an Ephod and Images, & fylled the hand of one of his sonnes, which became his priest.
Judges 17:6 For in those dayes there was no kyng in Israel, but euery man dyd what thought hym best.
Judges 17:7 And there was a young man out of Bethlehem Iuda, and out of the kinredes of Iuda: which young man was a Leuite and soiourned there.
Judges 17:8 And the man departed out of the cyty of Bethlehem Iuda, to go dwell where he coulde fynde a place. And he came to mount Ephraim, & to the house of Micah as he iourneyed.
Judges 17:9 And Micah sayde vnto him, whence comeste thou? and the Leuite answered him: I am of Bethlehem Iuda, & go to dwell where I may fynde a place.
Judges 17:10 And Micah sayde vnto hym: dwel with me, and be vnto me a father and a priest. And I wyll geue the ten syluerlynges by yere and rayment of al sortes, and thy meate and dryncke.
Judges 17:11 And the Leuite went and beganne to dwel with the man, and was vnto him as dere, as one of hys owne sonnes.
Judges 17:12 And Micah fylled the hande of the Leuite, and the younge man became his prieste, and continued in the house of Micah.
Judges 17:13 Then sayd Micah, now I am sure that the Lorde wylbe good vnto me, seyinge, I haue a Leuyte to my priest.

CHAPTER: 18

Judges 18:1 In those dayes there was no Kynge in Israell. And in those dayes the trybe of Dan sought them an enheritaunce to dwell in, for vnto that tyme there fell none enheritaunce vnto them amonge the tribe of Israel.
Judges 18:2 And the children of Dan sent of their kynredes fyue men of actiuite, oute of their coastes, euen out of Zaraah and Esthaol, to vewe the lande and searche it out, and sayd vnto them: go & searche out the lande. And they came to mount Ephraim, euen to the house of Micah & lodged there.
Judges 18:3 And when they were come vnto the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the young man the Leuite, & turned in thether, and sayde vnto hym: who brought the hether? and what makest thou in this place? & what hast thou here.
Judges 18:4 And he said vnto them thus and thus dealeth Micah wyth me, and hath hyred me to be his priest.
Judges 18:5 And they sayd vnto him: Aske of God I praye the, that we maye know, whether the way which we go, shalbe prosperous or no.
Judges 18:6 And the priest sayde vnto them: go in peace, for the waye whyche ye go is before the Lorde.
Judges 18:7 Then the fyue men departed and came to Lais, and sawe the people that were therin, how they dwelt carelesse, and after the maner of the Sidons, stylle, and without castyng of parelles, & that no man made any trouble in the lande or vsurped any dominion, and how they were farre from the Sidons, and had no busines wyth any nacion.
Judges 18:8 And they came vnto their brethren, to Zaraah, & Esthaol. And their brethren sayde vnto them: what tydynges bring you?
Judges 18:9 And they said: vp and let vs go vnto them, for we haue sene the lande, that it is verye good. Haste therfore and be not slouthfull to departe, and to go & conquere the land.
Judges 18:10 When ye be come, ye shall come vnto a people that casteth no parelles, and vnto a large countrey: for God hath geuen into youre handes a place, wherin is no lacke of any thinge that is in the worlde.
Judges 18:11 And there departed thence of the kynrede of the Dannites, out of Zaraah and Esthaol sixe hundred men apoynted wyth instrumentes of warre.
Judges 18:12 And they wente and pytched in Kariath Iarim in Iuda. Wherfore the place is called Mahanah Dan vnto thys daye, whyche is on the backsyde of Kariath Iarim.
Judges 18:13 And they went thence vnto mount Ephraim, and came to the house of Micah.
Judges 18:14 Then answered the fyue men that wente to spye oute the countreye of Lais, and sayd vnto their brethren: wot ye not that there is in these houses an Ephod and Images, and a grauen Image of metall? Nowe therfore consydre what ye haue to do.
Judges 18:15 And they turned thetherwarde and came to the house of the younge man the Leuite in the house of Micah, and saluted him peasably.
Judges 18:16 And the sixe hundred men gyrded wyth wepons of warre, whiche were of the chyldren of Dan stode in the enterynge of the gate.
Judges 18:17 And the fyue men that wente to spye out the land, wente in thether & toke the kerued Image, and the Ephod the kerued Image, and the Image of metal. And the priest stode in the enteringe of the gate with the syxe hundred men that were armed vnto battel,
Judges 18:18 while the other went to Micahs house, and fet the kerued Image, the Ephod, the kerued Image and the Image of metall. Then said the priest vnto them: what do ye?
Judges 18:19 and they answered hym, holde thy peace, and put thyne hande vpon thy mouth, and come wyth vs, and be vnto vs a father and a prieste, whether is it better for the to be a prieste vnto the house of one man, or to be prieste vnto a trybe or a kynred in Israell?
Judges 18:20 And the preste was glad, and toke the Ephod and the Images, and the grauen Image, and wente wyth the people.
Judges 18:21 And they turned and departed, and put the chyldren, the catel and their costlye thynges before them.
Judges 18:22 When they were a good waye from the house of Micah, the men that were in the houses that were by Micahs house, made an outcrye, and folowed after the children of Dan & called vnto them.
Judges 18:23 And they turned their faces & sayde vnto Micah, what ayleth the, that thou makeste an outcrye:
Judges 18:24 And he sayde, ye haue taken away my Goddes which I made and also the priest, and go youre wayes with them: And what haue I more, how then saye ye vnto me, what ayleth the?
Judges 18:25 And the chyldren of Dan sayde vnto him, let not thy voyce be heard among vs, leste angrye felowes runne vpon the, and thou lose thy lyfe, wyth the lyues of al thyne housholde to.
Judges 18:26 And so the chyldren of Dan went their wayes. And when Micah sawe that they were to stronge for hym, he turned & wente backe vnto his house agayne.
Judges 18:27 And they toke the thinges whiche Micah had made, and the prieste whiche he had, and went vnto Lais, euen vnto a people that were at reast and without mistruste, and smote them wyth the edge of the swerde, and burnte the cytye wyth fyre.
Judges 18:28 And there was no man to helpe, because it was farre from Sydon, and they had no medelynge wyth anye other nacyon. And the cytye stode in the valeye that lye by Bethrehob. And they builte the cytye and dwelt therin.
Judges 18:29 And called it Dan, after the name of Dan their father, whyche was borne vnto Israell. Howe be it in very deade the name of the cytye was Lays at the begynninge.
Judges 18:30 And the chyldren of Dan, set them vp the grauen Image. And Ionathan the sonne of Gerson, the sonne of Manasses & his sonnes were the priestes vnto the tribe of the Danites, vntyl they were caried awaye oute of the lande captiue.
Judges 18:31 And they set them vp the kerued Image which Micah made, al the whyle the house of God was in Siloh.

CHAPTER: 19

Judges 19:1 It chaunsed in those dayes, when there was no kynge in Israell, that a certain Leuyte dwellyng on the syde of mount Ephraim, toke to wyfe a concubyne out of Bethlehem Iuda:
Judges 19:2 whyche concubyne played the whore in his house, and went away from him, vnto her fathers house to Bethlehem Iuda, and there continued foure monethes.
Judges 19:3 And her husband arose & went after her, to speake frendelye vnto her, and to bringe her home againe, and his lad wyth him and a couple of Asses. And she brought him vnto her fathers house, and when the father of the damosell sawe him, he reioysed of his comyng.
Judges 19:4 And his father in lawe the damoselles father kepte him, that he aboade with him thre dayes, and so they ate and dranke and lodged there.
Judges 19:5 The fourth daye they arose erlye in the mornynge, and the man stode vp to departe. But the damoselles father sayde vnto hys sonne in lawe, comfort thyne herte with a morsel of bread, and then go youre waye.
Judges 19:6 And they sate doune and dyd eate and drynke both of them together. Then sayde the damoselles father vnto the man, go to I praye the and tarye all nyghte, and let thyne hert be merye.
Judges 19:7 How be it the man stode vp to departe: but hys father in lawe compelled hym to turne agayne and to tarye all nyghte there.
Judges 19:8 And he rose vp erlye the fyft daye to departe. Then sayde the damoselles father, comforte thyne herte: and so made hym tary vntyl after middaye. And they dyd eate both of them together.
Judges 19:9 And then the man arose to departe wyth hys concubine and hys lad. But hys father in law the damoselles father sayde vnto him: beholde the day goeth fast away, & draweth towarde euen, tary al nyght: at the laste way tarye thys day here and let thyne hert be merye. And to morow get you erlye vpon your waye and get the to thy tente.
Judges 19:10 Neuerthelater the man would not tary, but arose and departed and came as ferre as Iebus, which is Ierusalem, and his two asses laden, and hys concubyne and his lad with hym.
Judges 19:11 And when they were fast by Iebus, the daye was sore spente and the younge man sayde vnto hys mayster, come I pray the and let us turne in, into thys cyty of the Iebusites and lodge all nyght there.
Judges 19:12 But hys maister sayd vnto him, we wyll not turne into a straunge cytye that are not of the chyldren of Israel: we wyll go forth to Gabaah.
Judges 19:13 And he sayde vnto hys lad: go forwarde, and we shal come to one place or other, & shal lodge al nyght in Gabaah or in Ramah.
Judges 19:14 And they wente forwarde vpon theyr waye, and the sonne wente doune vpon them, when they were faste by Gabaah, which is in Beniamin:
Judges 19:15 And they turned thetherwarde to go and lodge al nyghte in Gabaah. And when they came in, they sat them doune in a streat of the cytye, for there was no man toke them into lodge.
Judges 19:16 But beholde, there came an olde man from hys worke, oute of the feldes at euen, whyche was also of mount Ephraim: and but a straunger in Gabaah for the men of the place were of the chyldren of Iemini.
Judges 19:17 And when he had lyft vp his eyes, and sawe a wayefaring man in the streates of the cyty he sayde: whether goest thou? And whence comest thou?
Judges 19:18 And the other answered hym, we come from Bethlehem Iuda towarde the syde of mounte Ephraim: from thence am I, and went to Bethlehem Iuda and go nowe to the house of the Lorde. But there is no man that receyueth me to house:
Judges 19:19 & yet I haue strawe and prauender for our Asses, and bread and wyne for me and thy handmaide, and thy lad that are with thy seruaunt, and lacke nothing.
Judges 19:20 The olde man sayde: peace be wyth the, al that thou lackeste shalt thou fynde wyth me: onlye abyde not in the streates all nyght,
Judges 19:21 and he brought hym into hys house, and gaue foder vnto hys Asses. And they wasshed their fete, and dyd eate and dryncke.
Judges 19:22 And as they were making their hertes merye, the men of the cytye, whyche were wycked, set the house roundabout, and thrust at the dore, and spake to the man of the house, the olde man saying: brynge forthe the man that came into thyne house, that we may knowe hym.
Judges 19:23 But the man of the house went out to them and sayde vnto them, Oh, naye my brethren, do not so wyckedlye seynge: that this man is come into myne house: do not this folye.
Judges 19:24 Beholde my doughter a mayden and thys mannes concubyne, them I wyll brynge out vnto you, and humble them, and do with them what semeth you good: but vnto this man, do not this folye.
Judges 19:25 But the men woulde not herken to hym. Neuerthelesse the man toke hys concubine and broughte her out vnto them, & they had to do wyth her, and entreated her shamefullye, all the nyghte euen vnto the morninge. And when the daye beganne to sprynge, they let her go.
Judges 19:26 And then came the woman in the douning of the daye, and fell doune at the dore of the mannes house, where her Lorde was, and there she laye tyll daye.
Judges 19:27 And her Lorde arose vp in the mornynge and opened the dores of the house, and went out to go hys way. And beholde hys concubine laye alonge before the dore of the house, and her hand vpon the tresholde.
Judges 19:28 And he sayde vnto her: vp and let vs be goynge. But she answered not. Then he toke her vp vpon an asse & stode vp, & gat him vnto his owne home.
Judges 19:29 And when he was come vnto his house, he toke a dreshing kneife, and caught his concubine & deuided her thorow the bones into twelue peces, and sent her into all quarters of Israel.
Judges 19:30 And al that sawe it sayde: there was no suche deade done or sene sence the chyldren of Israel came out of Egypt vnto thys day, consyder the mater, geue counsel and saye youre myndes.

CHAPTER: 20

Judges 20:1 Then all the chyldren of Israel went out: and there gathered al congregacyon together as it had bene but one man, euen from Dan to Berseba, and out of the land of Galaad, vnto the land to Marphah,
Judges 20:2 and there stode folke oute of all quarters of al the trybes of Israell, in the congregacyon of the people of God, foure hundred thousande fote men that drewe swerdes.
Judges 20:3 And the children of Beniamin heard that the chyldren of Israel were gone vp to Marphah. Then sayde the children of Israel: tell vs, how this wickednesse happened.
Judges 20:4 And the Leuyte the womans husbande that was slayne, answered and sayde: I came into Gabaah that is in Beniamin wyth my concubyne to lodge al nyghte.
Judges 20:5 And the cytezens of Gabaah rose agaynste me, and set the house roundeaboute vpon me by nyghte, and thoughte to haue slayne me: and caughte my concubyne and forced her, that she dyed.
Judges 20:6 And I toke my concubyne, and cut her in peces, and sent her thorow oute al the landes of the enheritaunce of Israel. For they haue committed abhomynacyon and folly in Israell.
Judges 20:7 Beholde ye are all chyldren of Israel. Se therfore and geue your aduyse in the case.
Judges 20:8 Then all the people arose, as it had bene one man sayinge: there shal not a man of vs go to his tente, neither turne into his house.
Judges 20:9 And now this is it that we wil do to Gabaah and cast lottes against it.
Judges 20:10 And we wyll take ten men of the hundred thorow out al the trybes of Israel, and an hundred of the thousand, and a thousand out of the ten thousand, to fet vitayle for the people to make that they maye go againste Gabaah Beniamin, according to all the folye, that they haue wrought in Israel.
Judges 20:11 And so all the men of Israel gathered together, vnto Gabaah, knyt together as it had bene but one man.
Judges 20:12 And the tribe of the trybes of Israel sent men thorow al the tribe of Beniamin sayinge: what wyckednesse is this that is happened among you:
Judges 20:13 Now therfore delyuer vs the men, those wycked wretches of Gabaah that we maye sley them, and put awaye euyl from Israel. Neuerthelater the children of Beniamin woulde not herken vnto the voice of their brethren the children of Israell:
Judges 20:14 but gathered them selues together out of the cytyes vnto Gabaah, to come out in batayle against the children of Israel.
Judges 20:15 And the chyldren of Beniamin were numbred at that tyme, out of the cytyes .xxvi. thousande men that drew swerdes beside the enhabiters of Gabaah, which were numbred seuen hundred chosen men.
Judges 20:16 And among al these folke were seuen hundred lefte handed men, which euery one could fling stones at an hear breadeth, & not mysse.
Judges 20:17 And the children of Israel besyde the children of Beniamin, were numbred foure hundred thousande men that drew swerdes, and al men of warre.
Judges 20:18 And the children of Israel arose & went vp to Bethel, and asked of God, who shoulde begynne to battel agaynste the children of Beniamin, and the Lorde sayd: Iuda shal beginne.
Judges 20:19 And the children of Israel stode vp erlye and beseged Gabaah.
Judges 20:20 And the men of Israel went out to battel agaynst Beniamin, & put them selues in araye agaynst them, to fight against Gabaah.
Judges 20:21 And the children of Beniamin came oute of Gabaah and destroyed in Israell that daye .xxij. thousande men, and brought them to the earth.
Judges 20:22 And the folcke of the children of Israell plucked vp their hertes, and went to agayne, and made battel in the same place where they dyd the fyrst daye:
Judges 20:23 but they went fyrste vp & wept before the Lord vnto euen, and asked of the Lorde saying: shal we go againe to battel agaynste the children of Beniamin oure brethren? And the Lord sayde: go vnto them:
Judges 20:24 and when the children of Israel were come to the chyldren of Beniamin the second day,
Judges 20:25 the children of Beniamin went against them out of Gabaah, the second day, & destroyed to the earth of the children of Israel ones again .xviij.M. men that drew sweardes euery man of them.
Judges 20:26 Then the chyldren of Israell and all the people went vp and came vnto Bethel, and wepte and sat there before the Lorde, & fasted the same daye vnto euen, and offered burntofferinges and peace offeringes before the Lorde.
Judges 20:27 And they asked the Lorde: for there was the arcke of the apoyntment of God, in those dayes.
Judges 20:28 And Phinehes the sonne of Eleazar, the sonne of Aaron waytyng vpon it at that time, & they sayd: shal we go out any more to battel agaynst the children of Beniamin oure brethren, or shal we cease? And the Lord said go: for to morowe I wil deliuer them into youre handes.
Judges 20:29 And Israell set layers awayte against Gabaah rounde about.
Judges 20:30 And the children of Israel went against the chyldren of Beniamin the thirde tyme, and put them selues in araye against Gabaah, as twise before.
Judges 20:31 Then came the children of Beniamin agaynst the people, tyll they were drawen a great way from the cytye. And they beganne to smyte of the people dead (as twyse before by two hye wayes of which one goeth vp to Bethel, and the other to Gabaah thorow the felde) vpon a thyrty men of Israel.
Judges 20:32 For the children of Beniamin thoughte that the other had ben beaten before them, as at the fyrste tyme. But the children of Israell sayd: let vs flee and plucke them awaye from the cyty, vnto the hye wayes.
Judges 20:33 And then al the men of Israel rose vp out of their standinge, and put them selues in aray at Baal Thamar. And lykewyse the layers in wayte of Israel came forth oute of their places, euen out of the medowes of Gabaah,
Judges 20:34 and came before Gabaah: ten thousand chosen men oute of all Israell, and there was sore battel. But the other wiste not that euyll was so nye them.
Judges 20:35 And the Lord plaged Beniamin before Israell, so that the chyldren of Israel destroyed in Beniamin the same daye .xxv. thousande and a hundred men, that drue swerdes euerye one of them.
Judges 20:36 It semed the children of Beniamin, that the other had bene put to the worsse. For the men of Israell gaue Rome to Beniamin, because they trusted vnto the layers in wayte, which they had layde againste Gabaah.
Judges 20:37 And the layers in wayte hasted and ranne vpon Gabaah, and went and smote al the cytye wyth the edge of the swerde.
Judges 20:38 And the apoyntmente of the men of Israell wyth the layers in wayte to runne vpon Beniamin wyth the swerde, was when they shoulde make the smoke ryse vp oute of the cytye.
Judges 20:39 And the men of Israell fleed in the battel. And Beniamin began to smyte dead of the chyldren of Israell, aboute a thyrtye personnes, for they supposed that the other had bene put to the worsse before them, as in the fyrste battel.
Judges 20:40 Then began to aryse oute of the cytye, a pyller of smoke. And the Beniamytes loked backe: and beholde the wastynge of the hole cytye began to ascende vp to heauen.
Judges 20:41 When the men of Israell turned agayne, the men of Beniamin were abasshed: for they saw that euel approched them.
Judges 20:42 And they turned before the men of Israell vnto the waye that leadeth to the wildernesse; the other folowing them at the harde hilles. And besyde that they of the cytye destroyed them in the mydle of them.
Judges 20:43 And they compassed Beniamin about, and chased them to Menuah, and ouerranne them before Gabaah on the eastsyde:
Judges 20:44 & there were slayne of Beniamin .xviij. thousande, and all men of myghte.
Judges 20:45 And they turned and fleed to the wildernesse warde & vnto the rocke of ponnegarnettes. And the other slue by the waye of the reste of them .v. thousande men, and sticked vnto them vntyll they came to Gadaam, and slue two thousand mo of them.
Judges 20:46 So that al that were slayne that same daye of Beniamin were .xxv. thousand men that drue swerdes, and all men of mighte:
Judges 20:47 onlye .vi. hundred men turned & fleed to the wildernesse, vnto the Rocke of pomgarnettes and abode there .iiij. monethes.
Judges 20:48 And then the men of Israel turned backe agayne vnto the children of Beniamin, and smote them wyth the edge of the swerde in the cyties both man and beast and all that came to hande, and moreouer set all the cytyes they coulde come by, on fyre.

CHAPTER: 21

Judges 21:1 And the men of Israel sware in Mazphah sayinge: there shall none of vs geue his doughter vnto any of Beniamin to wife.
Judges 21:2 And the people came to Bethel and abode there till euen, before God & lifte vp their voyces and wept sore
Judges 21:3 and sayd: O Lord God of Israel, why is this chaunsed in Israell that there shoulde be this daye one tribe lacking in Israel?
Judges 21:4 And on the morow the people rose vp by tyme, and made there an altare, and offered burntofferinges and peace offeringes.
Judges 21:5 And the children of Israel asked, who are they among all the tribes of Israel that came not with the congregacion vnto the Lorde? for they had made a greate othe concerninge them that came not vp to the Lorde to Mazphah saying: that they should surely dye.
Judges 21:6 And the children of Israel had pytie on Beniamin their brethren, and sayd: there is one tribe cut of from Israel this daye:
Judges 21:7 what shal we do vnto the remnaunt of them, for to get them wyues, for as muche as we haue sworne by the Lorde, that we wyll not geue them of oure doughters to wyues,
Judges 21:8 Then they sayde, what are they of the trybes of Israel, that came not vp to Mazphah to the Lorde.
Judges 21:9 And beholde there came none of the enhabitoures of Iabes Galaad vnto the congregacion. And when the people were vewed: beholde there were none of the enhabiters of Iabes Galaad there.
Judges 21:10 And the congregacion sente thether .xij. thousand men of the strongest of them, and commaunded them saying: go and smyte the enhabiters of Iabes Galaad with the edge of the swerde both wemen & children.
Judges 21:11 And this is that ye shal do: vtterlie destroye al the males & al the wemen that haue lyen by men.
Judges 21:12 And they founde among the enhabiters of Iabes Galaad foure hundred damoselles vyrgynis, that had knowen no man by lying with any male. And they broughte them vnto the host to Siloh, which is in the land of Canaan.
Judges 21:13 And the hole congregacion sente and spake with the children of Beniamin, that were in the Rocke of pomgarnettes, and called paceablye vnto them,
Judges 21:14 and Beniamin came agayne at that tyme, and they gaue them the wemen which they had saued a lyue of the wemen of Iabes Galaad. But they so suffised them not.
Judges 21:15 And the people had compassion on Beniamin because that God had made a gappe in the tribes of Israel.
Judges 21:16 And then the elders of the congregacion sayde: what shal we do to the remnaunt of them, to get them wiues seing al the wiues of Beniamin are destroyed?
Judges 21:17 And they sayde: there must be an enheritaunce for them that be escaped of Beniamin, that a trybe be not destroied out of Israel:
Judges 21:18 how be it we may not geue them wiues of oure doughters. For the children of Israel had made an adiuracion saying: cursed be he that geueth a wyfe to Beniamin.
Judges 21:19 Then they sayde: beholde there is a feaste of the Lorde yerlye in Siloh, which is on the northsyde of Bethell, and on the east syde of the way that goeth from Bethel to Sichem, and south from Libanon.
Judges 21:20 And they commaunded the children of Beniamin saying: go and lye in wayte in the vyneyardes.
Judges 21:21 And when ye se that the doughters of Siloh come oute to daunce in a rowe, then come ye oute of the vyneyardes, and catche you euerye man a wyfe of the doughters of Siloh, & get you vnto the lande of Beniamin.
Judges 21:22 And yf theyr fathers or brethren come vnto vs to complaine, we wyl saye vnto them: haue pytye on them, because we reserued not to eche man his wife in time of warre, and therto because that ye gaue them none in due tyme, ye were to blame.
Judges 21:23 And the children of Beniamin dyd euen so: and toke them wyues accordynge to the numbre of them of the dauncers, whyche they caught. And then they went and returned vnto their enheritaunce, and buylt there cytyes and dwelt in them.
Judges 21:24 And the chyldren of Israell departed thence at that tyme and wente euerye man to hys trybe, and to his kynred, and went out from thence euery man to hys enheritaunce.
Judges 21:25 In those dayes there was no kyng in Israel: but euerye man dyd what semed hym ryght.

BOOK: Ruth

CHAPTER: 1

Ruth 1:1 In the tyme when the Iudges iudged, there felle a darth in the land. Wherfore a certayn man of Bethlehem Iuda went for to soiourne in the countrey of Moab wyth his wyfe and two sonnes.
Ruth 1:2 The name of the man was Elymelec, and his wyfe Noemi, and the names of his two sonnes were, Mahalon and Chilion and they were Ephraites, oute of Bethlehem Iuda. And when they came into the lande of Moab, they contynued there.
Ruth 1:3 And Elemilec Noemies husbande dyed, and she remayned with her two sonnes,
Ruth 1:4 which toke them wyues of the nacions of the Moabites: the ones name Orphah and the others Ruth. And when they had dwelleth there about a ten yere,
Ruth 1:5 Mahalon and Chilion dyed also euen both two of them, so that the wyfe was lefte desolate of her two sonnes & of her husband therto.
Ruth 1:6 Then she stode vp wt her doughters in lawe and returned from the countrey of Moab: for she had heard saye, beyng in the countrey of Moab, howe that the Lorde had visited his people and geuen them fode.
Ruth 1:7 Wherfore she departed oute of the place where she was and her two doughters wyth her. And as they went by the waye returning vnto the land of Iuda,
Ruth 1:8 Noemi sayd vnto her two doughters in lawe: go and returne eche of you vnto youre mothers house: the Lorde deale as kyndlye wyth you, as ye haue dealt wt the dead & with me.
Ruth 1:9 And the Lord geue you, that you maye fynde reast ether of you in the house of her husband: & so she kyssed them. Then they cryed & wepte
Ruth 1:10 & sayd vnto her: we wil go with the vnto thy folke.
Ruth 1:11 But Noemi said, turne again my doughters: for what cause would you go with me? thinke you that there be any more children in my bowelles, to be youre husbandes?
Ruth 1:12 Turne again my doughters & go: for I am to olde to haue an husband. Yf I sayde I haue hope, also yf I toke a man this night, ye and though I had alreadye borne sonnes?
Ruth 1:13 would ye tary after them, tyl they were of age? or would ye for them so long refrayne from takynge of husbandes? Not so my doughters: for it greueth me much for youre sakes, that the hande of the Lord is gone out against me.
Ruth 1:14 Therwyth they cryed and wepte agayne how be it Orphah kissed her mother in lawe but Ruth aboade still by her,
Ruth 1:15 then she sayd: se, thy syster in lawe is gone backe againe vnto her people & vnto her God: returne thou after her.
Ruth 1:16 But Ruth saide: entreate me not to leaue the, and to returne from after the, for whether thou goest, I will go, & where thou dwelleste, there I wil dwelle: thy people are my people, and thy God is my God.
Ruth 1:17 Where thou dyest, I wil dye, and there wilbe buried. The Lorde do so and so to me, excepte that death onlye departe the and me a sondre.
Ruth 1:18 When she saw that she woulde nedes go with her, she left speakinge vnto her.
Ruth 1:19 And so they went both together vntyll they came to Bethlehem. And when they were come to Bethlehem, it was noysed thorow al the cyty and the wemen sayde: is not this Noemi?
Ruth 1:20 But she said vnto them, calle me not Noemi: call me Mara, for the almightye hath made me very bitter.
Ruth 1:21 I went oute full: but the Lorde hath brought me home emptye. Why should ye then calle me Noemi: seyng the Lord hath humbled me, & the almighty hath brought me vnto aduersite?
Ruth 1:22 And the time when Noemi wyth Ruth the Moabitesse her doughter in lawe returned out of the countreye of Moab and came to Bethlehem, was in the begynning of barley harueste

CHAPTER: 2

Ruth 2:1 And Noemi had a kynsman of her husbandes, a man of mighte, of the kynred of Elimelec, named Booz.
Ruth 2:2 And Ruth the Moabitesse sayd vnto Noemi, let me go to the felde and lease and gather eares, after whomsoeuer I fynde grace in his syghte. And she sayde vnto her: go my doughter.
Ruth 2:3 And she wente and came and gathered after the harueste men, and her chaunse was that parte of the felde pertayned vnto Booz whyche was of the kynred of Elymelec.
Ruth 2:4 And beholde, Booz came from Bethlehem, and sayde vnto the harueste men: the Lorde be wyth you. And they answered him, the Lord blesse the.
Ruth 2:5 Then sayde Booz vnto the younge man that had the ouersyghte of the herueste men. Whose damosel is this?
Ruth 2:6 And the young man, that was set to ouer se the herueste men answered and sayde: it is the Moabitish damosel, that came wyth Noemi oute of the countreye of Moab,
Ruth 2:7 and she sayde, let me I praye the, lease and gather after the heruest men, the eares that remayne, and so she came and hath continued euen from the morninge vnto now, and taryed not longe in the house.
Ruth 2:8 Then sayd Booz vnto Ruth: hearest thou my doughter, go to no nother felde together, neither go from hence: but abyde by my maidens.
Ruth 2:9 Thyne eyes are on a felde that shalbe reped: go after the maidens therfore, for I haue charged the young men, that they touche the not. Moreouer when thou arte a thryste, go vnto the vessels and dryncke of that whiche the laddes haue drawen.
Ruth 2:10 Then she fell on her face, and bowed her selfe to the grounde and sayde vnto him: howe is it that I haue founde grace in thyne eyes, to know me, seyng: I am an alyaunt.
Ruth 2:11 And Booz answered and sayd vnto her: al is tolde me, that thou hast done vnto thy mother in lawe sence the death of thine husband, howe thou haste lefte thy father and thy mother, and the lande where thou wast borne, & art come vnto a nacion, which thou kneweste not in time passed.
Ruth 2:12 The Lord quite thy worck, & a full reward be geuen the of the Lord God of Israel vnto whom thou art come, to truste vnder hys winges.
Ruth 2:13 Then she sayd vnto him: let me finde fauoure in thy sighte my Lorde, for thou hast comforted me, & hast spoken hertely vnto thy maide, which yet can not be like vnto one of thy maides.
Ruth 2:14 And Booz when the tyme of refeccion was come, saide vnto her: come hether & eate of the bread, & dippe thy soppe in the vinagre. And she sat doune by the repers, & he raught her parched corne. And so she did eate & was suffised & left part.
Ruth 2:15 And when she was rysen vp together, Booz sayde to the younge men sayinge: let her gather the eares that remaine, & do her no despite.
Ruth 2:16 And herto pul out of the sheues for her, & let it lie, that she maye gather it vp, & rebuke her not.
Ruth 2:17 And so she gathered vntill euen & then thresshed that she had gathered, & it was vpon an Epha of barleye.
Ruth 2:18 And she toke it vp & went to the city, & shewed her mother in law what she had gathered. And therto she plucked oute, & gaue to her that she had reserued when she had eaten ynough.
Ruth 2:19 Then sayd her mother in lawe vnto her, where gatherest thou to daye? and where wroughteste thou? blessed be he that knewe the. And she shewed her mother in law wt whom she had wroughte & saide: the mannes name wt whom I wrought to day is Booz.
Ruth 2:20 Then saide Noemi vnto her doughter in law: blessed be he for he ceaseth not to do the same goodnesse to the dead, that he did to the lyuynge. And Noemi said vnto her: the man is nye vnto vs, euen of our next kinne.
Ruth 2:21 And Ruth the Moabite said: he bad me also, that I should continew with his young men, vntil they had ended al the heruest he hath.
Ruth 2:22 Then said Noemi vnto Ruth her doughter in law, it is best my doughter that thou go oute wyth his maiden, and that no no man mete the in any other felde.
Ruth 2:23 And so she kept her by the maydens of Booz, together vnto the ende of barley haruest & of whete heruest also: and dwelt with her mother in law.

CHAPTER: 3

Ruth 3:1 Then Noemi her mother in law sayd vnto her: my doughter I wil seke reast for the, that thou maieste be in better case.
Ruth 3:2 For now this Booz oure kynsman with whose maydens thou waste, wenoweth his barley to nyght in the thresshinge floure,
Ruth 3:3 washe thy selfe therfore & anoynte the, & put thy rayment vpon the, and get the to the tresshinge floure. But let not the man beware of the, vntil he haue left eatyng and drinckyng.
Ruth 3:4 And when he goeth to slepe, marcke the place where he layeth him doune, and then go and lyfte vp the clothes that are on his fete, and laye the doune, and so shall he tell the what thou shalt do.
Ruth 3:5 And she answered her: al that thou byddest me I wyl do.
Ruth 3:6 And she went vnto the floure, and dyd accordynge to al that her mother in lawe bade her.
Ruth 3:7 And when Booz had eaten and droncken, and made hym merye, he went and lay doune by the syde of the heape. And she came softlye, and lyfte vp the clothes of hys fete, and layde her doune.
Ruth 3:8 And at mydnyght the man was afrayd and groped. And beholde, a woman laye at his fete.
Ruth 3:9 Then he sayde: what art thou? and she answered, I am Ruth thyne handmayde, sprede thy mantell ouer thyne handmayde, for thou art the next of the kynne.
Ruth 3:10 And then he sayde: blessed be thou in the Lorde my doughter, for thou haste shewed more goodnesse in the later end, then at the beginning, in as much as thou folowedeste not young men, whether they were poore or riche.
Ruth 3:11 And now my doughter, feare not, I wyl do to the al that thou requireste, for al the gates of my people knowe that thou art a woman of vertue.
Ruth 3:12 And is true that I am of thy nexte kynne: how be it, there is one nyer then I.
Ruth 3:13 Tary al nyght. And when mornynge is come yf he wyll marye the: it is good, so let hym do. But and yf he wyl not haue the as sure as the Lord liueth, I wil haue the, lye still vntyll the morning. And so she laye at his fete vntil the morninge.
Ruth 3:14 And she arose vp before one could knowe another. And he said: let no man beware, that there came any woman into the thresshing floure.
Ruth 3:15 And he sayd: bring thy mantel that thou hast vpon the & behold it vp. And she helde it vp. And he mette in syxe measures of Barleye and laied it on her. And she gat her into the cytye:
Ruth 3:16 & she came into her mother in lawe, which sayde: what tidinges my doughter? And she tolde her all that the man had done to her.
Ruth 3:17 And saide therto, these syxe measures of barlye gaue he me and sayde: thou shalt not go emptye vnto thy mother in law.
Ruth 3:18 Then sayde she: my doughter syt still, vntyll thou knowe howe the matter wyll chaunse. For the man wil not be in reast vntil he haue fynished the matter this same daye.

CHAPTER: 4

Ruth 4:1 Then went Booz vnto the gate and sat him doune there: and beholde, the kinsman of which Booz spake, came by. Vnto whom he sayde: come and sytte doune here, and called him by his name. And he turned in and sat doune.
Ruth 4:2 Then he toke ten men of the elders of the cyty and said, syt ye doune here. And they sat doune.
Ruth 4:3 Then he sayde vnto the kynsman: Noemi that is come againe out of the countreye of Moab, will selle a parcell of lande, which was oure brother Elimelecs.
Ruth 4:4 And I thought to do the to wete and bidde the bye it before the enhabitoures and elders of my people, yf thou be disposed to calenge it: but and yf thou wilt not purchase it, then tell me that I maye wete it. For there is none to calenge it saue thou, and I nexte the. And the other answered, I wyl purchase it.
Ruth 4:5 Then sayde Booz, what daye thou byeste the feld of the hand of Noemi, thou must take also Ruth the Moabyte the wyfe of the death to stere vp the name of the deed vpon his enheritaunce.
Ruth 4:6 Then sayde the kynsman: I can not purchase it for marring of myne own enheritaunce: take thou my ryghte to the, for I cannot purchase it.
Ruth 4:7 Now this was the maner of olde tyme in Israell concerninge purches and chaunging, for to stablyshe al thing: that a man must plucke of his showe and geue it hys neyghboure, and thys was a wytnesse in Israel.
Ruth 4:8 And the kinsman saide to Booz, bye it thou: and so drue of his showe.
Ruth 4:9 Then sayd Booz vnto the elders, and vnto all the people: ye are witnesses this day, that I haue bought al that was Elimelecs, and al that was Chilions & Mahelons, of the hand of Noemi.
Ruth 4:10 And moreouer Ruth the Moabite the wyfe of Mahelon, do I take vnto me to wife, to stere vp the name of the deed vpon his enheritaunce, that his name be not put out from amonge his brethren, and from the gate of hys cytye: ye are wytnesses this daye.
Ruth 4:11 And al the people that were in the gate, & the elders said: we are witnesses: the Lorde make the woman that is come into thine house lyke Rahel & Lea, which twayne dyd builde the house of Israel: that she maye do vertuously in Ephrathah, & be famouse in Bethlehem,
Ruth 4:12 and that thyne house be like the house of Pharez, whom Thamar bare vnto Iuda, euen of the seed, which the Lorde shall geue the of this young woman.
Ruth 4:13 And so Booz toke Ruth, and she was his wyfe. And he went in vnto her, and the Lord gaue that she conceyued and bare a sonne.
Ruth 4:14 And the wemen saide vnto Noemi: blessed be the Lorde, the which hath not lefte the wythout an heyre this day that shal haue a name in Israel,
Ruth 4:15 and that shal bring thy lyfe agayne and cherishe thine olde age. For thy doughter in law, which loueth the, hath borne him that is better to the then seuen sonnes.
Ruth 4:16 And Noemi toke the childe and layed it in her lappe, & became nourse vnto it.
Ruth 4:17 And her neyghbours gaue it a name sayinge: there is a childe borne to Noemi, and called it Obed: he is the father of Isai, the father of Dauid.
Ruth 4:18 This is the generacyon of Pharez, Pharez begat Hezron,
Ruth 4:19 Hezron begat Ram, Ram begat Aminadab,
Ruth 4:20 Aminadab begat Nahason, Nahason begat Salmon,
Ruth 4:21 Salmon begat Booz, Booz begat Obed,
Ruth 4:22 Obed begat Isai, Isai begat Dauid.

BOOK: 1 Samuel

CHAPTER: 1

1 Samuel 1:1 There was a man of Ramathaim Zophim, of mount Ephraim named Elkanah, the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Elihu, the sonne of Thohu, the sonne of zuph an Ephratite:
1 Samuel 1:2 which had two wiues, the one called Hannah, & the other Phenennah. And Phenennah had children but Hannah had none.
1 Samuel 1:3 And the sayde man went out of his citie euery festful day, to praye & to offer vnto the Lord of hostes: where the two sonnes of Eli (Hophni and Phinehes) were the Lordes priestes.
1 Samuel 1:4 And it fel on a day as Elkanah had offered that he gaue to Phenennah his wife & to al her sonnes & doughters porcions.
1 Samuel 1:5 But vnto Hannah he gaue a porcion with a heuye chere, for he loued her, neuerthelesse the Lorde had made her barren.
1 Samuel 1:6 And therto her enemye Phenennah vexed her a good in castinge her in the thete, howe the Lorde had made her barren.
1 Samuel 1:7 And so did she yere by yere as oft as she went vp to the house of the Lord. And so chafed her, wherfore Hannah wepte and ate not.
1 Samuel 1:8 Then sayde Elkanah her husband to her: Hannah why wypeste thou? And why eatest thou not? & why is thyne herte so troubled? am not I better to the, then ten sonnes?
1 Samuel 1:9 Then Hannah rose vp after that they had eaten and droncke in Siloh. And Eli the prieste sate vpon a stole by one of the syde postes of the temple of the Lord.
1 Samuel 1:10 And she was troubled in her spretes, and prayed vnto the Lorde, and wepte sore,
1 Samuel 1:11 and vowed a vowe and said: Lord of hostes, yf thou wylt loke on the wretchednesse of thyne handmayde, and shalt remembre me, and not forget thyne handmayde, & shalte geue vnto thyne handmayde a manchylde I wyll geue him vnto the Lord, all the dayes of hys lyfe, & there shal neyther raser or sheres come vpon hys heade.
1 Samuel 1:12 And as she continued prayinge before the Lorde, Eli marked her mouth.
1 Samuel 1:13 For Hannah she spake in her hert, and her lippes dyd but moue onely, but her voyce was not heard. And therfore Eli toke her for droncken
1 Samuel 1:14 & sayd vnto her: how long wilt thou be droncken? put away from the, the wine that thou hast
1 Samuel 1:15 Hannah answered & sayd: not so my Lorde, I am a woman sorowfull in myne hert, & haue droncke nether wyne nor any stronge drinck, but I haue poured out my soule before the Lorde.
1 Samuel 1:16 Counte not thyne handemayde to be lyke a doughter of vnthriftynes: for out of the aboundaunce of my meditacyon, and greafe haue I spoken hytherto.
1 Samuel 1:17 Eli aunswered and sayde: Go in peace the God of Israel shall graunt the thy petycyon that thou haste asked of hym.
1 Samuel 1:18 Then she sayd: let thyne handmayde fynd grace in thy sight. And so the woman wente her waye, and dyd eate, and loked no more so sadde.
1 Samuel 1:19 And they rose vp erlye, and bowed them selues before the Lorde, & then returned & went to theyr house to Ramath. And Elkenah laye by hys wyfe Hannah, and the Lorde remembred her.
1 Samuel 1:20 And in processe of tyme she couceyued and bare a sonne, & called hys name Samuel: because she had asked hym of the Lord.
1 Samuel 1:21 And Elkanah and all hys house went vp to offer vnto the Lorde, bothe the offerynges due for the feaste and also his vowes:
1 Samuel 1:22 but Hannah went not vp for she sayde vnto her husbande: I wyl tarye vntyll the ladde be wened, & then I wil bring hym, that he maye apeare before the Lorde, & there abide for euer.
1 Samuel 1:23 And Elkanah her husband sayde to her: do what semith the best: tary vntyll thou hast wened hym, onelye the Lorde make good his saying. And so the woman abode, and gaue her sonne sucke, vntyll she wened hym.
1 Samuel 1:24 And then she toke hym wyth her, when she had wened hym, with thre bullockes & an Epha of floure, & a bottel of wyne, & brought him vnto the house of the Lorde in Siloh how be it the chylde was yet young.
1 Samuel 1:25 And they slew the bullockes, & brought in the ladde to Eli,
1 Samuel 1:26 & then she sayde: Oh my Lorde: as truly as thy soule lyueth my Lorde: I am the woman that stode by the here, praying vnto the Lorde,
1 Samuel 1:27 and for thys ladde I praied, & the Lorde hath geuen me my desyre which I asked of him:
1 Samuel 1:28 & therfor I also lend him the Lord, as long as he may be lent the Lorde. And so they prayed there vnto the Lord.

CHAPTER: 2

1 Samuel 2:1 And Hannah prayd & sayd: myne herte reioyseth in the Lord, myne horne is hye in the Lorde, & my mouthe is wyde open ouer mine enemyes, for I reioyse in thy sauynge.
1 Samuel 2:2 There is none so holye as the Lorde: no there is none saue thou. Neyther is there any strength like vnto our God.
1 Samuel 2:3 Talke not to muche proudlye: let olde thynges depart oute of your mouthes, for the Lorde is a God of knowledge, & iudgeth the thoughtes.
1 Samuel 2:4 The boowes of the strong are broken, & the weake are endued with strength.
1 Samuel 2:5 They that were full, haue hyred out them selues for breade, and they that were hongrye cease so to be: in so much that the baren hath borne seuen, & she that had many chyldren is waxed feble.
1 Samuel 2:6 The Lorde kylleth and maketh a lyue, bryngeth doune to hell & fetcheth vp agayne
1 Samuel 2:7 The Lorde maketh pore, and maketh ryche, bryngeth lowe, and heueth vp on hye.
1 Samuel 2:8 He reyseth vp the poore out of the duste, and lyfteth vp the begger from the dong hill: to set them among princes, and to enheret them with the seate of glory. For the pyllers of the earth are the Lordes, and he hath set the rounde worlde vpon them.
1 Samuel 2:9 He wil kepe the fete of his sainctes, but the wicked shal kepe silence in darkenesse. For in his own myght shal no man be strong.
1 Samuel 2:10 The Lordes aduersaryes shall be made to feare hym: and out of heauen he shal thunder vpon them. The Lorde shall iudge the endes of the worlde, and shall geue myght vnto his Kynge, and exalte the horne of his anoynted.
1 Samuel 2:11 And Elkanah went to Ramath to hys house, and the ladde dyd mynystre vnto the Lorde before Eli the prieste.
1 Samuel 2:12 But the sonnes of Eli were vnthryftye chyldren, and knewe not the Lorde.
1 Samuel 2:13 For the maner of the priestes wyth the people was whensoeuer any man offered any offerynges the priestes ladde came, whyle the fleshe was in sethynge, and a fleshoke wyth thre tethe in hys hande,
1 Samuel 2:14 and thrust it into the panne, ketle, caldren, or potte. And all that the fleshe hoke broughte vp the prieste toke awaye. And so they dyd vnto all Israel that came thyther to Siloh.
1 Samuel 2:15 Yea, & thereto before they had offered the fatte, the priestes lad came and sayde to the man that offered: geue fleshe to roste for the prieste, for he wyll not haue sodden fleshe of the, but rawe.
1 Samuel 2:16 And yf any man sayd vnto hym let the fatte be offered accordynge to the daye, & then take as muche as thyne herte desireth. The lad wold aunswere him, thou shalt geue it me now, or els I wyl take it with violence.
1 Samuel 2:17 And the synne of the young men was very great before the Lorde. For they dispysed the people and also the offerynge of the Lorde.
1 Samuel 2:18 But the ladde Samuel mynystred before the Lord gyrded about wyth a lynen Ephod.
1 Samuel 2:19 Moreouer hys mother made hym a lytle coote, and brought it to hym from feaste to feaste when she came vp with her husbande to offer the offeryng of the sayd feast.
1 Samuel 2:20 And Eli blessed Elkanah and hys wyfe: and sayde: the Lorde geue the seede of thys woman, for that she hath lent the Lord. And they went vnto their owne whome.
1 Samuel 2:21 And the Lorde visited Hannah so that she conceyued and bare thre sonnes & two doughters But the boye Samuel grewe dwellynge styll with the Lorde.
1 Samuel 2:22 Eli was very olde, and hearde all that hys sonnes dyd vnto all Israel, & how they slepte wyth the wemen that wayted in the dore of the tabernacle of wytnesse,
1 Samuel 2:23 & sayd vnto them: why do ye suche thynges? For I heare youre wycked deades of all these people.
1 Samuel 2:24 Oh, naye my sonnes: for it is no good reporte, that I heare how that ye make the Lordes people to trespasse.
1 Samuel 2:25 If one man synne agaynste another daysemen maye make his peace: but yf a man synne agaynste the Lorde who can be hys dayse man? Notwythstandynge they herkened not vnto the voice of theyr father, because the Lorde wolde slaye them.
1 Samuel 2:26 The chylde Samuel profyted and grewe, and was in fauoure both wyth the Lorde and also with men.
1 Samuel 2:27 And there came a man of God vnto Eli & sayde vnto hym: thus sayth the Lorde. I apeared vnto the house of thy father, when they were in Egypte in Pharaos house.
1 Samuel 2:28 And I chose thy father out of al the trybes of Israel to be my prieste for to offer vpon myne aultar and to burne incense, & to were an Ephod before me. And I gaue vnto the house of thy father all the offerynges of the chyldren of Israel.
1 Samuel 2:29 Wherfore kycke ye agaynste my sacryfyce and agaynst myne offeryng which I commaunde in the tabernacle, and honoreste thy chyldren aboue me, and make your selues fat of the fyrste frutes of all the offerynges of Israel my people?
1 Samuel 2:30 Wherfore the Lorde God of Israel sayth: I sayde that thyne house and the house of thy father shulde haue walked before me for euer. But now the Lorde sayth: that be farre from me: for them that worshyppe me, I wyll worshyp, & they that despyse me, shalbe despised.
1 Samuel 2:31 Behold the dayes wyl come that I wil cut of thyne arme and the arme of thy fathers house, that there shall not be an elder in thyne house.
1 Samuel 2:32 And thou shalt se thyne enemye in the tabernacle, in al that shal please Israel, and there shall not be an elder in thyne house whyle the worlde standeth.
1 Samuel 2:33 Neuerthelesse I wyll not destroye all thy males from my aultare, to dase thy syghte with all and to make thyne hert melte. And al the multitude of thyne house shall dye younge.
1 Samuel 2:34 And this shalbe a sygne vnto the, that shal come vpon thy two sonnes, Hophni and Phinehes: euen in one daye they shal dye bothe of them.
1 Samuel 2:35 And I wyl stere me vp a faythful priest that shal do as it is in myne hert & in my mynd. And I wyl buylde him a sure house. And he shall walke before myne anoynted for euer.
1 Samuel 2:36 And they that are lefte in thyne house, shall come & crouche to hym for a lytle pece of syluer & a cake of bread, and shall saye: put me I praye the in one offyce, or other amonge the priestes, that I may eate a morsell of bread.

CHAPTER: 3

1 Samuel 3:1 And the child Samuel ministred vnto the Lord Eli: & the word of the Lorde was precious in those dayes, for there was none open vision.
1 Samuel 3:2 And it chaunsed at that tyme, that Eli laye in his place, & his eyes began to waxe dimme, that he could not se.
1 Samuel 3:3 And yer the lamp of God went out. Samuel layd him doune to slepe, in the temple of the Lord, where the arcke of God was.
1 Samuel 3:4 And the Lorde called Samuel: & he sayd: here am I,
1 Samuel 3:5 & he ran vnto Eli, & said: here am I, for thou calledest me. And he sayde I called the not: go agayne, & slepe. And he went and layde hym doune to slepe.
1 Samuel 3:6 And the Lord called once againe: Samuel, and Samuel arose & went to Eli, and sayd: I am here, thou dyddest call me. And he aunswered: I called the not my sonne. Go agayne & take thy rest:
1 Samuel 3:7 but it was yer Samuel knewe the Lord, & yer the worde of the Lorde was opened vnto hym.
1 Samuel 3:8 And the Lorde wente to & called Samuel the thyrde tyme. And he arose and wente to Eli, and sayde: I am here: for thou hast called me. Then Eli perceyued that the Lord had called the ladde.
1 Samuel 3:9 And said vnto him: go & lye doune: & yf he call the agayne, then say: speake on Lord, for thy seruaunt heareth. And Samuel went & layed him doune in hys place.
1 Samuel 3:10 And the Lord came & stode & called as before, Samuel, Samuel. And Samuel said speake on, for thy seruaunt heareth the.
1 Samuel 3:11 And the Lord said to Samuel: beholde I wyl do a thing in Israel, that the eares of as many as heareth it, shall tingle.
1 Samuel 3:12 In that day I wyll performe to Eli, al that I haue spoken concernyng hys house: I wil begynne it & ende it.
1 Samuel 3:13 For I haue tolde him that I wyl iudge his house for euer. For the wyckednesse which he knoweth, how hys sonnes are vngracyouse, and he was not wroth therewyth.
1 Samuel 3:14 And therfor I haue sworne vnto the house of Eli, that the wickednesse of Elies house, shal not be purged with sacrifice nor offeryng, whyle the world standeth.
1 Samuel 3:15 And Samuell lay tyll the mornyng, & then opened the dores of the house of the Lorde. But Samuel feared, to shewe Eli the vysion.
1 Samuel 3:16 Then Eli called Samuel and sayd: Samuel my sonne. And he aunswered here I am.
1 Samuel 3:17 And he saide: what is that he sayde vnto the? Se thou hyde it not from me. The Lord do so & so to the, yf thou hyde any thyng from me, of all that he said vnto the.
1 Samuel 3:18 And Samuell tolde him euery whit, & hyd it not from him. And he answered: it is the Lord, let him do what semeth him best.
1 Samuel 3:19 And Samuel grewe, and the Lorde was with hym, and left none of hys wordes vnparformed.
1 Samuel 3:20 And all Israel from Dan to Bersabe wist that Samuel was trulye made the Lordes Prophete.
1 Samuel 3:21 And the Lorde apeared agayne in Siloh: for the Lorde opened hym selfe to Samuel in Siloh, thorow the worde of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 4

1 Samuel 4:1 And Samuel spake vnto all Israel. And Israel went out agaynst the Philistines to battell, & pytched besyde the help stone. And the Philistines pytched in Aphek.
1 Samuel 4:2 And put them selues in araye agaynst Israel. And in the ende of the battel Israel was put to the worsse before the Philistines. And the Philistines slue in araye a long by the feldes about a four thousand men.
1 Samuel 4:3 And when the people were come into theyr tentes, the elders of Israel sayde: wherfore hath the Lord beaten vs thys daye before the Philistines? let vs fetche the arcke of the appoyntment of the Lorde, oute of Siloh vnto vs, & let it come among vs, & saue vs out of the handes of oure enemyes.
1 Samuel 4:4 And the people sent to Siloh, and fet from thence the arcke of the appoyntment of the Lorde of hostes whiche dwelleth betwene the Cherubyns. And there were the two sonnes of Eli, Hophni & Phinehes with the arcke of the apoyntment of God.
1 Samuel 4:5 And when the arcke of the appoyntment of the Lord came into the host, all Israell shouted a myghty shout, so that the earth rang agayne.
1 Samuel 4:6 When the Philistines heard the noyse of the shoute they sayde: what meaneth the sound of thys myghtye shout in the host of the Ebrues? And they vnderstode how that the arcke of the Lorde was come into the host.
1 Samuel 4:7 And the Philistines were afrayd, when it was tolde howe the God was come into the host & said. Wo vnto vs, for it was neuer so before thys.
1 Samuel 4:8 Wo vnto vs, who shall delyuer vs out of the hand of thys myghtye God? this is the God that smote the Egipcians wt al maner of plages in the wyldernesse.
1 Samuel 4:9 Be stronge & quite youre selues lyke men, ye Philistines, that ye be not seruauntes vnto the Ebrues, as they haue bene to you. Be men therfore & fight.
1 Samuel 4:10 And the Philistines fought, and Israel was put to the worsse and fledde, euery man into his tent. And there was a myghty great slaughter, so that there were ouerthrowen of Israel, thyrtye thousande fotemen.
1 Samuel 4:11 And the arcke of God was taken, and the two sonnes of Eli, Hophni & Phinehes were dead.
1 Samuel 4:12 And there ran a man of Beniamin out of the araye & came to Siloh the same day with his clothes rent & earthe vpon his head.
1 Samuel 4:13 And when the man came in, Eli sate vpon a stole by the waye syde lokynge: for hys herte feared for the arcke of God. And the man came in & tolde it in the citie. And al the citie cryed.
1 Samuel 4:14 When Eli hearde the noyse of the cryeng, he asked what the noyse of the rumor ment. And the man hasted & came in & tolde Eli
1 Samuel 4:15 Eli was foure skore & eighten yere olde, & his syghte fayled him that he could not se.
1 Samuel 4:16 And the man sayd vnto Eli: I am he that came out of the aray and fled out of the hoste thys daye. And he sayde how is it fortuned, my sonne?
1 Samuel 4:17 And the messenger answered & sayd: Israel is fled before the Philistines, & there is a great slaughter chaunsed amonge the people, and thy two sonnes, Hophni & Phinehes are dead, & therto the arck of God is taken.
1 Samuel 4:18 And when he made mencyon of the arcke of God, Eli fell from of hys stole backwarde towarde the gate, and hys necke brake, & he dyed: for he was olde & vnweldye and he had iudged Israel fourtye yeares.
1 Samuel 4:19 And his doughter in lawe Phynehes wife was wt chylde & nye the byrthe. And when she hearde the tydynges of the taking of the arcke of God, & that her father in law, & her husband were dead, she bowed her self & trauayled, for her paynes came vpon her.
1 Samuel 4:20 And about the time of her death, the wemen that stode about her, said vnto her: feare not, for thou hast borne a sonne. But she aunswered not nor regarded it
1 Samuel 4:21 And she named the child Ichabod, saiyng: honoure is departed from Israel. Because the arcke of God was taken, & her father in law and her husband were dead.
1 Samuel 4:22 And therfore she sayde, honoure is gone from Israel, because the arcke of God was taken.

CHAPTER: 5

1 Samuel 5:1 And the Philistines toke the arcke of God, & caried it from the helpe stone vnto Asdod, & broughte it
1 Samuel 5:2 into the house of Dagon, & set it by Dagon.
1 Samuel 5:3 And when they of Asdod were vp in the morning, behold, Dagon lay grouelynge vpon the earthe before the arcke of the Lorde. And they toke Dagon & set him in his place agayne.
1 Samuel 5:4 And when they were vp erlye the next mornyng, beholde, Dagon laye grouelyng vpon the grounde before the arcke of the Lorde, & hys head & hys two handes cut of vpon the tresholde, that the body onely was lefte on hym.
1 Samuel 5:5 Wherfore nether the priestes of Dagon, nether any man that cometh into Dagons house myght treade on the tresholde of Dagon in Asdod, vnto this daye.
1 Samuel 5:6 But the hand of the Lorde was heuye vpon them of Asdod, & he destroied them, & smote them wt Emerodes, both Asdod & all the coastes there of.
1 Samuel 5:7 And when the men of Asdod sawe that it was so, they sayd: the arcke of the God of Israell shall not abyde here wyth vs, for his hand is sore vpon vs, & vpon Dagon our God.
1 Samuel 5:8 And so they sente and gathered all the Lordes of the Philistines vnto them, & said: what shall we do with the arcke of the God of Israel. Then sayd they of Get: let the arcke of the God of Israel be caryed about.
1 Samuel 5:9 And they caryed the arcke of the God of Israel about. And when they had caried it about, the hand of the Lord was in the cytye with a myghty great plage, and he smote the men of the cytye both smal & great: and they were smyten in theyr secrete places, with the Emerodes.
1 Samuel 5:10 Then they sente the arcke of God to Akaron. And as sone as the arcke of God came to Akaron, the Akaronites cryed out saying: they haue brought the Arcke of the God of Israel to vs: to slee vs & oure people.
1 Samuel 5:11 Then they sent and fette all the Lordes of the Philistines vnto them, and sayde: sende awaye the arcke of the God of Israel, and let it go home agayne vnto hys owne place, that it slee vs not wyth our people. For there was a plage of death thorowout all the cytye, and the hand of God was excedyng sore there,
1 Samuel 5:12 in so much that they which dyed not, were smiten with the Emerades: so that the crye of the cytye went vp to heauen.

CHAPTER: 6

1 Samuel 6:1 And so when the arcke of the Lord had bene in the countreye of the Philistines .vij. moneths,
1 Samuel 6:2 the Philistines called for the priestes & the sothsayers, sayinge: what shall we do wyth the arcke of the Lorde? tell vs wherwith we shall sende it home agayne.
1 Samuel 6:3 They aunswered: yf you send the arcke of the God of Israel home agayne, send it not emptye: But rewarde it with a trespasse offeryng: and then ye shalbe hole, and it shalbe knowen to you, why hys hand departeth not from you.
1 Samuel 6:4 Then sayde they: what shalbe the trespace offerynge which we shal rewarde hym with? And they answered: fyue golden arsses with Emerodes and fyue golden myce, accordyng to the nombre of the Lordes of the Philistines. For it was one maner of plage that was on you al, & on your Lordes to.
1 Samuel 6:5 Wherfore ye shal make ymages lyke to your arsses with Emerodes & ymages lyke to your mice that destroyed your lande, & shall geue glorye vnto the god of Israel: that he maye take his hand from of you, and from of youre Goddes, and from of your lande.
1 Samuel 6:6 Wherfore shulde ye harden your hertes as the Egypcians & Pharao hardened theyr hertes, which for all that (when he had played hys pageauntes wyth them) were fayne to let the people go and departe.
1 Samuel 6:7 Now therfore make a newe carte and take two mealche kyne, on whose neck neuer came yocke. And tye the kyne in the carte, & brynge the calues whome from them.
1 Samuel 6:8 Then take the arcke of the Lorde, & put it in the carte, & putte the Iuelles of Golde (whiche ye reward him with for a trespace offeryng) in a sorcer by the syde thereof, and sende it away & let it go.
1 Samuel 6:9 And marke yf he go vp by the way that leadeth vnto his owne coaste, to Bethsames, then it is he that dyd vs thys great euyl. But & yf he do not, then it is not hys hande that smote vs, but it was a chaunce that hapened vs.
1 Samuel 6:10 And the men dyd euen so: they toke two kyne that gaue milcke, & tyed them in the carte, and kepte the calues at home,
1 Samuel 6:11 & they layde the arcke of the Lord vpon the carte, & the sorcer with the myce of golde & the ymages of theyr arsses with Emerodes.
1 Samuel 6:12 And the kyne toke the strayght way to Bethsames, bothe one waye, and as they wente, lowed, turnyng nether to the ryght hand nor to the lefte. And the Lordes of the Philistines went after them vntyll they came to the borders of Bethsames.
1 Samuel 6:13 And they of Bethsames were reping their whete heruest in the valeye. And they lyft vp theyr eyes and spyed the arcke. And reioysed when they sawe it.
1 Samuel 6:14 And the carte came into the groue of one Iehosua a Bethsamite, and stode styll there. There was there also a greate stone. And they claue the wodde of the carte and offered the kyne a burnte offerynge vnto the Lorde.
1 Samuel 6:15 And the Leuites toke doune the arcke of the Lorde, & the forcer that was therebye, wherein the Iuelles of golde were, & put them on the great stone. And the men of Bethsames sacryfyced burnte sacrifyce, & offered offerynges that same daye vnto the Lorde.
1 Samuel 6:16 And when the fyue Lordes of the Philistines had sene it. they returned to Akaron the same daye.
1 Samuel 6:17 These are the golden arsses with Emerodes whiche the Philistines gaue to amendes for a trespace offeryng, to the Lord: for Asdod one: for Gaza one: for Askalon one: for Geth one: & for Akaron one.
1 Samuel 6:18 And the golden myce were according to the nombre of all the cytyes of the Philistines thorowe the fyue lordeshyppes: both of walled tounes & of tounes vnwalled, euen vnto the great stone, whereon they set doune the arcke of the Lorde: whiche stone remayneth vnto thys daye in the felde of Iehosua the Bethsamite.
1 Samuel 6:19 And he plaged the men of Bethsames, because they had sene the arcke of the Lorde. And he slue of the people fyftyethousand and thre skore & ten persones. And the people lamented, because the Lorde had slayne so greate a slaughter of them.
1 Samuel 6:20 And the men of Bethsames sayde: who is able to stand before the Lord so holy a God, & to whom shall he go from vs.
1 Samuel 6:21 And they sent messengers to the enhabiters of Kariath Iarim, sayinge: The Philistines haue brought home agayne the arcke of the Lorde: come doune and fet it vp to you.

CHAPTER: 7

1 Samuel 7:1 And the men of Kariathiarim came & set vp the arcke of the Lord & brought it into the house of Abinadab in Gabaah, & sanctified Eleazar hys sonne to wayte vpon the arcke of the Lorde.
1 Samuel 7:2 And whyle the arcke abode in Kariathiarim, the dayes multyplyed, that it was twentye yeares, & all Israel lamented after the Lorde.
1 Samuel 7:3 And Samuel spake vnto al Israel, saying: yf ye become agayne vnto the Lorde wyth al youre hertes, then put awaye the straunge Goddes from among you, & Astharoth, & prepare your hertes vnto the Lorde, & serue hym alone, & so shal he rydde you out of the handes of the Philistines.
1 Samuel 7:4 And then the chyldren of Israel, did put awaye Baalim and Astaroth, & serued the Lorde onelye.
1 Samuel 7:5 Then sayd Samuel: gather al Israel to Mazphah, that I maye pray for you vnto the Lorde.
1 Samuel 7:6 And they gathered together to Mazphah, & drue water & poured it out before the Lorde, & fasted the same daye, & sayde there: we haue synned agaynst the Lord. And Samuel iudged the causes of the chyldren of Israel in Mazphah.
1 Samuel 7:7 When the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered together to Mazphah, the Lordes of the Philistynes went vp agaynste Israel. And when the chyldren of Israel heard that, they were afraid of the Philistines
1 Samuel 7:8 & sayd to Samuel: cease not to crye vnto the Lorde oure God for vs, that he maye saue vs out of the handes of the Philistines.
1 Samuel 7:9 And Samuel toke a suckyng lambe & offered it all together for a burntofferyng, vnto the Lorde, and cryed vnto the Lord for Israel: & the Lorde hearde him.
1 Samuel 7:10 And as Samuel offered the burntofferyng, the Philistines came to fyght agaynst Israel. But the Lorde thundered a great thunder that same daye vpon the Philistines, & turmoyled them, that they were beaten before Israel.
1 Samuel 7:11 And the men of Israel issued out of Mazphah & pursued the Philistines & slue them, vntil they came vnder Bethcar.
1 Samuel 7:12 And then Samuel toke a stone, & pitched it betwene Mazphah & Sen, & called the name therof the stone of help, saying: thus farre hath the Lorde holp vs.
1 Samuel 7:13 And so the Philistines were broughte vnder that they came no more into the coastes of Israell: for the hande of the Lorde was vpon the Philistines all the dayes of Samuel.
1 Samuel 7:14 Therto the cityes which the Philistines had taken from Israel, came again to Israel, euen from Acaron to Geth, with the coastes of the same, which Israel plucked out of the handes of the Philistines For there was peace betwene Israell & the Amorites.
1 Samuel 7:15 And Samuel iudged Israel all the dayes of hys lyfe,
1 Samuel 7:16 & went about yere by yere, to Bethel Galgal & Mazphah, and iudged Israel in all those places,
1 Samuel 7:17 & came agayne to Ramath: for there was hys house, and there he iudged Israell, & there he buylt an aultare vnto the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 8

1 Samuel 8:1 When Samuel was olde, he made his sonnes iudges ouer Israel.
1 Samuel 8:2 The name of his eldest sonne was Ioel, & the name of the second Abiath whiche were iudges in Bersabe.
1 Samuel 8:3 Neuerthelesse his sonnes folowed not his steppes: but turned a syde after lucre, & toke rewardes, & peruerted the ryght.
1 Samuel 8:4 Then all the elders of Israel gathered them together & came to Samuell vnto Ramath,
1 Samuel 8:5 and sayd vnto him: behold thou art olde, & thy sonnes folow not thy wayes. Now therfor make vs a king to iudge vs, as all other nacions haue.
1 Samuel 8:6 But the thyng displeased Samuell, when they sayde: geue vs a kynge to iudge vs. And Samuel prayed vnto the Lorde.
1 Samuel 8:7 And the Lord sayd vnto Samuel: heare the voyce of the people in all that they say vnto the. For they haue not cast the awaye, but me: that I shulde not raygne ouer them.
1 Samuel 8:8 And as they haue euer done (sence I brought them out of Egypt vnto thys daye, & haue forsaken me, & serued other Goddes) euen so do they vnto the.
1 Samuel 8:9 Now therfor herken vnto theyr voyce, howbeit yet, testifye vnto them, & shew them the duty of the kyng that shal raygne ouer them.
1 Samuel 8:10 And Samuel tolde al the wordes of the Lord vnto the people that asked a kynge of hym, & he sayde:
1 Samuel 8:11 this shalbe the duty of the kyng that shal raigne ouer you: he wil take your sonnes & put them to his charettes & make his horsmen of them, & they must runne before his charet,
1 Samuel 8:12 & wil make him captaines of them ouer thousandes & ouer fyfties, & wil set them to eare hys grounde, & to gather in hys heruest, & to make instrumentes of warre & apparel for hys charettes.
1 Samuel 8:13 And he wyll take your doughters & make them the dressers of his ointmentes, & his cookes & bakers.
1 Samuel 8:14 And he shall take the best of youre feldes, & of youre vyneyardes & of your olyue trees, & geue them to hys seruauntes.
1 Samuel 8:15 And he shall take the tenth of your seede & of your vines, & geue it to his lordes, & to his seruauntes.
1 Samuel 8:16 And he shall take the best of your menseruauntes and maydeseruauntes & youngmen, and of your asses, and do his worke with them.
1 Samuel 8:17 And he shall take the tenthe of youre shepe, & ye shalbe his seruauntes.
1 Samuel 8:18 And when ye crye out at that time vpon your king, whiche ye shall haue chosen you, the Lorde wyl not heare you at that daye.
1 Samuel 8:19 Neuerthelesse the people wolde not heare the voyce of Samuel, but dyd saye: naye not so: But there shalbe a kyng ouer vs,
1 Samuel 8:20 & we wylbe lyke al other nacions. And oure kyng shal iudge vs, & go out before vs, & fyght oure battelles.
1 Samuel 8:21 And Samuel hearde all the wordes of the people, and rehersed them in the eares of the Lord.
1 Samuel 8:22 And the Lord said to Samuel: herken vnto theyr voyce, & make them a kynge. Then said Samuel vnto the men of Israell: go euery man vnto hys cytye.

CHAPTER: 9

1 Samuel 9:1 Now there was a man of Beniamin named Cis the sonne of Abiel, the sonne of Zeror, the sonne of Bechorath, the sonne of Aphiah, the sonne of a man that was a Ieminite, a man of myght,
1 Samuel 9:2 the same had a sonne called Saul, a goodly young man, so that among the children of Israel, there was none goodlier then he, & was therto from the shoulders vpwarde hyer then all the other people.
1 Samuel 9:3 And it chaunsed that the Asses of thys Cis Sauls father were lost. Then said Cis to Saule his sonne: take one of the laddes with the, & vp, & go seke the Asses.
1 Samuel 9:4 And they went thorow mount Ephraim, & thorow the lande of Salisia, & founde them not. Then they went thorow the lande of Salim, & there they were not. Then they went also thorow the land of Iemini, and they found them not.
1 Samuel 9:5 Then when they were come to the lande of Zuph, Saule sayde to the youngeman that was with hym: come, let vs returne, lest my father leue caring for the asses, & take thought for vs.
1 Samuel 9:6 And he answered him: behold, there is in this cytie a worshipful man of God, & all that he sayth, cometh to passe. Now then let vs go thether, paraduenture he shall shew vs what waye we may go.
1 Samuel 9:7 Then said Saul to his lad yf we go what shall we bryng the man? For our bread is all spent out of our hampers, and there is no nother present to bryng the man of God, what haue we?
1 Samuel 9:8 And the young man aunswered Saul agayne & sayde: I haue found about me the fourth part of a Sicle, that will we geue the man of God to tell vs oure waye.
1 Samuel 9:9 Before tyme in Israel when a man went to seke an answere of God, thus wyse he spake: come & let vs go to the Sear. For he that is now called a Prophet, was in the olde tyme called a Sear.
1 Samuel 9:10 Then sayde Saul to his young man: well said of the: come let vs go. And so they went vnto the cytie where the man of god was.
1 Samuel 9:11 And as they were goyng vp into the citie, they met with damoselles that came oute to draw water, & sayde vnto them: is there here a sear.
1 Samuel 9:12 And the maydens answered them: yee: beholde, he goeth before you. Make hast nowe, for he came thys day to the cytie, for the people must offer thys day in the hil.
1 Samuel 9:13 When ye be come into the citie, so shall you fynd hym, yer he go vp to the hil to eate: for the people wyll not eate vntyll he come, because he must blesse the offeryng. And then eate they that be bidden to the feaste. Nowe therfore get you vp for euen now shal ye fynd hym.
1 Samuel 9:14 And they went vp into the cyty. And when they were come into the myddes of the cytye: beholde, Samuel came out agaynst them, for to go vp to the hyl.
1 Samuel 9:15 But the Lorde had tolde Samuel a daye before Saul came, sayinge:
1 Samuel 9:16 to morowe thys tyme I wyl sende the a man out of the lande of Beniamin, him shalt thou anoynt to be captayne ouer my people Israel, that he maye saue my people out of the hande of the Philistines, for I haue loked vpon my people, and theyr crye is come vnto me.
1 Samuel 9:17 When Samuel saw Saule, the Lorde aunswered hym: se, this is the man whome I spake to the of. Thys same shall raygne ouer my people.
1 Samuel 9:18 Then went Saul to Samuel in the myddle of the gate, & sayd: tell me, I praye the, where about the sears house is,
1 Samuel 9:19 and Samuel answered Saul and sayde: I am the sear, go vp before me vnto the hyll, for ye shall eate wyth me to daye. And to morowe I wyll let the go erlye, & wyll tell the all that is in thyne herte,
1 Samuel 9:20 and as for thyne asses that were loste this day thre dayes, care not for them, for they are founde And moreouer whose shall the bewtyfull thynges of Israel be? belonge they not to the, and vnto all thy fathers house?
1 Samuel 9:21 But Saul answered, & sayde: am not I the sonne of a Ieminite of the smallest trybe of Israel, and my kinred the least of al the kynredes of the trybe of Beniamin, wherfore then speakest thou so to me?
1 Samuel 9:22 And Samuel toke Saul and his ladde and brought them into the parler, and made them sit in the chyefest place among them that were bidden: which were vpon a thyrtye persones.
1 Samuel 9:23 Then sayde Samuel vnto the cooke: brynge forth the porcyon which I gaue the: & of whiche I sayde kepe it wyth the.
1 Samuel 9:24 And the cooke toke vp the shoulder and broughte it, and set it before Saul. And Samuel sayd: beholde, that whiche is lefte: putte it before the & eate, for I kept it for the of purpose, when I called the people. And so Saul dyd eate wyth Samuell that daye.
1 Samuel 9:25 And when they were come doune from the hyl into the cytye, Samuel comuned with Saul vpon the toppe of the house:
1 Samuel 9:26 & they arose erlye. And about the spryng of the daye Samuel called vpon the toppe of the house saying: vp that I maye sende the awaye. And Saul arose. And they wente out at the dores both of them, both he and Samuell.
1 Samuel 9:27 And when they were come almoste oute of the toune, Samuel sayde to Saul: byd the lad go before vs, and he wente, but stande thou styll a whyle euen nowe, that I maye shewe the what God sayeth.

CHAPTER: 10

1 Samuel 10:1 And then Samuel toke a boxe of oyle, & poured it vpon his head & kissed him & sayd: the Lord hath annoynted the to be a captaine ouer his enheritaunce.
1 Samuel 10:2 And now when thou art departed from me, thou shalte mete two men by Rahels sepulchre in the borders of Beniamin euen at Zalezah. And they wyl say vnto the: the asses which thou wenteste to seke, are founde se, thy father hath lefte the care of the asses, and soroweth for you saying what shal I do for my sonne?
1 Samuel 10:3 Then thou shalt go forth from thence, & shalt come to the ocke of Thabor. And there shalt thou mete thre men goynge to God to Bethel: one cariyng thre kyddes: and another caryenge thre loues of bread: and the thyrd caryeng a botell of wine.
1 Samuel 10:4 And they wyll salute the and geue the two loues of bread: which thou shalt receyue of theyr handes.
1 Samuel 10:5 After that thou shalt come to the hyll of God, where the Philistines kepe theyr watche. And when thou art come thyther to that cytye, thou shalt mete a companye of Prophetes comyng doune from the hyll, with a psalter, a tymbrell, a pype, and an harp before them & they prophesying.
1 Samuel 10:6 And the spyryte of the Lord wyll come vpon the, and thou shalt prophesye with them, and shalt be turned into another man.
1 Samuel 10:7 And when these sygnes are chaunced the, then do what thou hast to do, for God is wyth the.
1 Samuel 10:8 And thou shalt also go before me to Galgall. And beholde I wyl come vnto the, to sacrifye burnt sacrifice & peace offerynges. Tary for me seuen dayes, tyll I come to the, & shew the what thou shalt do.
1 Samuel 10:9 And assone as he had turned his shoulder to go from Samuel, god gaue hym another maner of herte, and all those tokens came to passe that same day.
1 Samuel 10:10 When thei came to the hyll, beholde, the company of prophetes met him, & the sprite of God came vpon him, & he prophesyed among them.
1 Samuel 10:11 And all that knewe him before when they sawe that he prophesied among the Prophetes, they sayd eche to other: what is happened vnto the sonne of Cis? Is Saule also among the Prophetes?
1 Samuel 10:12 And one of the same place answered & sayde? who is theyr father? And thereof sprang a prouerbe: what is Saul also amonge the Prophetes:
1 Samuel 10:13 And when he had made an end of prophesieng, he came to the hyll.
1 Samuel 10:14 Saules fathers brother sayde vnto him & his lad: whether wente ye? And he answered: to seke the asses, & when we saw that they were no where, we went to Samuel.
1 Samuel 10:15 Then sayd Sauls vncle: tel me what Samuel sayde vnto you?
1 Samuel 10:16 And Saul answered his vncle: he tolde vs that the asses were found. But of the kyngdome wherof Samuel spake, tolde he hym not.
1 Samuel 10:17 After that Samuel called the people together vnto the Lorde to Mazphah
1 Samuel 10:18 & sayde vnto the chyldren of Israel: thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I brought you out of Egypt, & deliuered you out of the hand of the Egipcians, & out of the handes of al kingedomes that oppressed you.
1 Samuel 10:19 And ye haue this day cast awaye youre God that holpe you oute of al youre aduersities & trybulacyons. And ye haue sayde vnto him, make a kyng ouer vs. Now therfore stande before the Lord by your trybes & youre thousandes.
1 Samuel 10:20 And when Samuel had brought al the trybes of Israel the trybe of Beniamin was caught.
1 Samuel 10:21 When he had broughte the trybe of Beniamin by theyr kinredes the kynrede of Metri was caught, and Saul the sonne of Cys was caughte. And they sought him: but he coulde not be founde.
1 Samuel 10:22 Then they asked the Lorde further: whither the man shuld come thyther. And the Lorde aunswered: beholde he hath hydde hym selfe among the stuffe.
1 Samuel 10:23 And they ran, and fet hym thence. And when he stode among the people, he was hyer then anye of the people, from the shoulders vpwarde.
1 Samuel 10:24 And Samuel sayde to al the people there se ye whom the Lord hath chosen & how there is none lyke hym amonge all the companye. And al the people shouted and sayd: God lend the Kyng lyfe.
1 Samuel 10:25 Then Samuel tolde the people the dutye of the kyngedome, & wrote it in a boke, and layde it vp before the Lorde, & so sente all the people awaye, euery man to hys house.
1 Samuel 10:26 And Saule also went home to Gabaah. And there went wt hym an hoste, suche as God had touched theyr hartes.
1 Samuel 10:27 But the children of vnthryftynesse sayde: how shall he saue vs? and despysed him & brought hym not presentes. And he made as though he had not hearde it.

CHAPTER: 11

1 Samuel 11:1 Then Nahas the Ammonite came & beseged Iabes in Galaad. And al the people of Iabes sayd vnto Nahas: make a couenaunte wyth vs & we wylbe thy seruauntes.
1 Samuel 11:2 And Nahas the Amonite said: herto will I make a couenaunt wt you, euen to thrust oute all youre ryght eyes, that I may bring that shame vpon al Israel.
1 Samuel 11:3 Then said the elders of Iabes: geue vs .vij. dayes respite that we maye send messengers vnto al the coastes of Israell. And then yf there come no man to help vs, we wyll come out to the.
1 Samuel 11:4 Then came the messengers to Gabaah where Saul dwelte, & tolde his tidinges in the eares of the people. And al the people lyfte vp theyr voyces & wept.
1 Samuel 11:5 And behold Saul came followyng his oxen oute of the felde, & asked what ayled the people to wepe. And they told hym the tydynges of the men of Iabes.
1 Samuel 11:6 Then came the spryte of God vpon Saul, when he hearde those tidinges, & he was exceding angrye.
1 Samuel 11:7 And toke a youke of oxen & hewed them in peces, & sent them thorowout al the coastes of Israel by the handes of messengers saying: whosoeuer cometh not forth after Saul & after Samuel, so shall hys oxen be serued. Then the feare of the Lord fel on the people, & they came out as it had ben but one man.
1 Samuel 11:8 And when they were nombred in Bezek the children of Israel were thre hundred thousand, & the men of Iuda thyrtye thousand.
1 Samuel 11:9 And they sayd vnto the messengers that came, so say vnto the men of Iabes in Galaad: to morow by that tyme, the sunne be hote, ye shall haue helpe. And the messengers came & shewed the men of Iabes, & they were glad.
1 Samuel 11:10 And then the men of Iabes sayde: to morowe we wil come out vnto you, that ye maye do with vs al that pleaseth you.
1 Samuel 11:11 And on the morowe Saul put the people in thre partes. And they came in vpon the host in the morning watche, & slue the Ammonites, vntill the heat of the day. And they that remayned, shattered, so that two of them were not left together.
1 Samuel 11:12 Then saide the people to Samuel: what are they that sayd: shall Saule raigne ouer vs? bryng them that we may slay them.
1 Samuel 11:13 But Saule sayde: there shal no man dye thys daye, for to daye the Lord hath saued Israel.
1 Samuel 11:14 Then sayde Samuel vnto the people: come & let vs go to Galgal, & renewe the kyngdom there.
1 Samuel 11:15 And the people went to Galgal & made Saul kyng there, before the Lorde in Galgal. And there they offered peace offerynges before the Lorde. And there Saul and all the people reioysed excedinglye.

CHAPTER: 12

1 Samuel 12:1 Then sayde Samuell vnto al Israel: beholde I haue obeyed your voyce in all that ye saide vnto me, & haue made you a kyng.
1 Samuel 12:2 And se youre kyng walketh before you. But I am olde & graye headed: & behold my sonnes are with you & I haue walked before you from my chyldhode vnto thys daye.
1 Samuel 12:3 Behold here I am: answere me before the Lorde & before his annoynted, whose oxe haue I taken? or whose asse haue I taken? whom haue I done wrong to? or whom haue I pylled? And of whose hand haue I receiued any bribe, to blynde myne eyes therewith? & I wyll restore it you agayne.
1 Samuel 12:4 And they sayde thou hast done vs no wronge, nor pylled vs, nether hast thou taken ought of any mannes hande.
1 Samuel 12:5 Then sayde he to them: the Lorde is wytnesse vnto you, and hys annoynted is witnesse thys daye, that ye haue found nought in my handes. And they answered: we are wytnesses.
1 Samuel 12:6 Then sayde Samuel vnto the people: it is the Lorde that made Moses & Aaron, & which brought youre fathers out of Egypte.
1 Samuel 12:7 Now therfore stand stil, & let me reason wyth you before the Lorde, of al the ryghtuousnesses of the Lorde which he shewed both you & youre fathers.
1 Samuel 12:8 After that Iacob was come into Egypte, your fathers cryed vnto the Lorde, & the Lord sent Moses & Aaron, which brought your fathers out of Egypt, & made them dwel in thys place.
1 Samuel 12:9 Neuerthelater they forgat the Lorde theyr God. And he solde them into the hande of Sisara chyefe captayne of Iabin kynge of Hazor, and into the handes of the Phylystynes and into the handes of the Kynge of Moab, which fought agaynst them.
1 Samuel 12:10 Then they cryed vnto the Lorde, and sayde: we haue synned, because we haue forsaken the Lorde, and haue serued Baalim & Astharoth. But nowe delyuer vs out of the handes of our enemyes, and we wyll serue the.
1 Samuel 12:11 And the Lorde sent Ierobaal Badan. Iephthah & Samuel, & delyuered you out of the handes of youre ennemyes on euery syde, so that ye dwelled with out feare.
1 Samuel 12:12 And for al that when you sawe that Nahas the king of the children of Ammon came against you, ye sayde vnto me: not so, a kynge shall raygne ouer vs, when yet the Lord your god was your Kyng.
1 Samuel 12:13 Now therfore beholde, the kynge whome ye haue chosen and whome ye haue desyred: se, the Lorde hath geuen you a Kynge,
1 Samuel 12:14 Oh, that ye wolde feare the Lorde & serue hym, & heare hys voyce, & not disobeye the mouth of the Lorde: and that both ye and the Kynge that raygneth ouer you, wolde folow the Lorde your God.
1 Samuel 12:15 For yf ye shal not herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde, but shall disobeye the Lordes mouthe: then shal the hand of the Lorde be vpon you & on youre fathers.
1 Samuel 12:16 Now also stande & se thys great thyng which the Lorde wyl do before youre eyes:
1 Samuel 12:17 is it not now wheteheruest. And yet for al that, I wyl call vnto the Lorde, and he shall sende thunder and rayne. Wherby perceyue and vnderstand how that your wyckednes is great which ye haue done in the syght of the Lorde in askyng you a Kynge.
1 Samuel 12:18 And when Samuel called vnto the Lorde, the Lorde sent thunder & rayne the same daye. And all the people feared the Lord and Samuel excedynglye.
1 Samuel 12:19 Then sayde all the people vnto Samuel: praye for thy seruauntes vnto the Lorde thy God, that we dye not: for we haue synned in askyng vs a kynge, besyde all the synnes that euer we dyd.
1 Samuel 12:20 Then sayde Samuel vnto the people: feare not. And thoughe ye haue done all thys wyckednesse yet departe not from the Lord in any case. But serue hym wyth all your hertes.
1 Samuel 12:21 Nether turne ye after vayne thynges which cannot delyuer you, for they are but vanities.
1 Samuel 12:22 But the Lorde wyl not forsake hys people, because of hys great names sake: because the Lorde had begonne to make you hys people.
1 Samuel 12:23 Moreouer God forbydde that I shulde synne agaynste the Lorde in leuyng praiyng for you and to shewe you the good and ryghte way.
1 Samuel 12:24 Onelye feare you the Lorde and serue hym truly with all your hertes: for se, he hath done great thynges for you.
1 Samuel 12:25 But and yf ye shall do wyckedlye, then shall both ye and your King therto peryshe.

CHAPTER: 13

1 Samuel 13:1 Saul was as a chyld of a yeare old, when he began to raigne. And when he had raygned .ij. yeares ouer Israel,
1 Samuel 13:2 he chose him thre thousand men out of Israel. Two thousand were wyth Saul in Machmas & mount Bethel, & a thousande wyth Ionathas in Gabaah Beniamin. And the rest of the people he sent, euery man to hys owne house.
1 Samuel 13:3 And Ionathas slue the Philistines in an holde they had in Gabaah, & it came to the Philistines eares. And Saul caused the trompet to be blowen thorow out all the lande, saying: let the Ebrewes heare.
1 Samuel 13:4 And all Israel hearde say, how that Saul had destroyed an holde of the Philistines, and howe that Israel stancke vnto the Philistines. And all the people cryed after Saule to Galgal.
1 Samuel 13:5 Then the Philistines gathered them selues together to fyghte wyth Israel, thyrtie thousand charettes and sixe thousande horse men with the other people lyke the sande by the sea side is in multitude and came vp & pytched in Machmas eastward from Bethauen.
1 Samuel 13:6 And when the men of Israel sawe them selues in a strayte, and that the people were accombred, they hyd themselues in caues, in preuy holes, in rockes dennes & pyttes.
1 Samuel 13:7 And the Ebrues wente ouer Iordan vnto the land of Gad & Galaad. But Saul was yet in Galgal, and al the people that folowed hym, were astonyed.
1 Samuel 13:8 And he taryed seuen dayes, as Samuel had appoynted. But Samuell came not to Galgal, & the people scatered from hym.
1 Samuel 13:9 Wherfore Saule sayde: bryng burnt sacryfyce to me & peace offerynges. And he offered burnt sacrifice.
1 Samuel 13:10 And as sone as he had made an ende of offeryng burnte offerynges, behold, Samuel came. And Saul went agaynste him to salute him.
1 Samuel 13:11 Then sayde Samuel to Saul: what hast thou done? And Saule sayd: because I saw that the people skatered from me, & that thou camest not within the dayes apoynted & that the Philistines gathered them selues together to Machmas:
1 Samuel 13:12 then sayd I: the Philistines shall come doune vpon me to Galgal, yer I haue made supplicacyon vnto the Lorde. And therfore I toke a courage wyth me, and offered burnt offerynges.
1 Samuel 13:13 Then sayde Samuel to Saul, thou hast done folyshly & hast not kept the commaundement of the Lorde thy God whiche he commaunded the. For at thys tyme wolde the Lord haue stablished thy kyngdom vpon Israel for euer.
1 Samuel 13:14 But nowe thy kyngedome shall not continue. The Lord hath sought him a man after his own hert, & hath commaunded hym to be a captayne ouer hys people: because thou hast not kepte that which the Lorde commaunded the.
1 Samuel 13:15 And Samuel arose, & gat him from Galgal to Gabaah Beniamin. And Saul nombred the people that were found with hym, aboute a syxe hundred men.
1 Samuel 13:16 And Saul & Ionathas his sonne & the people that were founde with them, had theyr abydyng in Gabaah Beniamin. But the Philistines had pytched in Machmas.
1 Samuel 13:17 And ther came out of the host of the Philistines thre companyes to destroye: one companye turned vnto the waye that leadeth to Ephrah vnto the land of Sual.
1 Samuel 13:18 And another companye turned the way to Bethoron. And the thyrd company turned to the waye of the cost that turneth to the valeye of Zeboim toward the wildernesse.
1 Samuel 13:19 But there was no smyth thorowout al the lande of Israel. For the Philistines thought that then the Ebrues myght make them swerdes or speres.
1 Samuel 13:20 And therfor must al Israel go doune to the Philistines, to mende euery man his share, hys mattok, his axe, or hys cyckle:
1 Samuel 13:21 as ofte as the edges of the cyckles mattockes, doung forckes, & axes were blunte, and also to mende theyr goodes.
1 Samuel 13:22 And so in tyme of battell there was nether swerde nor spere founde in the handes of any of the people that were wyth Saule & Ionathas: saue for Saule and Ionathas hys sonne was there som what founde.
1 Samuel 13:23 And the Garison of the Philistines came oute, & stode on the other syde before Machmas.

CHAPTER: 14

1 Samuel 14:1 And it fell on a daye, that Ionathas the sonne of Saul sayd vnto hys young man that bare his harnes: come & let vs go ouer to the watche men of the Philistines that are younder on the other syde, & told not his father.
1 Samuel 14:2 But Saul taryed in the vtmost parte of Gabaah vnder a pomegarnet tree, that was in Magron, & the people that were with hym were vpon a sixe hundred men.
1 Samuel 14:3 And Ahiah the sonne of Ahitob Iehabodes brother, the sonne of Phinehes, the sonne of Eli, was the Lordes priest in Siloh & bare an Ephod. But the people wyst not that Ionathas was gone.
1 Samuel 14:4 And in the way ouer by whiche Ionathas sought to go ouer vnto the garyson of the philistines, were there two sharpe rockes, euen one on the one syde, & the other on the other syde: the one called Bozez, & the other Seneh.
1 Samuel 14:5 And the one leaneth northwarde toward Machmas, & the other southwarde toward Gabaah.
1 Samuel 14:6 Then sayd Ionathas to the young man that bare hys harnesse: come & let vs go ouer vnto the standynge of these vncyrcumcysed, paraduenture the Lorde wyl worke with vs: for the Lorde is free to saue with manye or wyth few.
1 Samuel 14:7 And his harnesbearer sayde vnto hym: do all that is in thyne hert: set the forwarde: & se I am with the, as thyne hert lusteth.
1 Samuel 14:8 Then sayde Ionathas: behold, when we go ouer vnto the men, & shewe oure selues vnto them:
1 Samuel 14:9 yf they say on thys wyse to vs: tarye vntyl we come to you, then we wyl stand styl where we be & not go vp vnto them.
1 Samuel 14:10 But & yf they so saye vnto vs: come vp vnto vs, then we wyl go vp, for the Lorde hath deliuered them into oure handes. And thys shalbe a sygne vnto vs.
1 Samuel 14:11 And when they had bothe shewed them selues vnto the garison of the Philistines, the Philistines sayd: se the Ebrewes come out of the holes where thei had hidde them selues in.
1 Samuel 14:12 And the men of the garison answered Ionathas & hys harnesbearer & sayde: come vp to vs, & we wyl shew you a thyng. Then sayd Ionathas vnto hys harnesbearer: come vp after me, for the Lord hath delyuered them into the handes of Israel.
1 Samuel 14:13 And Ionathas clame vpon handes & fete, & hys harnesbearer after him. Then they fel before Ionathas, & his harnesbearer slue them after him.
1 Samuel 14:14 And that fyrst slaughter which Ionathas and hys harnesbearer made was vpon a twentye men, within the compasse as it were about an halfe aker of land.
1 Samuel 14:15 And there was a fear in the host that was in the felde, & among all the people: in so much that they that kept the hold and they that were gone to robbe, were afrayde also, and the earthe trymbled, and there was a feare sente of God.
1 Samuel 14:16 And the watche men of Saule in Gabaah Beniamin sawe. And beholde, the people skatered and ranne hyther and thyther.
1 Samuel 14:17 Then sayde Saule vnto the people that was with him: nombre and se who is gone awaye from vs. And when they had tolde: beholde, Ionathas & his harnesbearer were not there.
1 Samuel 14:18 And then Saul sayd vnto Ahia: bryng hyther the arcke of God. For the arck of God was at that tyme wt the children of Israel.
1 Samuel 14:19 And whyle Saule talked vnto the priest, the people that were in the host of the Philistines, ranne more & more. And Saul sayd vnto the priest: withdraw thyne hand.
1 Samuel 14:20 And Saul cryed & all the people that were with him, and went to battel. And beholde euery mans swerd was agaynst hys felowe, wt a myghty great slaughter.
1 Samuel 14:21 Moreouer the Ebrues that were with the Philistines before that tyme, & were come with them in al partes of the hoste, they turned to Israel that was with Saul & Ionathas.
1 Samuel 14:22 And they also whiche had hydde them selues in mount Ephraim, as sone as they heard how that the Philistines were fledde, they folowed after them in battell.
1 Samuel 14:23 And so God holp Israel that daye. And the battell contynued vntyll they came to Bethauen.
1 Samuel 14:24 And the men of Israel ioyned them selues together that daye: & Saule adiured the people saying: Cursed be he that eateth anye fode vntyll nyghte, that I may be aduenged of myne enemies. And so there was none of the people that tasted any sustinaunce.
1 Samuel 14:25 And all the land came to a woode where honye laye vpon the grounde.
1 Samuel 14:26 And when the people were come into the woodde: Beholde, the honye dropped. How be it there was no man that moued hys hande to hys mouthe, because that the people feared the cursse.
1 Samuel 14:27 But Ionathas heard not when hys father adiured the people, wherfor he put forth the ende of the staffe that was in his hand & dipte it in an honye combe, & put his hande to his mouth, & his eyes receyued sight.
1 Samuel 14:28 Then spake one of the people & sayd: thy father adiured the people saying: Cursed be that man that eateth any sustinaunce this daye, and yet the people were fayntye.
1 Samuel 14:29 Then sayde Ionathas: my father hath troubled the land: for se, myne eyes hath receyued sighte, because I tasted a lytle of thys honye:
1 Samuel 14:30 how then yf all the people had eaten of the spoyle of theyr enemyes, which they founde had there not ben then a muche greater slaughter amonge the Philistines?
1 Samuel 14:31 And they layed on the Philistines that daye, from Machmas to Aialon. And the people were excedynge fayntye.
1 Samuel 14:32 Then the people gat them to the spoyle & toke shepe, oxen & calues, & slue them on the ground & dyd eate wyth the bloude.
1 Samuel 14:33 Then the men told Saul, sayinge: Beholde the people synne agaynst the Lorde, in that they eate wyth the bloude. And he sayde: ye haue trespaced. But roule a greate stone vnto me nowe,
1 Samuel 14:34 and go abroad among the people, and bidde them bryng euery man his oxe & euerye man hys shepe, & slaye them here, & synne not agaynste the Lorde in eatyng with the bloude. And the people brought euery man his oxe in his hand by night & slue them there.
1 Samuel 14:35 And Saul made an aultar vnto the Lorde. And that was the fyrst altare that he made vnto the Lorde.
1 Samuel 14:36 And Saul sayde: let vs go doune after the Philistines by nyght, & let vs make hauoke amonge them vntyll it be daye in the mornyng, and let vs not leaue one of them. And the people answered: do whatsoeuer thou thynkest best. Then sayd the priest: let vs come hether vnto God.
1 Samuel 14:37 And Saule asked of God: shall I go doune after the Philistines? and wylt thou delyuer them into myne handes? But he aunswered hym not at that tyme.
1 Samuel 14:38 Then sayde Saul: let the people come hyther out of all quarters, & knowe and se, in whome thys synne is chaunced thys daye:
1 Samuel 14:39 for as trulye as the Lorde lyueth which hath saued Israel, though it be in Ionathas my sonne he shall dye for it. But no man answered hym of all the people.
1 Samuel 14:40 Then he said vnto all Israell: be ye on one syde, & I & Ionathas my sonne wylbe on another. And the people sayde vnto Saule: what thou thynkest best that do.
1 Samuel 14:41 And Saule sayde vnto the Lorde God of Israell: geue perfecte knoweledge. And Saule and Ionathas were caught, & the people skaped free.
1 Samuel 14:42 Then sayde Saul, cast lottes betwene me & Ionathas my sonne. And Ionathas was caughte.
1 Samuel 14:43 Then Saul sayde to Ionathas: tell me what thou hast done. And Ionathas tolde hym & sayde: I tasted a lytle honye vpon the ende of my staffe that was in myne hande, & se, I must dye.
1 Samuel 14:44 Then sayd Saul: God do so and so to me except that thou dye Ionathas.
1 Samuel 14:45 But the people sayde vnto Saul: shall Ionathas dye whiche hath so myghtely holpe Israel? God forbyd. As truly as the Lorde lyueth, there shall not one hearre of his head fal to the ground: for he hath wroughte with God thys daye. And so the people delyuered Ionathas, that he dyed not. And then Saule departed from folowyng the Philistynes.
1 Samuel 14:46 And the Phylystynes wente to theyr owne place.
1 Samuel 14:47 And so Saule toke the kyngedom ouer Israel, and fought agaynste all hys enemyes on euerye syde: agaynste the Moabytes: agaynst the chyldren of Ammon: agaynst the Edomites: agaynste the Kynges of Zobah and agaynst the Philystynes. And whethersoeuer he turned hym selfe, there he wanne,
1 Samuel 14:48 and played the man & slue the Amaleckites, and rydde Israel out of the handes of them that spoyled them.
1 Samuel 14:49 The sonnes of Saule were Ionathas, Iesui, and Melchisua. And hys two doughters were thus named: the elder was called Merob & the younger Michol.
1 Samuel 14:50 And the name of Saules wyfe was Ahinoam the doughter of Ahimaaz. And the name of hys chyefe captayne was Abner the sonne of Ner Saules vncle.
1 Samuel 14:51 And Cis was Saules father. And Ner the father of Abner was the sonne of Abiel.
1 Samuel 14:52 And there was sore war with the Philistines al the dayes of Saul. For whersoeuer Saul sawe a stronge man, and an actiue, he toke hym vnto hym.

CHAPTER: 15

1 Samuel 15:1 Then sayde Samuel vnto Saul: the Lorde sent me to anoynt the King ouer his people Israel. Now therfore obeye thou the voyce of the wordes of the Lorde.
1 Samuel 15:2 Thus saith the Lorde of hostes: I haue called to remembraunce that whiche Amalech dyd to Israel how they laye in wayte for them in the way as they came out of Egypte.
1 Samuel 15:3 Now therfor go & smyte the Amaleckites, & onelye destroy ye all that pertayneth vnto them, & se thou haue no compassion on them. But slay both man & woman, infant & sucklyng, & oxe, shepe, camell & Asse.
1 Samuel 15:4 And Saul tolde it the people, & nombred them in Telaim two hundred thousand foote men, & ten thousand men of Iuda.
1 Samuel 15:5 And Saule came vnto a city of the Amaleckites, & fought in a valeye.
1 Samuel 15:6 But Saul sayde vnto the Kenites go & departe, & get ye doune from amonge the Amaleckytes, leste I destroy you wyth them for ye shewed mercye with Israell when they came out of Egypt. And the kenites departed from amonge the Amaleckites.
1 Samuel 15:7 And Saul slue the Amaleckites from Heuila to Sur that lyeth before Egypte,
1 Samuel 15:8 & toke Agag the Kyng of the Amaleckites a lyue, & vtterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the swerde.
1 Samuel 15:9 But Saule and the people spared Agag, and they left of the shepe and of the oxen and fat thynges and the lambes and al that was good, and wolde not destroy them. But all that was noughte worth an flaggye, that they destroyed vtterlye.
1 Samuel 15:10 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Samuel, sayinge:
1 Samuel 15:11 it repenteth me that I haue made Saul King. For he is turned from me, & hath not parformed my commaundementes, wherfore Samuel was euyl apayde & cryed vnto the Lord all nyght.
1 Samuel 15:12 And Samuel rose earlye, to mete Saul in the mornynge. And it was tolde Samuel that Saule was come to Carmell, and had set hym vp a pyller of triumphe. And was turned and departed and gone to Galgall.
1 Samuel 15:13 And when Samuel was come to Saule, Saule sayde vnto hym: Blessed be thou in the Lorde. I haue done the commaundemente of the Lorde.
1 Samuel 15:14 And Samuel aunswered: what meaneth then the bleatynge of the shepe in myne eares, & the noyse of the oxen whiche I heare?
1 Samuel 15:15 And Saule sayde: they haue broughte them from the Amaleckytes. For the people spared the best of the shepe and of the oxen, to sacrifyce vnto the Lorde thy God. And the remnaunt we haue destroyed.
1 Samuel 15:16 But Samuel sayde to Saul: cease and let me tell the what the Lorde hath sayde to me thys nyght. And he sayde vnto him: saye on.
1 Samuel 15:17 And Samuel sayde when thou waste lytle in thyne owne sighte, wast thou not made the head of the trybes of Israell? And the Lorde anoynted the Kynge ouer Israel.
1 Samuel 15:18 And then the Lord sent the on a iourneye, & sayde vnto the, se that thou vtterlye destroye those synners, the Amaleckites & fyght agaynste them vntil ye haue vtterlye destroyed them.
1 Samuel 15:19 And wherfore hast thou now not obeyed the voyce of the Lorde. But dydest turne to the praye & haste wrought wickednesse in the sight of the Lord?
1 Samuel 15:20 And Saule sayde vnto Samuel: I haue obeyed the voyce of the Lorde, and wente the waye which the Lord sent me, & haue brought Agag the Kynge of the Amaleckites. And haue vtterlye destroyed the Amaleckites.
1 Samuel 15:21 And the people toke of the spoyle, shepe, oxen, and the chiefest of the thynges which shulde haue ben destroyed, to offer vnto the Lorde thy God in Galgal.
1 Samuel 15:22 Then sayde Samuel: hath the Lorde as great pleasure in burnt sacryfyces & offerynges, as he hath that thou shouldest obeye hys voyce? Beholde, to obeye is better then offeryng, and to geue heade is better then the fat of rammes.
1 Samuel 15:23 For rebellyousnesse is as the synne of witchcrafte, & stoburnesse is wyckednesse and Idolatrye. Because therfore thou hast cast awaye the worde of the Lorde, therfore hath the Lorde caste awaye the also, from beynge Kynge.
1 Samuel 15:24 Then sayde Saul to Samuel: I haue sinned, for I haue trespaced the mouthe of the Lorde, and thy wordes, because I feared the people and obeyed theyr voyce.
1 Samuel 15:25 But now take awaye my synne, & turne agayne wyth me, that I maye worshyppe the Lord.
1 Samuel 15:26 Then sayd Samuel vnto Saul: I wyll not returne wyth the: for thou hast cast awaye the byddyng of God, & therfore the Lorde hath cast awaye the also, that thou shalt not be Kyng ouer Israel.
1 Samuel 15:27 And as Samuel turned to go awaye, he caught the lappe of hys coote, and it rente.
1 Samuel 15:28 Then Samuel saide: the Lorde hath rente the Kyngdome of Israel from the this daye, and hath geuen it to a neyghbour of thyne, that is better then thou.
1 Samuel 15:29 And therto he that geueth victorye to Israel, wyl not begyle nor repente: for he is not a man, that can repent.
1 Samuel 15:30 Then he sayd: I haue synned. But yet honoure me before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turne agayne wyth me, that I maye praye vnto the Lorde thy God.
1 Samuel 15:31 And Samuell turned agayne, and folowed Saule. And Saul prayed vnto the Lord.
1 Samuel 15:32 Then sayde Samuel: Bryng ye hyther to me Agag the Kynge of the Amaleckytes. And Agag came vnto hym delycately. And Agag said: truly the bytternesse of death cometh on. And Samuel sayde:
1 Samuel 15:33 As thy swerde hath made wemen chyldelesse, so shall thy mother be chyldlesse among other wemen. And so Samuell hewed Agag in peces before the Lord in Galgal. And then Samuell departed to Ramath.
1 Samuel 15:34 And Saul went home to hys house to Gabaah Saule.
1 Samuel 15:35 But Samuel came no more to se Saule vntyll the day of hys death. Neuerthelesse Samuel mourned for Saule, because the Lorde repented that he had made hym Kyng ouer Israel.

CHAPTER: 16

1 Samuel 16:1 And then the Lorde sayde vnto Samuel: How longe wilt thou mourne for Saul, seing I haue cast him away from raygning ouer Israel? fyll an horne with oyntment, and come: I wil sende the to Isay the Bethlehemite, for I haue spyed me a king amonge his sonnes.
1 Samuel 16:2 But Samuel answered: how shall I go? For Saul shall heare it and wyll kyll me. And the Lorde sayde: Take an heyfer with the, and saye thou goest to offer to the Lorde.
1 Samuel 16:3 And call Isai to the offerynge, and I wil shew the what thou shalt do. And thou shalt anoynt hym whom I saye vnto the.
1 Samuel 16:4 And Samuel dyd as the Lorde bad him. And when he came to Bethlehem, the elders of the towne were astonyed at hys coming, and sayde: Betokeneth thy comynge peace?
1 Samuel 16:5 and he sayde, ye, for I am come to offer vnto the Lorde. Clense your selues and come wyth me to the offerynge. And he puryfyed Isai and his sonnes, and bad them to the offerynge.
1 Samuel 16:6 And when they were come, he loked on Eliab and sayde: the Lordes anoynted is before hym.
1 Samuel 16:7 But the Lorde sayde vnto Samuel: loke not on his fashion nor on the height of hys stature, for I haue refused hym. Because it is not as man seyth. For man loketh on the outward apperaunce, but the Lorde beholdeth the harte.
1 Samuel 16:8 Then Isai called Abinadab and made hym come before Samuel. And he sayd: nether yet hath the Lord chosen thys.
1 Samuel 16:9 Then Isai made Samah come, and he sayde: nether yet hath the Lord chosen hym.
1 Samuel 16:10 Then made Isai seuen of hys sonnes come before Samuel. And Samuel sayd, the Lord hath chosen none of these.
1 Samuel 16:11 Then sayde Samuel to Isai: are here all thy chyldren, and he saide: the youngest is yet behynde: Beholde, he kepeth the shepe. Then Samuel sayd vnto Isai: sende and fet hym for we wyl not sytte doune, til he be come hyther.
1 Samuel 16:12 And he sent and brought hym in. And he was browne wyth goodly eyes, and welfauored in syght. And then the Lord said vp and anoynt hym: for this is he.
1 Samuel 16:13 And Samuel toke the horne with the oyntment and annoynted him in the presens of hys brethren. And the spryte of the Lord came vpon Dauid, from that daye forwarde. And Samuel rose vp and went to Ramath.
1 Samuel 16:14 But the spyryte of the Lord departed from Saul, and an euill spyryt sent of the lord vexed hym.
1 Samuel 16:15 Then sayde his seruauntes vnto hym. Beholde, an euyll spyryt sent of god vexeth the,
1 Samuel 16:16 let oure Lord therfore commaund hys seruauntes to seke a man that is a connynge player wyth an harpe. And then when the euyll sprete sent of God, cometh vpon the that he may plaie wyth hys hande, and thou shalt be eased.
1 Samuel 16:17 And Saul sayde vnto his seruauntes: seke me a man that can well playe, and brynge hym to me.
1 Samuel 16:18 Then answered one of hys seruauntes, and saide. Beholde, I haue sene a sonne of Isai the Bethlehemyte, that can playe vpon instrumentes, and is an actyue felowe and a man of warre and prudent and well made, and the Lorde is with hym,
1 Samuel 16:19 whervpon Saul sent messengers vnto Isai, and saide, sende me Dauid thy sonne which is with the shepe.
1 Samuel 16:20 And Isai toke an asse laden with bread, and a flacked of wyne, & a kidde and sent them by Dauyd hys sonne vnto Saul.
1 Samuel 16:21 And Dauid went to Saul, and came before hym, and he loued hym very well, so that he was made hys harnesbearer.
1 Samuel 16:22 And Saul sent to Isai saying, let Dauid remaine wyth me, for he hath founde fauour in my syght.
1 Samuel 16:23 And when the spyryte of God came vpon Saul, Dauid toke an harpe and plaied with hys hand, and so Saul was refresshed, and dyd amend and the euyll spyryt departed from hym.

CHAPTER: 17

1 Samuel 17:1 The Philistines gathered theyr hoste to battel, and came together to Socoh in Iuda, and pitched betwene Socoh and Azekah, in the ende of Domim.
1 Samuel 17:2 And Saul and the men of Israel came and pytched in Ockedale, and put them selues in araye, to fyght agaynst the Phylystines.
1 Samuel 17:3 And the Philistynes stode on an hyll on the one syde, and Israel stode on a hyll on the other syde, and a valeye betwene them.
1 Samuel 17:4 And then came a man and stode in the myddes, out of the tentes of the Philistines named Goliath of Geth syxe cubytes and an handbredeth longe,
1 Samuel 17:5 and had an helmet of brasse vpon hys head, and a coote of mayle about hym. And the weyght of his coote of mayle was fyue thousande Cyckles of brasse.
1 Samuel 17:6 And he had harnesse of brasse vpon hys legges, and a shilde of brasse vpon hys shoulders.
1 Samuel 17:7 And the shaft of hys spere was like a weauers beame. And hys speare heade weyed syx hundred sykles of yron. And one bearynge a shylde went before hym.
1 Samuel 17:8 And he stode and called vnto the hoste of Israel, and sayde vnto them: what neadeth that ye shoulde come out in araye to battell? am not I a Philistine, and you seruauntes to Saul, chose you a man, and let hym come doune to me,
1 Samuel 17:9 yf he be able to fyght wyth me, and to beate me, then we wyll be youre seruauntes. But yf I can ouercome hym and beate hym, then ye shalbe oure seruauntes and serue vs.
1 Samuel 17:10 And the Philistine said: I haue defyed the host of Israel thys daye geue me a man and let vs fyght together.
1 Samuel 17:11 When Saul and all Israell hearde those wordes of the Philistine, they were discouraged & greatly afraied.
1 Samuel 17:12 And this Dauid was the sonne of an Ephrathite of Bethlehem Iuda, named Isai, whyche Isai had eyght sonnes. And was an olde man in the daies of Saul among the people.
1 Samuel 17:13 And the thre eldest sonnes of Isai went and folowed Saul to battell. And the names of his thre sonnes that went to battel were Eliab the eldest, and the next to hym Abinadab, and the thyrd Samah,
1 Samuel 17:14 and Dauid was the youngest. And when the thre eldest were gone after Saul,
1 Samuel 17:15 Dauid went and departed from Saul, to fede hys fathers shepe at Bethlehem.
1 Samuel 17:16 And the Philistine came forth euery mornyng and euenyng, and contynued fourtye dayes.
1 Samuel 17:17 And Isai sayde vnto Dauid hys sonne: take for thy brethren this Epha of parched corne, and these ten loues, and runne to the hoste, to thy brethren.
1 Samuel 17:18 And carye these ten freshe cheses vnto the capitayne, and loke how thy brethren fare, and fet out their pledges.
1 Samuel 17:19 And Saul and they and all the men of Israell were in ocke valey fyghtyuge wyth the Philistines.
1 Samuel 17:20 And Dauid rose vp erlye in the mornynge and lefte the shepe wyth a keper, and toke and went, as Isai had commaunded hym, and came where the host laye. And the host was goying out in araye, and showted in the battell:
1 Samuel 17:21 for Israel and the Philistines had put them selues in araye, the one agaynst the other.
1 Samuel 17:22 Then Dauid put the panier from hym, vnto the handes of the keper of the vessels, and ranne into the hoste, and came and saluted hys brethren.
1 Samuel 17:23 And as he talketh with them, beholde, there stode a man in the myddes, Goliath the Philistine by name, of Beth, whyche came out of the araye of the Philistines, and spake of the maner aboue rehersed, that Dauid hearde it.
1 Samuel 17:24 And all the men of Israell, when they sawe the man, ranne awaye from hym, and were sore afrayed.
1 Samuel 17:25 And euery man of Israel sayde: Se ye this man that is come forthe, euen to reuile Israel he is come. And to hym that beateth hym wyll the Kynge geue great ryches, and wyl geue hym hys daughter therto, ye and make hys fathers house fre in Israel.
1 Samuel 17:26 Then spake Dauid to the men that stode by and sayde: What shalbe done to the man that beateth thys Philistine, and taketh awaye the shame from Israel? for what is this vncircumcysed Phylystyne, that he shoulde reuyle the hoste of the lyuynge God?
1 Samuel 17:27 And the people answered as it is rehersed sayinge: so shal it be done to the man that beateth him.
1 Samuel 17:28 And Eliab his eldest brother hearde when he spake vnto the men and was angry with Dauid and sayde: Why camest thou away and wyth whom hast thou lefte those fewe shepe in the wyldernesse? I knowe thy pryde and the malyce of thyne herte, that thou art come to se the battell.
1 Samuel 17:29 And Dauid answered what haue I now done? is there any more saue a worde?
1 Samuel 17:30 And departed from him into an other fronte, & spake of the same maner, and the people answered hym agayne as before.
1 Samuel 17:31 And they that hearde the wordes whych Dauid spake, rehersed them before Saul, whyche caused hym to be fett.
1 Samuel 17:32 And Dauid saide to Saul: Let no mannes hert fayle him because of hym. Thy seruaunt wyll go and fyght wyth this Philistine.
1 Samuel 17:33 And Saul sayde to Dauid agayn, thou art not able to go vnto thys Philistine, to fyght wyth hym. For thou art but a ladd, and he hath bene a man of warre euen from hys youth.
1 Samuel 17:34 Then sayde Dauid vnto Saul, as thy seruaunt kept his fathers shepe, there came a Lyon and lykewyse a Beare, and toke a shepe out of the flocke.
1 Samuel 17:35 And I went out after hym and smote hym, and toke it out of hys mouth. And when he arose agaynst me, I caught hym by the bearde and smote hym and slue hym.
1 Samuel 17:36 For bothe a Lyon and also a Beare hath thy seruaunt slayne. And this vncircumcysed Philistine shalbe as one of them, for hys railing on the hoste of the lyuyng God.
1 Samuel 17:37 And Dauid spake moreouer, the Lorde that delyuered me out of the handes of the Lyon and out of the handes of the Beare, he shall delyuer me also oute of the handes of the Philistine. Then sayde Saul to Dauid: go, and the Lorde be wyth the.
1 Samuel 17:38 And Saul put hys rayment vpon Dauid, and put an helmet of brasse vpon his head, and put a coote of mail vpon hym,
1 Samuel 17:39 and gyrde Dauid with hys own swearde vpon hys rayment. And he assayed to go, for he neuer proued it. Then sayde Dauid vnto Saul: I can not go in these, for I haue not bene vsed therto, and put them of hym
1 Samuel 17:40 and toke hys staffe in hys hande, and chose hym fyue smotestones out of a broke and put them in a shepardes bagge whyche he had, and in a pocke, and hys slyng in hys hande, and went to the Philistine.
1 Samuel 17:41 And the Philistine came and drue nere to Dauid, wyth the man that bare a shylde before hym.
1 Samuel 17:42 And when the Philistine loked and sawe Dauid, he disdayned hym, for he was but a ladd, roudye and goodly to loke vpon.
1 Samuel 17:43 And the Philistine sayde vnto Dauid: am I a dogge, that thou comest to me with a staf? and he cursed Dauid in the name of hys Goddes.
1 Samuel 17:44 And he sayde to Dauid: come to me & I wyll geue thy fleshe vnto the fowles of the ayre, and to the beastes of the felde?
1 Samuel 17:45 Then sayd Dauid to the Philistine: thou camest to me with a swerde, a speare & shild, but I come to the in the name of the Lorde of hostes, the God of the hoste of Israell whom thou hast rayled vpon.
1 Samuel 17:46 This day shal the Lorde delyuer the into my hande, and I shall smyte the and take thyne head from the, and I will geue the karcases of the hoste of the Philistines this day vnto the foules of the ayre and to the beastes of the earth, and al the worlde shal knowe, that there is a God in Israel.
1 Samuel 17:47 And al this congregacyon shal know, that the Lorde saueth not wyth the swerde and speare. For the battel is the Lordes, and he shal geue you into oure handes.
1 Samuel 17:48 And when the Philistine arose and came and drue nye vnto Dauid, Dauid hasted and ranne in araye euen againste the Philistyne.
1 Samuel 17:49 And Dauid put hys hande in hys yoke and toke out a stone and slange it, and smote the Philystyne in hys forhead, that the stone soncke into hys forhead, and he felle groueling to the earth.
1 Samuel 17:50 And so Dauid ouercame the Philistine wyth a slyng and a stone, & smote the Philistine and slue him. And because Dauid had no swerde in his hand,
1 Samuel 17:51 he ranne and stode vpon the Philistine, and toke his swerd and drue it oute of his shethe, and slue hym & cut of his head therwyth. And when the Philistines sawe that theyr champyon was dead, they fleed.
1 Samuel 17:52 And the men of Israel and of Iuda arose and showted and folowed after the Philistines, vntyl they came to the valey and vnto the gates of Akaron. And the Philistines fell doune dead by the waye, euen vnto Geth and Akaron.
1 Samuel 17:53 And then the children of Israel returned from chasyng after the Phylistines and robbed theyr tentes.
1 Samuel 17:54 And Dauid toke the head of the Philistine and brought it to Ierusalem: But he put his armoure in hys tente.
1 Samuel 17:55 When Saul saw Dauid go forth agaynst the Philistine, he sayde vnto Abner the captayne of hys host: Abner, whose sonne is this lad? And Abner answered, as truely as thy soule lyueth, O kynge, I can not tell.
1 Samuel 17:56 Then sayde the kynge: Enquere thou, whose sonne the youngelyng is:
1 Samuel 17:57 And so when Dauid was returned from the slaughter of the Philystine, Abner toke him and brought him before Saul, wyth the head of the Philistine in hys hande.
1 Samuel 17:58 And Saul said to him: whose sonne art thou, thou lad? And Dauid answered the sonne of thy seruaunt Isai the Bethlehemite.

CHAPTER: 18

1 Samuel 18:1 And when he had made an ende of speaking vnto Saul, the soule of Ionathas was knit wyth the soule of Dauid. In so much that he loued hym as hys owne soule.
1 Samuel 18:2 And Saul toke him that daye & would let hym go no more home to hys fathers house.
1 Samuel 18:3 And Ionathas and Dauid bounde them selues the one to the other, for Ionathas loued him as hys owne soule.
1 Samuel 18:4 And Ionathas put of his owne coote that was vpon hym, & gaue it Dauid, and therto hys mantel, hys swerde, his bowe and hys gyrdle.
1 Samuel 18:5 And Dauid went oute to all that Saul sente hym, and behaued hym selfe wyselye. And when Saul hath set him ouer his men of warre, he pleased al the people, and Sauls seruauntes therto.
1 Samuel 18:6 And it happened as they went, when Dauid was returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that wemen came out of al cytyes of Israel syngynge and daunsyng, agaynste Saul, wyth tymbrelles, wyth ioye, and wyth fydilles.
1 Samuel 18:7 And the wemen that played sange therto, & sayd: Saul hath slayne his thousand & Dauid hys ten thousand.
1 Samuel 18:8 Then was Saul exceding wroth & the sayinge displeased him, and he sayde: they haue ascrybed vnto Dauid ten thousand, and to me but a thousande, & what can he more haue saue the kyngdome?
1 Samuel 18:9 wherfore Saul loked on syde of Dauid from that daye forward.
1 Samuel 18:10 And it happened on the morow, that the euyll spirite sente of God came vpon Saul, so that he prophesyed in the myddes of the house. And Dauid played on the instrumente wyth hys hande as he was daylye wont.
1 Samuel 18:11 And Saul had a speare in hys hand, and hourlde it entendyng to haue nayled Dauid to the walle. But Dauid auoyded out of hys presence two times.
1 Samuel 18:12 For Saul was afrayde of Dauid, because the Lorde was wt him, and was departed from Saul.
1 Samuel 18:13 And then Saul put Dauid from him and made hym a captayne ouer a thousand, and he wente oute and in before the people.
1 Samuel 18:14 And Dauid was wyse in al that he toke in hande, and the Lorde was wyth hym.
1 Samuel 18:15 Wherfore when Saul sawe that he was so exceding wyse, he was afrayd of him.
1 Samuel 18:16 But al Israel and Iuda loued Dauid because he wente oute and in before them.
1 Samuel 18:17 Then sayd Saul to Dauid. Beholde my eldest doughter Merob, her I wyll geue the to wyfe: Only play the man and fyghte the Lordes batelles. For Saul thoughte myne hande shal not be vpon hym, but the hande of the Philistines.
1 Samuel 18:18 And Dauid answered Saul: what am I? and what is my lyfe or the kynred of my father in Israel, that I shoulde be sonne in lawe to the Kynge:
1 Samuel 18:19 How be it when the time was come that Merob Sauls doughter shoulde haue bene geuen to Dauid, she was geuen vnto Adriel a Meholothite, to wyfe.
1 Samuel 18:20 How be it Michol Sauls doughter loued Dauid. And when it was shewed Saul, the thinge pleased hym well.
1 Samuel 18:21 And he sayde: I wyll geue hym her that she maye be a snare to hym, to bringe the hande of the Philistines vpon hym. And Saul sayde to Dauid: thou shalt thys daye be my sonne in lawe agayne.
1 Samuel 18:22 And Saul commaunded hys seruauntes, to comen wyth Dauid secretely and saye: Beholde the Kynge hath a fauoure to the, and all his seruauntes loue the, be therfore the kinges sonne in lawe.
1 Samuel 18:23 And Sauls seruauntes spake these wordes in the eares of Dauid. But Dauid answered: semeth it to you a light thing to be the kinges sonne in lawe, when I am a poore man and of smalle reputacyon?
1 Samuel 18:24 And Sauls seruauntes tolde hym agayne sayinge: of this maner answered Dauid.
1 Samuel 18:25 Then sayde Saul: this wyse saye to Dauid: the kinge careth for no nother dowry but for an hundred foreskynnes of the Philistines, to be auenged of the kynges enemies. For Saul thought to make Dauid fall into the handes of the Philistines.
1 Samuel 18:26 Then hys seruauntes tolde Dauid these wordes, and it pleased Dauid well to be the kynges sonne in lawe.
1 Samuel 18:27 And shortlye after Dauid arose wyth his men, and went, and slue of the Philistines two hundred men, and brought there foreskinnes, and satisfyed the Kynge thereof to be his sonne in lawe. And so Saul gaue hym Michol hys doughters to wyfe.
1 Samuel 18:28 And when Saul sawe and vnderstode, how that the Lord was with Dauid, and that Michol hys doughter loued hym,
1 Samuel 18:29 he was the more afrayed of Dauid, and became Dauids enemie for euer.
1 Samuel 18:30 And when the Philistines went out to warre, Dauid behaued hym selfe wyselyer then all the seruauntes of Saul: so that hys name was moche set bye.

CHAPTER: 19

1 Samuel 19:1 Then Saul comuned with Ionathas hys sonne, and with al his seruauntes that they should kyl Dauid
1 Samuel 19:2 But Ionathas Sauls sonne had a great fauoure to Dauid, and tolde Dauid sayinge: Saul my father goeth about to slee the. Now therefore take hede to thy selfe by tymes and abyde in some secret place and hyd thy selfe.
1 Samuel 19:3 And I wil go out and stande by my father in the felde, where thou art, and wyll comen wyth my father of the, and yf I can perceyue ought I wil tell the.
1 Samuel 19:4 And Ionathas spake the best of Dauid vnto Saul hys father and sayde vnto hym: lette not the kyng synne agaynst hys seruaunt Dauid, for he hath not synned agaynst the, and hys workes are to the warde very good.
1 Samuel 19:5 For he dyd put hys lyfe in hys hande and slue the Philistine, and the Lorde gaue a great vyctorye to all Israell. And thou sawest it, & thou reioysedest, wherfore then shouldest thou sinne agaynst innocent bloude, and slee Dauid for nought?
1 Samuel 19:6 And Saul harkened vnto the voice of Ionathas and sware: as truly as the Lorde lyueth, he shall not dye.
1 Samuel 19:7 Then Ionathas called Dauid, and shewed him all those wordes and brought hym to Saul. And he was in his presens as in tymes past.
1 Samuel 19:8 And the warre began agayne, and Dauid went out and fought with the Philistines and slue a great slaughter, and put them to flight.
1 Samuel 19:9 And the euyll spyryte of the Lorde was vpon Saul as he sat in his house hauing a Iaueling in hys hande, and Dauid played wyth hys hande.
1 Samuel 19:10 And Saul entended to nayle Dauid to the walle wyth the Iauelynge: But Dauid rydde hym selfe out of Sauls presens, and he smote the speare into the walle.
1 Samuel 19:11 But Dauid fled and saued him selfe that same nyght. Then Saul sent messengers vnto Dauids house, to watche hym and to sley hym in the mornyng. But Michol his wife tolde it hym saying.
1 Samuel 19:12 Yf thou saue not thy selfe thys nyghte, to morow thou art a dead man.
1 Samuel 19:13 And so Michol let Dauid doune thorow a wyndow, and he went & fled and saued him selfe. And then she toke an Image and layed it in the bed, and put an pillow stuffed with goates heare vnder the head of it, and couered it wyth a clothe.
1 Samuel 19:14 And when Saul sent messengers to fetch Dauid, she said that he was sicke.
1 Samuel 19:15 Then Saul sent the messengers to se Dauid sayinge: brynge hym to me, bed and all, that he maye be slayne.
1 Samuel 19:16 And when the messengers were come in, beholde there laye an Image in the bed, wyth a pyllowe of goates hearre vnder the head of it.
1 Samuel 19:17 Then sayd Saul to Michol: why hast thou mocked me so, and sent awaye myne enemy that he is escaped? And Mychol answered Saul: he saide vnto me, let me go, or elles I wil kyl the.
1 Samuel 19:18 And so Dauid fled and escaped and went to Samuel to Ramath and tolde hym all that Saul had done to hym. And he, and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.
1 Samuel 19:19 And it was tolde Saul saying: Beholde, Dauid is at Naioth in Ramath,
1 Samuel 19:20 then Saul sent messengers to fet Dauid. And when they sawe a companye of prophetes prophesying & Samuel standing fast by them, the spyrit of God fel vpon the messengers of Saul, and they prophesyed to.
1 Samuel 19:21 And when it was tolde Saul, he sent other messengers, and they prophesyed lykewyse. And Saul sent messengers yet agayne the thyrd tyme whych prophesyed also.
1 Samuel 19:22 Then went he hym selfe to Ramath, and when he came to a great welle that is in Socoh, he asked and sayde: where are Samuell & Dauid? And they sayde: se they be at Naioth in Ramath,
1 Samuel 19:23 and as he went thither to Naioth in Ramath, the spyryte of God came vpon him also, and he went prophesying, vntyl he came to Naioth in Ramath.
1 Samuel 19:24 And he stripte of hys clothes and prophesyed before Samuel in like maner, & fell naked all the day & all the night wherfore it is a comen sayinge, is Saul also amonge the prophetes?

CHAPTER: 20

1 Samuel 20:1 And Dauid fled from Naioth in Ramath and went and sayde before Ionathas: What haue I done? wherin am I faultie? what is the synne that I haue committed before thy father that he seketh my lyfe?
1 Samuel 20:2 And Ionathas answered hym: God fordyd, thou shalt not dye. For se my father wyll do nothyng ether great or small, but that he wyll shew it me. For why shoulde my father hyde thys thynge from me? there shalbe no suche thinge.
1 Samuel 20:3 And Dauid sware agayne and sayde: thy father knoweth that I haue founde grace in thyne eyes and therfore he thinketh, Ionathas shall not know it, leste he be sorye. For in very dede, euen as truly as the Lorde lyueth and as truely as thy soule lyueth, there is but a steppe betwene me and death.
1 Samuel 20:4 Then sayde Ionathas vnto Dauid, whatsoeuer thy soule desyreth that I wyl do vnto the.
1 Samuel 20:5 And Dauid sayde vnto Ionathas: Beholde, to morow is the fyrst daye of the moneth, & I shoulde syt wyth the kynge at meate. But let me go that I may hyde my selfe in the feldes vnto thys daye thre dayes at euen.
1 Samuel 20:6 Yf thy father mysse me, then saye: Dauid asked leaue of me, that he myght go to Bethlehem to hys owne cytye, for there is holden a yearely feast for all his kinne.
1 Samuel 20:7 And yf thy father saye thus: it is well done, then thy seruaunt shall haue peace. But and yf he be angrye: then be sure that wickednesse is vtterly concluded of him.
1 Samuel 20:8 And then thou shalt shewe mercye vnto thy seruaunt, for thou hast made wyth me thy seruaunte a bonde in the Lorde. Notwythstandinge yf there be in me any trespace, then sley me thy selfe, for what nedeth the to bring me to thy father.
1 Samuel 20:9 And Ionathas answered: God kepe that from the, that I should knowe, that wickednesse were concluded of my father, to come vpon the: and should not tel it the.
1 Samuel 20:10 Then said Dauid, who shal tel me, yf thy father answer cruelly?
1 Samuel 20:11 Then sayde Ionathas to Dauid, come and let vs go out into the feldes. And they went out both of them into the feldes.
1 Samuel 20:12 And Ionathas saide vnto Dauid: O Lord god of Israel, when I haue groped my fathers mynde, one tyme or other wythin thys thre dayes, that it stand well wyth Dauid, and I then sende not vnto the and shew it the,
1 Samuel 20:13 the Lorde do so, and so vnto Ionathas. And in lyke maner, yf euyl to the warde please my father, I wyll shew the and sende the awaye, that thou mayest go in peace. And the Lorde be wyth the as he hath bene wyth my father.
1 Samuel 20:14 And thou shalt performe vnto me the mercy of the Lord, not onely whyle I lyue but euen when I am dead,
1 Samuel 20:15 plucke not thy mercy away from my house foreuer: No not when the Lorde hath destroyed the enemies of Dauid euery one from the face of the earth.
1 Samuel 20:16 And so Ionathas made a bonde wyth the house of Dauid, desyrynge that the Lorde shoulde seke out of the handes of Dauids enemyes theyr wyckednesse.
1 Samuel 20:17 And with other wordes Ionathas adiured Dauid, because he loued hym. For as hys owne soule he loued hym.
1 Samuel 20:18 Then sayd Ionathas to Dauid: to morow shalbe the fyrst daye of the mone. And thou shalt be myssed, because the place shall appere emptye.
1 Samuel 20:19 But thys day thre dayes come in any wyse vnto the place where thou shalt hyde thy selfe, when it is worckedaye: euen by the stone Esell.
1 Samuel 20:20 And I wyll shote thre arowes by the one syde thereof, as though I shot at a marke,
1 Samuel 20:21 and wyll sende after a ladde, and bid hym go seke the arowes. Yf I saye vnto the lad, se the arowes are on thys side the, brynge them: then come thou, for it is peace and nothyng to do, as sure as the Lorde lyueth.
1 Samuel 20:22 But and yf I saye thus vnto the young felow, beholde, the Arowes are beyounde the, then go, for the Lord hath sent the awaye.
1 Samuel 20:23 And of this whyche thou and I haue spoken: beholde, the Lord is witnesse betwene the and me for euer.
1 Samuel 20:24 And so Dauid hyd him selfe in the feld. And when the new mone was come, the kynge sat downe at meate, for to eate.
1 Samuel 20:25 And the kyng sat him doune after the old maner, in his seate by the wall. And Ionathas arose, & Abner sate by Sauls syde, and Dauids place was emptye.
1 Samuel 20:26 Neuerthelesse yet Saul sayd nothyng at all that day. For he thought some thynge had chaunced hym that he is not cleane.
1 Samuel 20:27 But on the morow whyche was the second daye of the mone when Dauids place appered emptye, Saul sayde vnto Ionathas hys sonne: wherfore cometh not the sonne of Isai to meate, nether yesterdaye nor to day.
1 Samuel 20:28 And Ionathas answered vnto Saul. Dauid asked lycence of me to go to Bethlehem
1 Samuel 20:29 sayinge: let me go, I praye the, for oure kynrede holde an offerynge in the cytye, and my brother hath sent for me. Nowe therfore yf I haue found fauour in thyne eyes let me go, and se my brother. And therefore he cometh not vnto the table of the Kynge.
1 Samuel 20:30 Then was Saul angry with Ionathas and sayde vnto hym: O frowarde and rebellyous, thyukest thou I knowe not howe thou hast chosen the sonne of Isai vnto thine owne rebuke, and vnto the rebuke & shame of thy mother.
1 Samuel 20:31 For as longe as the sonne of Isai lyueth vpon the earth, thou shalt not be stabylyshed, nor yet thy kyngdome, wherfore now sende and fet him vnto me, for he is the child of the death.
1 Samuel 20:32 But Ionathas answered Saul hys father and sayde to hym: wherefore should he dye? what hath he done?
1 Samuel 20:33 Then Saul cast a speare at hym to hyt hym, wherby Ionathas wyst well, that it was vtterlye determyned of hys father, to sley Dauid.
1 Samuel 20:34 And so Ionathas arose from the table in a great anger and dyd eate no meate the second daye of the moneth, for he was sory for Dauid, because his father had done hym shame.
1 Samuel 20:35 On the next mornynge Ionathas went out into the felde, at the tyme appointed with Dauid, and a litle lad with him.
1 Samuel 20:36 And he sayd vnto the boye: runne and fynde out myne arowes whyche I shote. And as the boye ran, he shote an arow beyonde hym.
1 Samuel 20:37 And when the lad was come to the place whether Ionathas had shot the arow, Ionathas cryed after hym and sayde, the arow is beyond the.
1 Samuel 20:38 And he cryed after the lad: haste, make spede and stande not styll. And Ionathas lad gathered vp the arow and came to his master.
1 Samuel 20:39 But the lad wist nothyng of the matter: Only Ionathas and Dauid wist it.
1 Samuel 20:40 Then Ionathas gaue hys wepons vnto the lad and sayd vnto hym: go and carye them to the towne.
1 Samuel 20:41 And as sone as the lad was gone, Dauid arose out of a place that was to ward the south and fell on hys face to the grounde & bowed hym selfe thre tymes. And they kyssed ether other and wepte together, but Dauid more abundantly.
1 Samuel 20:42 And Ionathas sayde to Dauid: go in peace, whyche we haue sworne both of vs in the name of the Lord sayinge: the Lorde be betwene the and me, and betwene thy sede and myne for euer. And he rose and departed. And Ionathas went into the towne.

CHAPTER: 21

1 Samuel 21:1 Then came Dauid to Nob to Ahimelech the pryest. And Ahimelech was astonied at his coming and said vnto him: Why comest thou thy self alone, and noman wyth the?
1 Samuel 21:2 And Dauid saide to Ahymelech the preast: the kinge hath commaunded me to do a certeyne thynge and sayde vnto me, let no man knowe where aboute I sende and what I haue commaunded the to do. And therefore I haue apoynted my seruauntes to suche and suche places.
1 Samuel 21:3 And now what hast thou vnder thyne hande? geue me fyue loues of bread, or what cometh to hande.
1 Samuel 21:4 And the pryest answered Dauid and sayd: there is no comen bread vnder myne hande, but there is halowed bread, yf the young men, had abstayned only from wemen.
1 Samuel 21:5 And Dauid answered the pryest and sayde vnto him: of a truth wemen hath bene locked vp from vs about a thre dayes, when I came out, and the vesselles of the young men were holy. Howe be it thys waye is vnpure, but it shalbe halowed in the vessel.
1 Samuel 21:6 And so the pryest gaue hym halowed bread, for there was no nother bread there saue shew breades that were taken from before the Lord, to put freshe bread there the day that it was taken away.
1 Samuel 21:7 And there was there the same day a certen man of the seruauntes of Saul abydynge before the Lorde named Doeg an Edomite, the chefest of Sauls hearde men.
1 Samuel 21:8 And Dauid sayde vnto Ahimelech: is not here vnder thine hande other speare or swerde? for I haue nether brought my swerde nor myne harnes wt me, because the kinges busines required hast.
1 Samuel 21:9 Then the priest answered: the swerde of Goliath the Philistine whom thou sluest in Ocdale, that is here wrapt in a cloth behynde the Ephod. Yf thou wilt take that, take it: for there is no nother saue that here. And Dauid sayde: there is none to that, geue it me.
1 Samuel 21:10 And Dauid arose and fled the same daye from the presence of Saul, and went to Achis the Kynge of Geth.
1 Samuel 21:11 And the seruauntes of Achis sayde of hym: is not this Dauid the king of the lande? dyd they not synge vnto this felowe in daunses sayinge: Saul hath slayne hys thousand, and Dauid hys ten thousand?
1 Samuel 21:12 And Dauid put those wordes into hys hert & was sore afrayed of Achis the king of Geth.
1 Samuel 21:13 And he chaunged hys contenaunce before them and raued in theyr handes, and scrabled on the dores of the gate, and let hys spyttel fal doun vpon hys bearde.
1 Samuel 21:14 Then sayde Achis vnto his seruaunt. Lo, ye saw that this man was besyde hym selfe, wherefore then haue ye brought hym to me?
1 Samuel 21:15 lacke I madde men, that ye haue brought this felowe to playe the mad man in my presence? he shall not come into my house.

CHAPTER: 22

1 Samuel 22:1 And Dauid departed thence and escaped, and came vnto the caue Odollam. When hys bretheren and all his fathers house hearde it, they went thyther to hym.
1 Samuel 22:2 And there gathered vnto hym all men that were in combraunce and in det and troubled in their hertes, and he became a captayne ouer them. And there where wyth hym vpon a four hundred men.
1 Samuel 22:3 And Dauid went thence to Mazphah in the lande of Moab, and sayde vnto the kynge of Moab: Let my father and mother I praye the, haue their abidinge with you, tyl I knowe what God wil do with me.
1 Samuel 22:4 And he lefte them with the kyng of Moab, and they dwelt wyth hym all the whyle that Dauid kepte him selfe in holdes.
1 Samuel 22:5 And the prophet Gad sayde vnto Dauid: Abyde not in castelles, but departe and go to the land of Iuda. Then Dauid departed and came into the forest Hareth.
1 Samuel 22:6 And Saul hearde of it: for Dauid was knowen and also the men that were wyth him. And as Saul sat in Gabaah vnder a groue vpon a hye bancke with hys speare in his hande, and al hys men about him,
1 Samuel 22:7 he sayde vnto hys seruauntes that stode aboute him. Heare I pray you, you sonnes of Iemini wyl the sonne of Isai also geue euery one of you feldes and vineyardes, and make you all captaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hundredes?
1 Samuel 22:8 that ye haue all conspyred agaynst me? so that there is none of you that openeth mine eare, in so muche that my sonne hath made a bounde with the sonne of Isai, nether is there any of you, that mourneth for me or sheweth it in myne eare: because my sonne hath set vp my seruaunt to lye awayte agaynst me, as it appeareth thys daye.
1 Samuel 22:9 Then answered Doeg the Edomite, which had the ouer sight of the seruauntes of Saul and sayde: I sawe the sonne of Isai, when he came to Nob, to Ahimelech the sonne of Ahitob,
1 Samuel 22:10 whyche asked councel of the lorde for him and gaue him vitayles, and the swerde of Goliath the Philistine also.
1 Samuel 22:11 Then the king sent to calle Ahimelech the pryest the sonne of Ahitob, and all hys fathers house, that is to saye, the pryestes that were in Nob. And they came all to the kinge.
1 Samuel 22:12 And Saul sayde: heare thou sonne of Ahitob. And he sayde: here I am my Lorde.
1 Samuel 22:13 Then sayde Saul to hym: why haue ye conspyred against me, thou and the sonne of Isai, in so muche that thou hast geuen hym vitayle and a swerde, and hast asked councell of God for him, that he shoulde aryse against me, and lye awayte as it is come to passe thys daye.
1 Samuel 22:14 And Ahymelech answered the kynge & sayde: who is so faythfull amonge all thy seruauntes as Dauid & therto the kinges sonne in lawe, and goeth at thy bidding, and is had in honoure in thyne house?
1 Samuel 22:15 haue I thys daye begonne fyrst to aske councel of God for him? God forbyd that from me: let not the kynge put suche a thinge vnto hys seruaunt and on all the house of my father. For thy seruaunt knoweth nothinge of all thys, ether lesse or more.
1 Samuel 22:16 But for all that the kynge sayd: thou shalt surely dye Ahimelech, bothe thou and all thy fathers house.
1 Samuel 22:17 Then sayde the kynge vnto his fote men that stode about hym: turne and sley the priestes of the Lorde, bothe because their hand is with Dauid, and because they knewe when Dauid fled & shewed it not to me. But the seruauntes of the kynge woulde not moue their handes, to runne vpon the priestes of the Lorde.
1 Samuel 22:18 Then saide the kinge to Doeg: turne thou and smyte the pryestes. And Doeg the Edomite turned and ranne vpon the priestes and slue that same daye foure skore and fyue persones that dyd weare eche man a lynnen Ephod.
1 Samuel 22:19 And Nob the citie of the pryestes he smote with the edge of the swerde, bothe man and woman, chylde and suckelynge, with oxe asse and shepe.
1 Samuel 22:20 But yet one of the sonnes of Ahimelech the sonne of Ahitob, named Abiathar, escaped & fled to Dauid,
1 Samuel 22:21 and he shewed Dauid, how that Saul had slaine the Lordes priestes.
1 Samuel 22:22 And Dauid sayde vnto Abiathar: I wist it the same daye, that Doeg the Edomite whyche was there would tell it Saul. And I am cause of the death of all the soules of thy fathers house.
1 Samuel 22:23 Abyde with me and feare not: he that seketh thy soule, shall seke myne, and with me thou shalt be in sauegarde.

CHAPTER: 23

1 Samuel 23:1 Then men tolde Dauid seyinge: Beholde the Philistines fyghte against Keilah, and spoyle the barnes.
1 Samuel 23:2 Then Dauid asked the Lordes aduyse sayinge: shall I go and smyte the Philistines? And the Lorde sayde vnto Dauid: go and smite the Philistines and saue Keilah.
1 Samuel 23:3 Then sayde Dauids men vnto hym: se we be afrayed here in Iuda. What shal we then be, when we come to Keilah, to the host of the Philistines.
1 Samuel 23:4 Then Dauid asked the Lorde agayne. And the Lorde answered hym and sayde: vp and go to Keilah, for I will delyuer the Philistines into thyne handes.
1 Samuel 23:5 And so Dauid and hys men went to Keilah and fought wyth the Philistines, and draue awaye their cattel and slue a great slaughter of them. And so Dauid saued the enhabyters of Keilah.
1 Samuel 23:6 And it chaunced when Abiathar the sonne of Ahimelech fled to Dauid to Keilah, that he brought an Ephod in hys hande.
1 Samuel 23:7 And it was tolde Saul, that Dauid was come to Keilah. Then sayde Saul: God hath delyuered hym into my hand. For he is shut in, that he is come into a towne wyth gates & barres.
1 Samuel 23:8 And Saul called al the people to warre, for to go to Keilah, to besege Dauid and his men.
1 Samuel 23:9 But Dauid had knoweledge that Saul ymagened myschefe agaynst hym, and sayd therefore to Abiathar the pryest: Bring the Ephod.
1 Samuel 23:10 Then sayde Dauid, O lord God of Israel, thy seruaunt heareth that Saul is about to come to Keilah to destroye the cytye for my sake:
1 Samuel 23:11 wyll the men of Keilah delyuer me into hys hand? or wyll Saul come as thy seruaunt heareth saye? Lorde God of Israell tel thy seruaunt. And the Lorde sayde: he wyll come.
1 Samuel 23:12 Then sayd Dauid: wyl the men of Keilah delyuer me and my men into the hande of Saul? and the Lorde sayde: they wyll deliuer you.
1 Samuel 23:13 Then Dauid and hys men whyche were vpon a .vi. hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whether chaunce draue them. And when it was tolde Saul, that Dauid was flyd from Keilah, he let the iourney alone.
1 Samuel 23:14 And Dauid abode in the wyldernesse in stronge holdes, and in mountayne in the wyldernesse of Ziph. And Saul sought hym all hys lyfe, but God delyuered hym not into hys hande.
1 Samuel 23:15 And Dauid sawe that Saul was come out, to seke hys lyfe, while Dauid was in the wildernesse of Ziph in a thycket.
1 Samuel 23:16 And Ionathas Sauls sonne arose and went to Dauid to the thycket, and strengthed him in God,
1 Samuel 23:17 and said vnto hym: feare not, for the hand of Saul my father shall not fynde the, and thou shalt be kynge ouer Israell, and I must be next vnto the. And Saul my father therto knoweth that it shalbe so.
1 Samuel 23:18 And they made a bonde bothe of them together before the Lorde. And Dauid taryed styll in the thycket, and Ionathas went to hys house.
1 Samuel 23:19 Then came the Ziphites to Saul, to Gabaah sayinge: Dauid hydeth hym selfe fast by vs in stronge holdes that are in a thycket in the hyl of Hachilah on the ryght syde of the wyldernesse.
1 Samuel 23:20 Now therfore syr kynge, come downe wyth all the lust that thy soule hath to come. And oure parte shalbe to delyuer hym into the handes of the kynge.
1 Samuel 23:21 Then sayd Saul: Blessed are ye in the Lorde: for ye haue compassion on me.
1 Samuel 23:22 Go, I praye you and marke more dylygently, and knowe and se hys haunt where hys fote hath bene, and who hath sene hym there: for it is told me that he is very sotel.
1 Samuel 23:23 Se therfore and knowe al the lourkynge places where he lourketh, and come againe to me wyth the certenty, and I wil go with you. And then yf he be in the lande, I wyl hunt him out with all the thousandes of Iuda.
1 Samuel 23:24 And they arose and went to Ziph before Saul. But Dauid and hys men were in the wyldernesse of Maon, in the wylde felde, on the ryght hand of the wildernesse.
1 Samuel 23:25 For when Saul was gone with his men to seke, it was tolde Dauid. And therfore he went vnto a Rock and dwelt in the wildernesse of Maon.
1 Samuel 23:26 And when Saul hearde that, he folowed after Dauid into the wyldernesse of Maon. And Saul and his men went on the one syde of the mountayne, and Dauid and his men on the other. And Dauid as a man amased, made hast to get from Saul, for Saul and his men had compased Dauid and hys men rounde about take them.
1 Samuel 23:27 But there came a messenger to Saul saying: Hast the & come, for the Philistines are come in, & roue the land.
1 Samuel 23:28 Wherfore Saul returned from persecutyng Dauid, & went agaynst the Philistines. And therfore the place is called, Sela Mahelecoth.
1 Samuel 23:29 And then Dauid went thence and dwelt in strong holdes at Engadi.

CHAPTER: 24

1 Samuel 24:1 When Saul was come agayne from the Philistines, there were that tolde him saying: beholde Dauid is in the wildernesse of Engadi.
1 Samuel 24:2 Then Saul toke thre thousand chosen men out of al Israel, & went to seke Dauid & his men in the Rockes, where nothyng haunted but wyld gotes.
1 Samuel 24:3 And he came to the flockes of shepe by a wayes side, where was a caue. And Saul went in to couer his feete. And Dauid and his men sat a longe by the sides of the caue.
1 Samuel 24:4 And the men of Dauid sayde vnto him: se the day is come, of which the lord said vnto the: Beholde, I wil delyuer thine enemy into thy hand, & thou shalt do with him what it pleaseth the. Then Dauid arose, & cut of a lappe of Sauls cote pryuely.
1 Samuel 24:5 And immediatly Dauids herte smote hym, because he had cut of a lappe of Sauls cote.
1 Samuel 24:6 And he sayde vnto his men: the Lord kepe me from doying that thing vnto my maister that is the lordes anoynted, to lay mine hand vpon him, seyng he is the lordes anoynted.
1 Samuel 24:7 And so Dauid kept of his seruauntes with wordes, and suffered them not to go vpon Saul. And when Saul was vp out of the caue & gone awaye,
1 Samuel 24:8 Dauid arose and went out of the caue, and cryed after Saul sayinge: My Lorde Kinge. And Saul loked behinde hym. And Dauid stouped to the earth and bowed him selfe,
1 Samuel 24:9 & said to Saul: wherfore geuest thou an eare to mennes wordes, that saye: Dauid seketh the euyl?
1 Samuel 24:10 Beholde, this daye thine eyes haue sene, howe that the Lord had delyuered the this daye, into myne hande in the caue. When they bad kil the, mine eye had compassion on the: and I sayde: I wyll not laye my handes on my mayster, for he is the lordes anoynted.
1 Samuel 24:11 And moreouer my father, se yet the lap of thy cote in my hand. And in as muche as I killed the not to, when I cut of the lappe of thy cote, vnderstand and se, that there is nether euyl nor rebellyousnesse in me, & that I haue not synned agaynst the. And yet thou huntest after my soule to take it.
1 Samuel 24:12 The lorde be iudge betwene the and me, & the lorde aduenge me of the. But myne hand be not vpon the.
1 Samuel 24:13 Accordyng to the old prouerbe, wickednesse shal procede out of the wicked. But myne hande be not vpon the.
1 Samuel 24:14 After whom art thou come out, thou kynge of Israel? After whom chasest thou euen after a dead dogge, & after a flee.
1 Samuel 24:15 The Lord be iudge, and iudge betwene the & me, & se & pleate my cause, and iudge me fre out of thine hande.
1 Samuel 24:16 When Dauid had made an ende of speaking all these wordes to Saul, Saul sayde: is this thy voyce my sonne Dauid? & he lifte vp hys voyce and wepte,
1 Samuel 24:17 and sayde to Dauid: thou art ryghteouser then I, for thou hast rewarde me wyth good, and I haue rewarded the with euyl.
1 Samuel 24:18 And thou haste shewed thys daye howe that thou hast dealt louyngly with me, for as muche as when the Lorde hath locked me in thyne handes, thou sluest me not.
1 Samuel 24:19 For who shall fynde hys enemy and let hym depart a good waye? Wherfore the Lord rewarde the with good, for that thou hast done vnto me thys daye.
1 Samuel 24:20 And now I wote wel that thou shalt be kyng, and that the kyngedome of Israel shalbe stablyshed in thyne hande.
1 Samuel 24:21 Swere therfore vnto me by the Lorde, that thou shalt not destroye my seade after my, & that thou shalt not destroy my name out of my fathers house.
1 Samuel 24:22 And Dauid sware vnto Saul, and Saul went home. But Dauid and hys men gat vp vnto an holde.

CHAPTER: 25

1 Samuel 25:1 And then Samuel dyed, and all Israel gathered together and lamented hym and buryed him in his owne house at Ramath. And Dauid arose and gat hym to the wildernesse of Pharan.
1 Samuel 25:2 And there was a man in Maon, whose catel was in Carmell, and the man was excedynge myghtye, and had thre thousand shepe and a thousande gootes. And he was sheringe his shepe in Carmel.
1 Samuel 25:3 The name of the man was Nabal, and the name of hys wyfe was Abigail, and was a woman of good wysdom and beutiful. But the man was churlyshe and of shrewde condicyons, and was a Kalebite.
1 Samuel 25:4 And when Dauid hearde in the wyldernesse, that Nabal share hys shepe,
1 Samuel 25:5 he sent out ten of hys young men, and sayde vnto them: get you vp to Carmell, & go to Nabal & grete him in my name.
1 Samuel 25:6 And thus wyse saye vnto my frende: peace be to the, peace be to thyne house and peace be vnto all that thou hast.
1 Samuel 25:7 I haue hearde saye that thou hast sherers. Now thy sheperdes were with vs, & we dyd them no spyte, nether was there ought myssynge vnto them, al the whyle they were in Carmel:
1 Samuel 25:8 aske thy laddes, and they wil shewe the. Wherfore let these young men fynde fauoure in thyne eyes (for we come in a good ceason) and geue I praye the whatsoeuer cometh to thyne hand vnto thy seruauntes and to thy sonne Dauid.
1 Samuel 25:9 And Dauids young men came & tolde Nabal all those wordes in the name of Dauid & then stopped.
1 Samuel 25:10 And Nabal answered Dauids seruauntes & sayd: What is Dauid? and what is the sonne of Isai? there is plentye of seruauntes nowe a dayes, that breake awaye euery man from hys mayster.
1 Samuel 25:11 I shoulde take my breade, my water & my flesh that I haue kylled for my sherers, and geue it men whych I wote not whence they be.
1 Samuel 25:12 And Dauids seruauntes turned theyr waye and went agayne, and came and tolde hym accordinge to all those sayinges.
1 Samuel 25:13 Then Dauid sayd vnto his men: gyrd euery man his swerd aboute hym. And they gyrded euery man his swerde on, and Dauid therin girde on hys swerde. And there folowed Dauid vpon a foure hundred men, and two hundred abode by the stuffe.
1 Samuel 25:14 But one of the laddes tolde Abigail Nabals wyfe sayinge: se Dauid sent messengers vnto oure maister out of the wildernesse to salute him, and he rayled on them.
1 Samuel 25:15 And yet the men were very good vnto vs and dyd vs no displeasure, nether missed we any thynge, as longe as we were conuersant with them, when we were in the feldes,
1 Samuel 25:16 But they were a wal of defence vnto vs bothe by nyght, and also by daie, al the while we were with them keping shepe.
1 Samuel 25:17 Now take hede and se what thou hast to do, for it is concluded to do mischeue vnto our maister, and to al his houshold. And he is vngracyous to speake to.
1 Samuel 25:18 Then Abigail made hast and toke two hundred loues and two botelles of wine, and fiue shepe redy dressed and fyue measures of parched corne, and an hundred bondelles of reasings, and two hundred frayles of fygges, and laded them on asses,
1 Samuel 25:19 & sayde vnto her younge men: go before me, & se I come after you, and tolde her husbande Nabal nothing therof:
1 Samuel 25:20 and as she rode on her asse and was coming doune in a slade of the hyll, Dauid and his men came doune against her and she met them.
1 Samuel 25:21 And Dauid sayde: in vayne haue I kept all that this felowe had in the wildernesse, so that nought was myssed that pertayneth vnto him, for he hath quytte me with euyll for good.
1 Samuel 25:22 So and so do God vnto the enemies of Dauid, as I wil not leaue of all that pertaine to hym, by the daunynge of the daye, ought that pisseth agaynst the wall.
1 Samuel 25:23 When Abigail sawe Dauid, she halted & light of her asse, and fell before Dauid on her face, and bowed her selfe to the grounde,
1 Samuel 25:24 and fel at his fete and sayde: Let thys vnhappye deade be counted myne, my lord, and let thine handmaid speake in thine audience, and heare the wordes of thy handmayde.
1 Samuel 25:25 Let not my Lorde regarde thys vnthryftye man Nabal, for as hys name is, so is he. Nabal is his name, and follye is with him. But I thine handmayde sawe not the younge men of my lorde whiche thou sendest.
1 Samuel 25:26 And nowe my lord as sure as the lorde lyueth and as thy soule lyueth, the Lorde hathe witholden the from commyng to shede bloud and from aduenging thy self with thine own hande. Forthermore I praye God that thyne enemies and they that entende to do my Lord euyl, may be as Nabal.
1 Samuel 25:27 And now this blessing, whiche thine handmaide hath brought, let it be geuen vnto the young men that folowe my Lorde.
1 Samuel 25:28 Forgeue the trespace of thine handmaide that the Lorde may make my lord a suer house, because my Lorde fyghteth the battelles of the Lorde, and there coulde none euill be founde in the in all thy lyfe.
1 Samuel 25:29 And yf any man rise to persecute the and to seke thy soule the soule of my Lorde be bounde in a bondel of lyfe with the Lorde thy God. And thy soules of thy enemies be slong in the midle of a slinge.
1 Samuel 25:30 And moreouer when the Lorde shal haue done to my Lord all the good that he hath promysed the, and shal haue made the ruler ouer Israel:
1 Samuel 25:31 then shall it be no grudge of conscience vnto the or discourage of herte vnto my Lorde, that thou sheddest bloud causelesse and dyddest aduenge thy selfe. And moreouer when the Lorde shall haue dealt wel with my Lorde, then thinck on thine handmayde.
1 Samuel 25:32 Then sayde Dauid to Abigail: blessed be the Lorde God of Israel which sent the this daie to mete me.
1 Samuel 25:33 And blessed be thy behaueoure, and blessed be thou whyche hast kept me this daye from coming to shed bloud and from aduenging my selfe with mine own hande.
1 Samuel 25:34 For in very dede as sure as the Lorde God of Israel liueth whiche hath kept me backe from hurting the, excepte thou haddest hasted and met me, there hath not bene lefte Nabal by the dauninge of the daye, a pysser against the wall.
1 Samuel 25:35 And so Dauid receyued of her hand that she brought hym, and sayde to her: go in peace to thine house. And se I haue obeyed thy voyce, and haue receyued the to grace.
1 Samuel 25:36 And when Abigail came to Nabal: behold he helde a feaste in his house like the feast of a kynge, and Nabals herte was mery within him, and he was droncke a good. Wherfore she tolde hym naught nether lytle nor more, vntil to morow daye.
1 Samuel 25:37 But in the mornynge, when the wyne was gone out of Nabal, hys wyfe tolde him those wordes, and hys herte dyed within him, and he became as a stone,
1 Samuel 25:38 and vpon a ten dayes after the Lorde smote Nabal, that he dyed.
1 Samuel 25:39 And when Dauid heard that Nabal was dead, he sayde: Blessed be the Lorde that hath iudged the cause of my rebuke of the hande of Nabal, and hath kept his seruaunt from euil, and hath turned the wickednesse of Nabal again vpon his own head. And Dauid sent to comen with Abigail, to thyntent to take her to his wyfe.
1 Samuel 25:40 And when the seruauntes of Dauid were come to Abigail to Carmel, they spake vnto her sayinge: Dauid sent vs to the, to take the to his wyfe.
1 Samuel 25:41 And she arose and bowed her selfe on her face to the earth and sayd: Beholde thy handmaid to be a seruaunt
1 Samuel 25:42 to washe the fete of thy seruauntes of my Lorde. And Abigail hasted & arose, and gat her vp vpon an asse, with fyue damoselles of hers that went at her fete, and went after the messengers of Dauid & was hys wyfe.
1 Samuel 25:43 Dauid also toke Ahinoam of Iesrahel, and they were bothe his wyues.
1 Samuel 25:44 But Saul gaue Michol hys doughter Dauids wyfe to Phalty the sonne of Lais of Gallim.

CHAPTER: 26

1 Samuel 26:1 After that came the Ziphites vnto Saul to Gabaah sayinge: Dauid hydeth hym self in the hil of Hachilah euen before the wildernesse.
1 Samuel 26:2 Then Saul arose & went to the wildernesse of Ziph and thre thousande chosen men of Israel with hym, for to seke Dauid in the wildernesse of Ziph.
1 Samuel 26:3 And Saul pitched in the hyl of Hachilah which lieth before the wildernesse, by the wayes side. But Dauid dwelt in the wildernesse. And when he saw that Saul came after him into the wildernesse
1 Samuel 26:4 he sent out spyes and vnderstode that Saul was come of suretye.
1 Samuel 26:5 Wherfore Dauid arose and went to the place where Saul had pytched, and behelde the place where Saul lay wt Abner the sonne of Ner his chefe captaine. For Saul lay within a round bancke, and the people pytched rounde about him.
1 Samuel 26:6 Then answered Dauid & spake to Ahimelech the Hethite and to Abisai the sonne of Zaruiah and brother to Ioab sayinge: who wyl go doune with me to Saul to the hoste? and Abisai saide: I wyl go doune with the.
1 Samuel 26:7 And so Dauid and Abisai came to the people by night. And beholde, Saul lay slepynge within a rounde bancke and his speare pytched in the ground at his head, Abner and the people lying round about hym.
1 Samuel 26:8 Then sayde Abisai to Dauid: God hath closed in thine enemy vnto thyne handes this day. Now therfore let me smyte him a felowshippe with my speare to the earth, euen one stroke, and I wil not smyte hym the second tyme.
1 Samuel 26:9 But Dauid sayde to Abisai: destroye him not, for who can laye his hand on the Lordes anoynted and be gyltlesse?
1 Samuel 26:10 And Dauid sayde forthermore: as the Lorde lyueth, the Lord shall smyte hym, or hys daye shal come to dye, or he shall descende into battel and there peryshe:
1 Samuel 26:11 but the Lorde kepe me from laying myne hand vpon the Lordes anointed. Now then take a felowshippe the speare that is at his heade, and the creuse of water, and let vs go.
1 Samuel 26:12 And Dauid toke the speare and the creuse of water that were at Sauls head, and they gat them away and noman sawe or wist it or awoke. For they were all a slepe, because the Lorde had sent a slomber vpon them.
1 Samuel 26:13 Then Dauid went ouer to the other syde and stode on the toppe of an hyl a farre of (a great space beyng betwene them)
1 Samuel 26:14 and cryed to the people and to Abner the sonne of Ner saying: Answerest thou not Abner? and Abner answerde and said: What art thou that cryest to the king?
1 Samuel 26:15 and Dauid said to Abner: art not thou a man, and who is like the in Israhel? But wherefore hast thou not kept thy Lord thy kinge? For there came one of the folke to destroy the kyng thy lord.
1 Samuel 26:16 It is not good that thou hast done. As truely as the lorde lyueth, ye are worthy to dye, because ye haue no better kept the Lordes anointed. And now se where the kynges speare is and the creuse of water that were at hys heade.
1 Samuel 26:17 Then Saul knew Dauids voyce and said: is this thy voyce my sonne Dauid? and Dauid sayde: it is my voyce my Lord kyng.
1 Samuel 26:18 And he saide therto: wherfore doth my Lorde persecute hys seruaunt? for what haue I done? or what euil is in myne hande.
1 Samuel 26:19 Now heare therfore (my lord king) the wordes of thy seruaunt Yf the lorde haue stered the vp against me, he shal smel the sauoure of sacryfyce. But & yf they be the children of men, cursed be they before the Lorde. For they haue cast me out from abyding in the enheritaunce of the Lorde, saying: hence & go serue other Goddes.
1 Samuel 26:20 And yet I hope my bloude shal not fal to the earth before the face of the Lorde, though the kyng of Israel be come out to hunt a flee, as men hunt the partreges in the mountaynes.
1 Samuel 26:21 Then said Saul: I haue synned, come agayn my sonne Dauid, for I will do the no more harme, because my soul was preciouse in thine eyes this daye. Beholde, I haue played the fole & haue erred exceding muche.
1 Samuel 26:22 And Dauid answered and sayde: Beholde the kynges speare, let one of the young men come ouer and fet it.
1 Samuel 26:23 The Lorde rewarde euery mannes ryghteousnesse and faythe: for the Lorde delyuered the into my hande this daye, but I woulde not laye myne hande vpon the Lordes anoynted.
1 Samuel 26:24 And as thy lyfe was muche set by in the thys tyme in myne eyes: so be my lyfe in the eyes of the Lorde, that he delyuer me out of all trybulacyon.
1 Samuel 26:25 And Saul sayde to Dauid: Blessed art thou my sonne Dauid, for thou shalt be a doer and also able to brynge to an ende. And so Dauid went hys waye, and Saul turned to hys place agayne.

CHAPTER: 27

1 Samuel 27:1 Then thought Dauid in his hert: I maye peryshe one daye or other by the handes of Israell. There is no better for me, then to flee into the lande of the Philistines, that Saul of very dispaire to finde me, may cease to seke me any more in all the coastes of Israhel: for so I maye escape his hande.
1 Samuel 27:2 And Dauid arose, & he and the syxe hundred men that were with him went vnto Achis, the sonne of Maoch, kynge of Geth.
1 Samuel 27:3 And Dauid dwelt wyth Achis at Geth, both he & hys men, euery man with his housholde, and Dauid wt hys two wyues: Ahinoam the Iesrahelite and Abigail Nabals wyfe of Carmel.
1 Samuel 27:4 And when it was tolde Saul that Dauid was fleed to Geth, he sought no more for him.
1 Samuel 27:5 And Dauid sayde vnto Achis: Yf I haue founde grace in thyne eyes, let me haue a place in some towne in the feldes, that I may dwel there. For what shoulde thy seruaunt dwell in the head citie of the kyngdome with the.
1 Samuel 27:6 Then Achis gaue him Zikeleg the same day, for which cause Zikeleg pertayneth vnto the kinges of Iuda vnto this daye.
1 Samuel 27:7 And the tyme that Dauid dwelt in the contreye of the Philistines, was a yeare, and foure monethes.
1 Samuel 27:8 And Dauid & hys men went & ranne vpon the Gesurites, the Gerzites and Amalekites: whyche nacions were from the begynnyng the enhabyters of the land, as men go to Sur, and so forthe to Egypte.
1 Samuel 27:9 And Dauid smote the land & left nether man nor woman a lyue, & toke the shepe, the oxen, the asses, camelles, and clothes, and remoued and came to Achis.
1 Samuel 27:10 And Achis said: haue ye not bene a rouyng thys day? And Dauid answered: yes in the south of Iuda, and in the south of the Iesrahelites, and in the south of the Kenites.
1 Samuel 27:11 And Dauid saued nether man nor woman alyue to brynge to Geth, for feare leste they shoulde tell on them sayinge: so dyd Dauid & so is his maner all the whyle he dwelt in the contreye of the Philistines.
1 Samuel 27:12 And Achis beleueth Dauid sayinge: He hath made hym selfe to stynke vnto hys people Israel, and therfore he shalbe my seruaunt for euer.

CHAPTER: 28

1 Samuel 28:1 And it chaunced in those dayes, that the Philistines gathered theyr hoste together to warre, entendyng to fyght with Israel. And Achis sayde to Dauid: Be sure, thou shalt go out with me in the host, and thy men also.
1 Samuel 28:2 And Dauid sayd agayne to Achis: then thou shalt knowe, what thy seruaunt can do. And Achis sayde to Dauid: Then I wyll make the keper of my head for euer.
1 Samuel 28:3 Samuel was then deade, and all Israel had lamented hym & buryed hym in Ramath hys owne cytye. And Saul had put the wemen that had spyrytes of prophesye & the Sorcerers oute of the lande.
1 Samuel 28:4 And the Philistines gathered together and came and pytched in Sunam. And Saule and al Israell gathered together and pytched in Gelboe.
1 Samuel 28:5 And when Saul sawe the hoste of the Philistines, he was afrayed, and hys hert was sore astonied.
1 Samuel 28:6 And Saul asked councell of the Lorde: But the Lord answered hym not, nether by dreame nor by Vrim, nor yet by Prophetes.
1 Samuel 28:7 Then sayde Saul vnto hys seruauntes: seke me a woman that is mastres of a spyrit of prophecie, that I may go to her and aske of her. And his seruauntes said to hym: se, there is a wyfe that hath a spyrit of prophecy in her possession at Endor.
1 Samuel 28:8 And Saul chaunged hys clothes & put on other rayment, & then went he and two men wt hym, & they came to the wyfe by nyghte. And he sayde: prophesye vnto me by the spyryt, & bring me him vp whom I shal name vnto the.
1 Samuel 28:9 And the wyfe sayde vnto hym: Beholde, thou knowest what Saul hath done how he hath destroyed the wemen that had prophesyinge spirites, & the Sorcerers out of the lande. Wherfore then layest thou a nette for my soule to kyl me?
1 Samuel 28:10 And Saul swore to her by the Lorde sayinge: As surely as the Lord lyueth, there shall no harme chaunce the for this thynge.
1 Samuel 28:11 Then saide the wyfe: whom shall I fetche vp vnto the? and he sayde: Brynge me vp Samuel.
1 Samuel 28:12 When the woman saw Samuell, she cryed with a loude voice & spake to Saul saying: why hast thou mocked me for thou art Saul:
1 Samuel 28:13 And the kynge sayde vnto her, be not afrayd. But what seyst thou. And the wyfe sayde vnto Saul: I se a God ascendynge vp out of the earth.
1 Samuel 28:14 And he sayd: what fashyon is he of? And the woman sayd: there cometh vp an olde man wyth a mantel vpon hym. And Saul perceyued that it was Samuel, and stouped wt hys face to the ground and bowed him selfe.
1 Samuel 28:15 And Samuel sayde to Saul: why hast thou vnquyeted me, to make me be brought vp? And Saul answered: I am sore encombred. For the Philistines make warre agaynst me & God is departed from me & answered me no more, nether by prophetes, nether by dreames. And therfore I haue called the, to tell me what I shall do.
1 Samuel 28:16 Then said Samuel: wherfore doest thou aske of me? while the lorde is gone from the & is thyne enemye,
1 Samuel 28:17 the lorde wyl do to the as he sayde by my hande. For the lorde wyl rent the kyngdom out of thyne hand, & geue it thy neyghboure Dauid,
1 Samuel 28:18 because thou obeydst not the voyce of the Lorde, nor excutest hys fearce wrath vpon the Amalekites. Therfore hath the lord done thys vnto the this daye.
1 Samuel 28:19 And moreouer the Lorde wyll delyuer Israel wyth the, into the handes of the Philistines. And to morow shalt thou and thy sonnes be with me, and the Lorde shall geue the host of Israel into the handes of the Philistines.
1 Samuel 28:20 Then Saul fell streyght waye flatte on the earth as longe as he was, and was sore a dread of the wordes of Samuel. And therto there was no strength in hym, for he had not eaten all the daye & the nyght before.
1 Samuel 28:21 And the woman came vnto Saul and sawe that he was sore troubled, and said vnto him Se, thyne handmayde hath obeyed thy voyce and haue put my soule in my hand, and haue harkened vnto thy wordes whyche thou saydest vnto me.
1 Samuel 28:22 Now therefore harken thou also vnto the voyce of thyne handmayde, and let me set a morsel of bread before the, and eat and get the strength to go thy iourney.
1 Samuel 28:23 But he refused it and sayde: I will not eate. But hys seruauntes and the wyfe together compelled hym, that he hearde their voice. And so he arose from the earth and sat hym on a bed.
1 Samuel 28:24 The woman had a fat calf in the house, and that she hasted and kylled it, and toke flower and kneed it, and dyd bake hym swete cakes,
1 Samuel 28:25 and brought them before Saul, and before his seruauntes. And when they had eaten, they stode vp, and went awaye the same nyght.

CHAPTER: 29

1 Samuel 29:1 The Philistines gethered all their hostes together vnto Apher. And Israell pitched by a fountayne in Iesrahel.
1 Samuel 29:2 And the Lordes of the Philistines went forthe by the hundredes & by the thousandes. But Dauid & hys men came behynde with Achis.
1 Samuel 29:3 Then said the lordes of the Philistines: what are younder Ebrues? And Achis said vnto the lordes of the Philistines: Is not this Dauid the seruaunt of Saul the king of Israell, whyche hath bene wt me daies or yeres, & I haue found no fault in him sence he fleed vnto me vnto this daie.
1 Samuel 29:4 Neuerthelesse the lordes of the Philistines were wroth wt him & said vnto him: make this felow returne, & let him go agayn to his place which thou hast appointed hym. For he shall not go with vs to battel, lest he be an aduersarye to vs in the battel. For wherwith could he better obtaine the fauoure of hys master, then vpon the heades of oure men.
1 Samuel 29:5 Is this not Dauid to whom they sange in daunses: Saul slue his thousand, but Dauid his ten thousande?
1 Samuel 29:6 Then Achis called Dauid and sayde vnto hym. As sure as the Lorde lyueth thou art honest, and it pleaseth me wel that thou shouldest accompanye me in the host, for I haue founde none euyl with the sence thou camest to me vnto thys daye. Neuerthelesse the Lordes of the Philistines fauoure the not
1 Samuel 29:7 wherefore returne and go in peace, that thou displease not the Lordes of the Philistines.
1 Samuel 29:8 And Dauid said again to Achis: Why? what haue I done? and what hast thou found in thy seruaunt as long as I haue bene with the vnto thys day? that I may not go fyght against the enemies of my Lord the kynge.
1 Samuel 29:9 Achis answered & sayde to Dauid: I wote well thou pleasest me, as it were an Aungell of God. Notwithstandyng the Lordes of the Philistines haue sayde, that thou shalt not go wyth them to battell.
1 Samuel 29:10 Wherfore ryse vp erlye in the mornynge wyth thy masters seruauntes that are come wyth the. And when ye be vp erly as sone as ye haue light, departe.
1 Samuel 29:11 And so Dauid and hys men rose erlye to departe in the mornynge, and to returne into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went vp to Iesrahell.

CHAPTER: 30

1 Samuel 30:1 Bvt yer Dauid and hys men were come to Zikeleg the third day, the Amalekites had runne in a runnynge vpon the south and vpon Zikeleg, and had smiten Zikeleg, and burnt wyth fyre
1 Samuel 30:2 and had taken the wemen that were there in prysoners, both small and great: but slewe not a man, saue caryed them wyth them and went their wayes.
1 Samuel 30:3 When Dauid and his men came to the citie, behold, it was burnt with fyre, and theyr wyues, their sonnes and their doughters were taken prisoners.
1 Samuel 30:4 Then Dauid & the people that was wt hym lyfte vp their voyces and wept, vntyl they coulde wepe no more.
1 Samuel 30:5 And Dauids two wyues were taken prysoners also. Ahinoam the Iezrahelyte and Abigail the wyfe of Nabal the Carmelite.
1 Samuel 30:6 And Dauid was in a shrowde strayte: for the people entended to stone hym because the hertes of all the people were vexed for their sonnes and their doughters. But Dauid toke a good courage to him in the lord hys God
1 Samuel 30:7 & said to Abiathar the priest Ahimelechs sonne: bryng me the Ephod. And Abiathar brought the Ephod to Dauid.
1 Samuel 30:8 And Dauid asked the lorde sayinge: shall I folow after thys companye? and shall I ouer take them? And he sayde to hym: folowe, for thou shalte ouertake them and recouer the praye.
1 Samuel 30:9 And he went and the syxe hundred men that were with him, & they came to the ryuer Besor, where a part of them abode.
1 Samuel 30:10 But Dauid and foure hundred men folowed. But two hundred abode behinde being to werye to go ouer the ryuer Besor.
1 Samuel 30:11 Then they founde an Egypcian in the felde, and brought him to Dauid and gaue hym breade to eate and water to dryncke,
1 Samuel 30:12 and gaue hym a fewe fygges, and two clousters of reasynges. And when he had eaten, hys spyrytes came agayne to hym: for he had eaten no breade nor droncke no water in thre dayes and thre nyghtes.
1 Samuel 30:13 Then Dauid sayde vnto hym: to whom belongest thou and whence art thou? and the lad answered: I am an Egypcyan, and seruaunt to an Amalekite: and my master left me behynde because it is thre dayes a gone that I fel syck:
1 Samuel 30:14 we came a rouynge vpon the south of Cerethis and vpon them of Iuda and on the south of Caleb. And we burnt Zikeleg with fyre.
1 Samuel 30:15 And Dauid sayde to him: canst thou brynge me to thys company? And he sayde: swere by my vnto God, that thou wilt nether kyll me, nor delyuer me into the handes of my master, and I wyl brynge the vnto them.
1 Samuel 30:16 And when he had brought hym, se, they laie skatered all abroade vpon the earth, eatyng and dryncking and triumphing ouer all the great pray that they had caryed awaye out of the lande of the Philistines, and out of the land of Iuda.
1 Samuel 30:17 And Dauid layde vpon them from the twylyght vntyll the euen on the morow: so that there escaped not a man, saue foure hundre a young men, whyche rodde awaye vpon cameles and fledde.
1 Samuel 30:18 And Dauid recouered all that the Amalekites had caryed awaye, and his two wyues,
1 Samuel 30:19 so that there was no persone lackynge smal or great, sonne or doughter, or of the spoyle of all that they had take awaye, Dauid brought all againe.
1 Samuel 30:20 And Dauid toke all the shepe, and the oxen. And they draue the cattel before, and sayde: this is Dauids pray.
1 Samuel 30:21 And then Dauid came to the two hundred men that were to wery for to folowe Dauid, which they made to abyde at the ryuer Besor. And they came to mete Dauid and the people that were wyth hym. And when Dauid came to the people, he saluted them.
1 Samuel 30:22 Then answered all the wycked and the vnthriftes of the men that went wyth Dauid, and sayde: because they went noth with vs, therfore shall none of the praye that we haue recouered, be geuen vnto them, saue to euery man hys wyfe and his children: whyche let them cary awaye and be walkynge.
1 Samuel 30:23 Then sayde Dauid: ye shall not do so (my brethren) with that the Lorde hath geuen vs, and hath preserued vs, & delyuered the companye that came agaynst vs, into oure handes.
1 Samuel 30:24 For who shoulde herken vnto you in this matter? But as his parte is that goeth & fighteth so good shal hys parte be, that taryeth by the stuffe, they shall part it a lyke.
1 Samuel 30:25 And so from that daye forward was that made a law and a custome in Israel, and dureth to thys day.
1 Samuel 30:26 When Dauid came to Zikeleg, he sent of hys praye vnto the elders to Iuda and to hys frendes saying: se there a blessinge for you, of the spoyle of the enemies of the Lorde:
1 Samuel 30:27 He sent to them of Bethel: to them of south Ramath to them of Gether:
1 Samuel 30:28 to them of Aroer: to them of Sephamoth: to them of Esthamo:
1 Samuel 30:29 to them of Rachal: to them of the cytyes of the Ierhameelites: to them of the cities of the Kenites:
1 Samuel 30:30 to them of Haramah: to them of Borasan: to them of Athach:
1 Samuel 30:31 to them of Hebron, and to all places where Dauid and hys men were wont to haunt.

CHAPTER: 31

1 Samuel 31:1 And as the Philistines fought agaynst Israel, the men of Israell fleed awaye from the Philistines, and fell doune deade in mount Gelboe.
1 Samuel 31:2 And the Philistines folowed after Saul and hys sonnes, and slewe Ionathas, Abinadab and Melchisua Sauls sonnes.
1 Samuel 31:3 And the battel went sore agaynst Saul, in so much that shoters wt bowes had founde hym, & he was sore wounded of the shoters.
1 Samuel 31:4 Then sayde Saul vnto hys harnesbearer: draw out thy swerde and thrust me thorow therwyth lest these vncyrcumcised come thrust me troughe and make me a mockinge stocke of me. But hys harnesbearer woulde not, for he was sore afrayed. Wherfore Saul toke a swerde and fel vpon it.
1 Samuel 31:5 And when hys harnesbearer sawe that Saul was dead, he fell lykewyse vpon hys swerde and dyed wyth hym.
1 Samuel 31:6 And so Saul dyed and hys thre sonnes and hys harnesbearer, and therto all hys men, that same daye together.
1 Samuel 31:7 When the men of Israel that were in the other syde the valeye, and they of the other syde Iordan, hearde that the men of Israell were put to flyghte, and that Saul and hys sonnes were deade, they left the cytyes, & ran awaye, and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
1 Samuel 31:8 On the morow when the Philistines were come to strippe them that were slaine, they founde Saul and hys thre sonnes lyinge in mount Gelboe.
1 Samuel 31:9 And they cut of hys head, and strypped him out of his harnesse, & sent into the land of the Philistines euery where, to publyshe in the houses of their Goddes & to the people.
1 Samuel 31:10 And they hanged vp hys harnesse in the house of Astaroth, but they hanged vp hys carkase on the walles of Bethsan.
1 Samuel 31:11 When the enhabyters of Iabes in Galaad hearde therof, what the Philistines had done to Saul,
1 Samuel 31:12 they arose as manye as were men of warre and went all nyght and toke the karkasse of Saul & the karkases of hys sonnes from the walles of Bethsan & brought them to Iabes and burnt them there
1 Samuel 31:13 and toke theyr bones & buryed them vnder a Tree at Iabes, & fasted seuen dayes.

BOOK: 2 Samuel

CHAPTER: 1

2 Samuel 1:1 After the death of Saule, when Dauid was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, & had ben two dayes in Zikeleg:
2 Samuel 1:2 Beholde, there came a man the thyrde daye out of the hoste from Saul wyth his clothes rent & earth vpon hys head. And when he came to Dauid, he fell to the earthe, & dyd obeysaunce.
2 Samuel 1:3 To whome Dauid said whence comest thou? And the other aunswered hym: Out of the host of Israel am I escaped.
2 Samuel 1:4 And Dauid sayd to him agayne: How hath it chaunced? tell me. And he sayde: the people fleed from the battell: & many of the people are ouerthrowen & dead: and Saul and Ionathas his sonne are dead therto.
2 Samuel 1:5 And Dauid sayde vnto the young man that tolde hym: how knowest thou that Saul and Ionathas hys sonne be dead?
2 Samuel 1:6 and the younge man that tolde hym, sayde: I was by chaunce in mount Gelboe. And se, Saul leaned vpon hys speare, and the charettes and horsemen folowed him at the heles.
2 Samuel 1:7 And Saul loked back and called me. And I aunswered: here am I.
2 Samuel 1:8 And he sayde vnto me: what arte thou? and I sayde vnto hym: I am an Amalekite.
2 Samuel 1:9 And he sayde vnto me: come on me & slee me: For anguyshe is come vpon me, and my lyfe is yet all in me.
2 Samuel 1:10 And I went on hym & slue hym: for I was sure that he coulde not lyue, after that he was fallen. And I toke the croune that was vpon hys head and the Braselet that was on hys arme, and haue brought them vnto my Lorde hyther.
2 Samuel 1:11 Then Dauid toke hys clothes and rente them, and so dyd all the men that were wyth hym.
2 Samuel 1:12 And they mourned, wepte & fasted vntyll euen, for Saul and Ionathas hys sonne, & for the people of the Lorde, and for the house of Israel, because they were ouerthrowen with the swerde.
2 Samuel 1:13 Then sayde Dauid vnto the younge man that brought hym tydynges. Whence arte thou? And he sayde: I am the sonne of an alyaunt an Amalekyte.
2 Samuel 1:14 And Dauid sayde vnto hym: How is it that thou wast not afrayed to laye thyne hande on the Lordes annoynted, to destroy hym?
2 Samuel 1:15 And Dauid called one of his young men & sayde: Go to and runne vpon hym. And he smote hym that he dyed.
2 Samuel 1:16 Then sayde Dauid vnto hym: thy bloude vpon thyne owne head. For thyne own mouth hath testyfyed agaynste the sayinge: I haue slayne the Lordes anoynted.
2 Samuel 1:17 And Dauid sang thys song of mourning ouer Saule and ouer Ionathas hys sonne,
2 Samuel 1:18 & bad to teache the chyldren of Israel the staues thereof. And beholde it is wrytten in the boke of the ryghteous.
2 Samuel 1:19 The glorye of Israell is slayne vpon the hye hylles: Oh how were the myghtye ouerthrowen?
2 Samuel 1:20 Tell it not in Geth: nor publyshe it in the streates of Askalon: lest the doughters of the Philistines reioyse, and that the doughters of the vncircumcysed triumphe thereof.
2 Samuel 1:21 Ye mountaynes of Gelboe, vpon you be nether dewe nor raygne, nor feldes whence heaue offerynges come. For there the shyldes of the myghtye were cast from them: the shyld of Saul, as though he had not bene anoynted wyth oyle.
2 Samuel 1:22 The boowe of Ionathas and the swerde of Saule turned neuer backe agayne emptye, from the bloude of the wounded and from the fatte of the myghtye warryours.
2 Samuel 1:23 Saul and Ionathas louely and pleasaunte in theyr lyues, were in theyr deethes not deuyded, men swifter then Egles and stronger then Lyons.
2 Samuel 1:24 Ye doughters of Israel, wepe ouer Saule, whiche clothed you in purple and garmentes of pleasure, and bordered youre rayment wyth ornamentes of goulde.
2 Samuel 1:25 How were the myghtye slayne in battell? Ionathas on the hye hylles was wounded to death.
2 Samuel 1:26 Woo is me for the my brother Ionathas: delectable to me wast thou excedyng. Thy loue to me was wonderfull, passyng the loue of wemen.
2 Samuel 1:27 How were thy myghtye ouerthrowen, & how were the weapons of warre forloren.

CHAPTER: 2

2 Samuel 2:1 After thys Dauid asked the Lorde saying: shal I go vp into any of the cytyes of Iuda? And the Lord sayde: go. And Dauid aunswered: Whyther shall I go? He aunswered: vnto Hebron.
2 Samuel 2:2 And so Dauid went thyther wyth hys two wyues also. Ahinoam the Israelyte and Abigail Nabals wyfe the carmelyte.
2 Samuel 2:3 And the men that were wyth him, dyd Dauid carye vp also, euerye man with hys house. And they dwelte in the tounes of Hebron.
2 Samuel 2:4 And the men of Iuda came and there anoynted Dauid kynge ouer the house of Iuda. When it was tolde Dauid, howe the men of Iabes in Galaad had buryed Saule,
2 Samuel 2:5 he sent messengers vnto them & said vnto them: blessed are ye vnto the Lorde, that ye haue shewed suche kyndnesse vnto youre Lorde Saule, and haue buryed hym.
2 Samuel 2:6 Wherfore the Lorde shewe you mercye and truthe agayne. And I wil do you good also, because ye haue done thys thynge.
2 Samuel 2:7 And now let your handes stere them & playe ye the men, though your mayster Saule be deade. And finallye vnderstande that the house of Iuda haue anointed me kyng ouer them.
2 Samuel 2:8 But Abner the sonne of Ner that was captayne of Sauls hoste, toke Isboseth the sonne of Saul and brought hym to Mahanaim
2 Samuel 2:9 and made hym kyng ouer Galaad and ouer the Assurites, & ouer Iesrahel: and ouer Ephraim and Beniamin, and ouer all Israel.
2 Samuel 2:10 And Isboseth Saules sonne was fourtye yeare olde when he began to raygne ouer Israel, and rayned two yeare. But the house of Iuda onely folowed Dauid.
2 Samuel 2:11 And the tyme whiche Dauid raygned in Hebron ouer the house of Iuda, was .vij. yere & syxe monethes.
2 Samuel 2:12 And Abner the sonne of Ner & the seruauntes of Isboseth the sonne of Saul went out of Mahanaim, to Gabaon.
2 Samuel 2:13 And Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah and the seruauntes of Dauid went out, and mette them by the Pole of Gabaon. And they sat doune, the one part on the one syde the Pole & the other on the other syde.
2 Samuel 2:14 And Abner sayde to Ioab: let the young men aryse and playe before vs. And Ioab aunswered: be it.
2 Samuel 2:15 Then there arose and went ouer, twelue of Beniamin by nombre which pertayned to Isboseth the sonne of Saul, and twelue of the seruauntes of Dauid.
2 Samuel 2:16 And they caught eche hys felow that came agaynst hym, by the head and thrust hys swerde in hys syde, and so fell doune al at once. Wherfore the place was called Helath Zurim which is in Gabaon.
2 Samuel 2:17 And there beganne an excedyng cruel battell that same daye. But Abner and the men of Israel were put to the worsse of the seruauntes of Dauid.
2 Samuel 2:18 And there was thre sonnes of Zaruiah there: Ioab, Abisai and Asahel: whiche Asahel was as swyfte of fote as a wylde Roo,
2 Samuel 2:19 & folowed after Abner and turned neyther to the ryght hande nor to the lefte from Abner.
2 Samuel 2:20 Then Abner loked behynde him, and sayd: art thou Asahel? And he sayde ye.
2 Samuel 2:21 Then sayde Abner: turne the eyther to the ryghte hande or to the lefte, and catche one of the younge men, and take the hys spoyle. But Asahel wolde not depart from hym.
2 Samuel 2:22 And Abner sayde agayne to Asahel: turne from me, for I were loth to smyte the to the ground. For then how shuld I hold vp my face before Ioab thy brother?
2 Samuel 2:23 howbeit he wolde in no wyse departe. Then Aner wyth the hynder ende of the speare smote hym vnder the short rybbes, that the speare came oute behynde hym: that he fell doune in the same place & dyed there. And as many as came to the place where Asahell fell doune and dyed, stode styll.
2 Samuel 2:24 But Ioab & Abisai folowed Abner tyll the sunne went doune. And when they were come to the hyll Amah that lyeth before Giah in the waye that goeth thorow the wyldernesse of Gabaon,
2 Samuel 2:25 the chyldren of Beniamin gathered them selues together after Abner on a plumpe, and stode styll on the toppe of an hyll.
2 Samuel 2:26 Then Abner called to Ioab, and sayde: shal the swerd deuoure without ende? knowest thou not that bytternesse is wont to come in the latter ende? howe longe shall it be, yer thou bydde the people returne from folowynge theyr brethren?
2 Samuel 2:27 And Ioab aunswered: as truely as God lyueth, yf thou haddest so sayde, then euen in the mornynge had the people departed, eche from folowing hys brother.
2 Samuel 2:28 And therwyth Ioab blew a trompet, and all the people stode styll & pursued after Israel no more nor fought no more.
2 Samuel 2:29 And Abner and hys men walked al that nyght by the wylde feldes, and went ouer Iordan, and past thorow all Bethhoron and came to Mahanaim.
2 Samuel 2:30 And Ioab returned from after Abner and gathered all the people together. And there lacked of Dauid seruauntes nyntene persons and Asahel.
2 Samuel 2:31 But the seruauntes of Dauid had slayne of Beniamin and of Abners men, thre hundred and thre skore men.
2 Samuel 2:32 And they toke vp Asahel, and buryed hym in the sepulchre of hys father in Bethlehem. And Ioab and hys men went all nyght, and came in the dauning to Hebron.

CHAPTER: 3

2 Samuel 3:1 There was long stryfe betwene the house of Saul and the house of Dauid. But Dauid waxed stronger and stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker & weaker.
2 Samuel 3:2 And Dauid had chyldren borne him in Hebron: hys eldest sonne was Ammon of Ahinoam the Iesrahelyte:
2 Samuel 3:3 the seconde Cheleab of Abigail the wyfe of Nabal the Carmelyte: the thyrd Absalon the sonne of Maachah the doughter of Tholmai the King of Gessur
2 Samuel 3:4 the fourth Adoniah the sonne of Hagith: the fyfte Saphatiah the sonne of Abital:
2 Samuel 3:5 the syxte Iethraam by Egla Dauids wyfe. These were borne to Dauid in Hebron.
2 Samuel 3:6 And as long as there was battell betwene the house of Saule and the house of Dauid, Abner helde vp the house of Saul.
2 Samuel 3:7 And Saule had a concubyne named Riphah the doughter of Aiah. And Isboseth sayde to Abner. Wherfore lyest thou wyth my fathers concubyne?
2 Samuel 3:8 Then was Abner very wrothe for the wordes of Isboseth, and sayde: Am I not a dogges head, which agaynste Iuda haue shewed mercye thys day vnto the house of Saule thy father, and to his brethren and frendes, and haue not delyuered them into the hande of Dauid: seynge thou fyndest a faulte in me thys daye for a woman?
2 Samuel 3:9 So do God to Abner, and so therto: excepte that as the Lorde hath sworne to Dauid, I so do to hym,
2 Samuel 3:10 and bryng the kyngdom from the house of Saule, and set vp the throne of Dauid ouer Israel and ouer Iuda, euen from Dan to Bersabe.
2 Samuel 3:11 And he coulde geue Abner neuer a worde to aunswere, because he feared hym.
2 Samuel 3:12 And Abner sente messengers to Dauid forthwyth, saiyng: whose is the lande? and he sayde therto: make a bonde wyth me, and se, my hande is with the, to bryng al Israel vnto the.
2 Samuel 3:13 And Dauid aunswered: well sayd, I wyl make a bonde wyth the. But one thynge I requere of the, that thou se not my face, excepte thou fyrst brynge Michol Saules doughter, when thou comest to se me.
2 Samuel 3:14 And Dauid sent messengers to Isboseth Saules sonne, saiynge: delyuer me my wyfe Michol whiche I maryed wyth an hundred forskynnes of the Phylistines.
2 Samuel 3:15 And Isboseth sent and toke her from the husbande Phaltiel the sonne of Lais.
2 Samuel 3:16 And her husband went with her, and came wepinge behynde her, tyll they came to Bahurim. Then sayde Abner vnto hym: go and returne. And he returned.
2 Samuel 3:17 And Abner had communycacyon wyth the elders of Israel saying: ye haue long gone about that Dauid shulde be kyng ouer you.
2 Samuel 3:18 Nowe then do it: for the Lorde hath sayde of Dauid, by the hande of my seruaunt Dauid, I wyl saue my people Israel out of the handes of the Philistines, and oute of the hande of al theyr enemyes.
2 Samuel 3:19 And lyke wordes had he wyth Beniamin, and then went to tell in the eares of Dauid in Hebron all that Israell was content wt and the whole house of Beniamin.
2 Samuel 3:20 And when Abner was come to Dauid to Hebron & twentye men wyth hym, Dauid made hym, & the men that were wyth hym a feast.
2 Samuel 3:21 Then Abner sayde vnto Dauid. I wyll vp and go gather all Israel vnto my Lorde the kynge, that they maye make an appoyntment wyth the, that thou mayest be kyng ouer all that thyne hert desyreth. And so Dauid let Abner depart and he went in peace.
2 Samuel 3:22 And se, the seruauntes of Dauid & Ioab came from chasyng robbers and broughte a great praye wyth them. But Abner was not wyth Dauid in Hebron: for he had sent hym awaye to departe in peace.
2 Samuel 3:23 When Ioab and al the host that was wyth hym were come, men tolde Ioab sayinge: Abner the sonne of Ner came to the Kyng, & he hath sente hym awaye that he is gone in peace.
2 Samuel 3:24 Then Ioab wente to the kynge & sayde: what hast thou done? Se, Abner came vnto the, why hast thou sent him awaye, that he shulde skape quyte?
2 Samuel 3:25 Thou myghtest knowe Abner the sonne of Ner, that he came to flatter wyth the, and to knowe thy conuersacyon and behauoure, and to knowe all that thou doest.
2 Samuel 3:26 And when Ioab was come out from the Kynge, he sent messengers after Abner which brought hym agayne from the wel of Sirah vnwetyng to Dauid.
2 Samuel 3:27 And when Abner was come agayne to Hebron, Ioab toke hym a syde in the gate, to speake wyth hym gylefully, & there smote hym vnder the short rybbes that he dyed, for the bloud of Asahel hys brother.
2 Samuel 3:28 And when it afterward came to Dauids eare, he sayde: I and my kyngedom are gyltelesse before the Lorde for euer, concernyng the bloude of Abner the sonne of Ner.
2 Samuel 3:29 It fal therfore on the head of Ioab and on al hys fathers house: that the house of Ioab be neuer wythoute one or other that hath runnyng yssues or wythout lepers and goers on crouches, and that fal on the swerde, and that lacke bread.
2 Samuel 3:30 And the cause why Ioab & Abisai slue Abner was, that Abner had slayne their brother Asahel at Gabaon in battel.
2 Samuel 3:31 And Dauid sayd to Ioab & to al the people that were wyth hym, rent youre clothes and put on sacke clothe and mourne before Abner. And kyng Dauid hym selfe folowed the bere.
2 Samuel 3:32 And when they had buryed Abner in Hebron, the kyng lyfte vp hys voyce and wepte ouer the sepulchre of Abner, and so dyd all the people.
2 Samuel 3:33 And the kynge lamented ouer Abner and said: Abner dyed not as a wretche dyeth.
2 Samuel 3:34 Thy handes were not manacled nor thy fete broughte into gyues: but as men fall before wycked chyldren, so fellest thou. And all the people wept yet more ouer hym.
2 Samuel 3:35 And when all the people came to eat meat wyth Dauid, whyle it was yet daye, Dauid sware, saying: so do God to me and so therto, yf I taste bread or ought elles, tyll the sunne be doune.
2 Samuel 3:36 And the people wyst it, and it pleased them, as well as all other good thynges, whiche the kynge dyd in the sight of the people.
2 Samuel 3:37 And all the people and al Israel therto vnderstode that daye how that it was not the Kynges mynde to slee Abner the sonne of Ner.
2 Samuel 3:38 And the kynge sayde vnto hys seruauntes: knowe ye not, how that there is a Lorde and that a greate fallen thys daye in Israel?
2 Samuel 3:39 And I am thys daye tender, thoughe I be anoynted kyng. And these men the sonnes of Zaruiah be to good for me to rule? But the Lorde rewarde the doer of euyll accordynge to hys wyckednesse.

CHAPTER: 4

2 Samuel 4:1 When Sauls sonne hearde that Abner was deade in Hebron, hys handes faynted & all Israel was troubled.
2 Samuel 4:2 Nowe thys Sauls sonne had two men that were become captaynes ouer the soudyars, the one called Baanah and the other Rechab, the sonnes of Remon a Berothite, and of the chyldren of Beniamin: for Beroth was rekened to pertayne to Beniamin.
2 Samuel 4:3 And these Berothites fled to Gethaim and soiourned there vntil the same tyme.
2 Samuel 4:4 And Ionathas Sauls sonne had a sonne that was lame on hys fete: fyue yeare olde was he when the tydynges came of Saul and Ionathas out of Iesrahel. And hys nource toke hym vp and fled awaye. And as she made hast to flee and was amased, the chylde fell and became halte and was calleth Miphiboseth.
2 Samuel 4:5 And these sonnes of Remon the Berothite, Rechab and Baanah went, & came in the heat of the daye to the house of Isboseth as he slept on a bed at none.
2 Samuel 4:6 And behold they came into the house as thoughe they wold haue bought whete, & smote hym vnder the short ribbes, and fled.
2 Samuel 4:7 For they came into the house as he slept on hys bed in hys restynge chamber, and smote hym, and slue hym, & beheaded hym, and toke hys head, and gat them away thorowe the wylde feldes al nyght.
2 Samuel 4:8 And they brought the head of Isboseth vnto Dauid to Hebron and sayde to the kynge: behold there the head of Isboseth Sauls sonne thyne enemye, whiche soughte thy soule. But the Lorde hath aduenged my Lorde the kynge this day, of Saule and of hys seede.
2 Samuel 4:9 And Dauid aunswered Rechab and Baanah hys brother, the sonnes of Reman the Berothite, and sayde vnto them: as surelye as the Lorde lyueth whiche hath delyuered my soule out of all aduersites:
2 Samuel 4:10 hym that told me howe that Saul was dead, thynkyng to haue brought me good tydynges, I caught & slew in Zikeleg, to geue hym a rewarde for his tydynges bringing.
2 Samuel 4:11 And how much more ought I so to deale with weked men that haue slayne a ryghtuouse person in hys owne house vpon hys bed. Now therfore thynke ye that I wyll not requyre hys bloude of youre handes and take you from the earth?
2 Samuel 4:12 And Dauid commaunded hys younge men, and they slue them and cut of theyr handes and theyr fete & hanged them vp by the pole in Hebron. And they toke the head of Isboseth, and buryed in the sepulchre of Abner in Hebron.

CHAPTER: 5

2 Samuel 5:1 Then came all the trybes of Israel to Dauid to Hebron & sayde: se, we are thy bones & thy flesh.
2 Samuel 5:2 And therto in tyme paste when Saul was kyng ouer vs, thou leddest Israel in and oute. And the Lord hath sayd to the: thou shalt fede my people Israel, and thou shalt be a captayne ouer Israel.
2 Samuel 5:3 And so all the elders of Israell came to the kynge to Hebron. And Kynge Dauid made a couenaunt wyth them in Hebron before the Lord. And they anoynted Dauid Kynge ouer Israell.
2 Samuel 5:4 Dauid was thyrtye yeare olde when he began to raygne, and he raygned fourty yeare.
2 Samuel 5:5 In Hebron he raygned ouer Iuda seuen yere & syxe monethes. And in Ierusalem he raygned thyrtye & thre yeares ouer all Israell and Iuda.
2 Samuel 5:6 Then went the Kynge and hys men to Ierusalem, vnto the Iebusytes the enhabyters of the lande. And they sayde vnto Dauid: excepte thou take awaye the blynde & the lame thou shalt not come in hyther, meanyng therby that Dauid shulde not haue come in thyther.
2 Samuel 5:7 Neuerthelesse Dauid toke the holde of Syon, which is in the cytye of Dauid.
2 Samuel 5:8 Then sayde Dauid the same day. Whosoeuer wynneth the walles and the lame & the blinde hated of Dauids soule. Wherfore the blynd & the lame shall not come into the house.
2 Samuel 5:9 And Dauid dwelte in the toure and called it the cytye of Dauid. And Dauid buylt round aboute it from Mello inwarde.
2 Samuel 5:10 And Dauid waxed great and the Lorde God of hostes was with him.
2 Samuel 5:11 And Hiram Kynge of Tyre sent messengers to Dauid wyth Cedar trees and carpenters & Masons, to buyld Dauid an house.
2 Samuel 5:12 Wherby Dauid perceyued that the Lord had stablished him Kynge ouer Israel, and had exalted his kingdom for his people Israels sake.
2 Samuel 5:13 And Dauid toke hym mo concubynes and wyues out of Ierusalem, after he was come from Hebron, and mo sonnes and doughters were yet borne to Dauid.
2 Samuel 5:14 And these be the names of the sonnes that were borne hym in Ierusalem: Samua, Sobab, Nathan, Salamon,
2 Samuel 5:15 Iebahar, Elisua, Nepheg, Iaphia,
2 Samuel 5:16 Elisama, Eliada, & Eliphalet.
2 Samuel 5:17 But when the Philistines heard that they had anoynted Dauid King ouer Israel, they came al vp to seke Dauid. And as sone as Dauid hearde of it, he gat hym to an hold.
2 Samuel 5:18 And the Philistines came and layd them a long in the valeye of Raphaim.
2 Samuel 5:19 And Dauid asked of the Lorde sayinge: shal I go to the Philistines? & wilt thou delyuer them into my handes? And the Lorde sayde vnto Dauid: go for I wyll delyuer the Philistines into thy handes.
2 Samuel 5:20 And Dauid cam to Baal Pharazim & smote them there & sayd: the Lorde hath deuyded myne enemyes a sondre before me, as a man wold deuyde water. And therfore he called the name of the sayd place, Baal Pharazim.
2 Samuel 5:21 And there they lefte theyr Images and Dauid & his men toke them vp.
2 Samuel 5:22 And the Philistines came yet agayne & layde them in the valeye Raphaim.
2 Samuel 5:23 And Dauid asked the Lorde, & he sayd go not But compasse them on the backsyde & come vpon them from the Peretrees.
2 Samuel 5:24 And when thou hearest the noyse of a thyng goyng in the toppes of the Peretrees, then moue. For then the Lord is gone out before the, to smyte the host of the Philistines.
2 Samuel 5:25 And Dauid dyd as the Lord commaunded hym and smote the Philistines from Gabaah to Gezer.

CHAPTER: 6

2 Samuel 6:1 After that, Dauid chose out all the chefe young men in Israel to the somme of thyrtythousand,
2 Samuel 6:2 & arose and went and al the folcke that were wyth hym of the men of Iuda, to fet awaye the arcke of GOD vpon which is called the name of the Lord of hostes that dwelleth betwene the cherubyns.
2 Samuel 6:3 And they put the arcke of God vpon a newe carte, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that dwelt at Gabaah. And Ozah & Ahio the sonnes of Abinadab draue the newe carte.
2 Samuel 6:4 And when they brought it out of the house of Abinadab that dwelt at Gabaah wt the arcke of God, Ahio went before the arck.
2 Samuel 6:5 And Dauid and all the house of Israel playde before the Lorde wyth all maner instrumentes of fyre woode, wyth harpes, psalteryes, tymberelles, fedylles, and symbals.
2 Samuel 6:6 And when they came to Nachons thresshing floure, Ozah put hys hande to the arcke of God and helde it, for the oxen stombled.
2 Samuel 6:7 And the Lorde was wrath wyth Ozah and God smote hym in the same place for hys faulte, & there he dyed by the arcke of God.
2 Samuel 6:8 And Dauid was dyspleased because the Lorde had rent Ozah. And the name of the place was called Perez Ozah vnto thys daye.
2 Samuel 6:9 And Dauid was then afrayed of the Lord, and sayd: how shulde the arcke of the Lord come to my house
2 Samuel 6:10 And so Dauid wolde not bryng the arcke of the Lord wyth hym into the cytye of Dauid. But caryed it into the house of Obed Edom a Gethite.
2 Samuel 6:11 And the arcke of the Lorde continued in the house of Obed Edom the Gethite, thre monethes, and the Lorde blessed Obed Edom and all hys housholde.
2 Samuel 6:12 And when it was told Kynge Dauid howe that the Lorde had blessed the house of Obed Edom and all that pertayned vnto hym, because of the arck of God he went and brought the arcke of God from the house of Obed Edom vnto the cytye of Dauid wyth gladnes.
2 Samuel 6:13 And euer when they that bare the arcke of the Lorde, had gone sixe passes, he offered an oxe and a fat shepe.
2 Samuel 6:14 And Dauid daunsed before the Lorde wyth all hys myght in a lynnen Ephod gyrde vnto hym.
2 Samuel 6:15 And Dauid & all the house of Israel brought the arcke of the Lorde wyth shoutyng & trompet blowyng.
2 Samuel 6:16 And as the arcke of the Lorde came into the cytye of Dauid, Michol Sauls doughter loked thorowe a wyndowe, and saw Kynge Dauid spryng and daunse before the Lord, & therfore dyspysed hym in her hert.
2 Samuel 6:17 And when they had brought in the arcke of the Lorde, & had set it euen in hys place, euen in the tabernacle that Dauid had prepared for it: Dauid offered burntofferynges and peaceofferynges before the Lorde,
2 Samuel 6:18 and as sone as Dauid had made an ende of offeryng burnteofferynges and peaceofferynges he blessed the people in the name of the Lorde of Hostes,
2 Samuel 6:19 & gaue amonge all the folcke, euen amonge the hole multytude of Israel, as well to the wemen as men euerye one a cake of bread, and a pece of fleshe and a flacket of wyne. And so the people departed euerye man to hys house.
2 Samuel 6:20 Then Dauid returned to salute hys housholde. And Michol the doughter of Saul came out agaynst hym, and sayde: Oh how gloryous was the kynge of Israel to day, which strypte hym selfe to daye before the eyes of the maydens of hys seruauntes, as a lyght brayned felowe is wont to strype hymselfe.
2 Samuel 6:21 But Dauid sayd agayne to Michol, I wyll make sporte before the Lorde which chose me before thy father & before all hys kynne, commaundynge me to be ruler ouer al hys people Israel.
2 Samuel 6:22 And I wylbe yet more vyle then so, & wyl be meke in myne owne syght: and shal for all that of the very same maydeseruauntes which thou speakest of, be had in honoure.
2 Samuel 6:23 But the sayd Michol doughter to Saule had no chyld vnto the daye of her death.

CHAPTER: 7

2 Samuel 7:1 And in processe as the king dwelt in hys house after that the Lorde had geuen hym rest round about from all hys enemyes,
2 Samuel 7:2 he sayde vnto Nathan the Prophete: Beholde, I dwell in an house of Cedar trees, but the arcke of God dwelleth in the myddes of curtaynes.
2 Samuel 7:3 Then sayd Nathan vnto the King go and do al that is thyne herte, for the Lord is wyth the.
2 Samuel 7:4 But that same nyght the worde of the Lorde came vnto Nathan saying:
2 Samuel 7:5 go and tell my seruaunt Dauid, thus sayth the Lord: shalt thou go buylde me an house to dwell in?
2 Samuel 7:6 For I haue not dwelt in anye house sence the tyme I brought the chyldren of Israel out of Egypte vnto thys daye: but haue walked in a tent and in a tabernacle.
2 Samuel 7:7 In anye waye where I wente among all the chyldren of Israel, spake I one word wyth any of the trybes of Israel which I commaunded to fede my people Israel saying: why buylde ye not me an house of Cedar tree?
2 Samuel 7:8 Now therfore so saye vnto my seruaunt Dauid, thus sayth the Lord of Hostes I toke the out of a shepeherdes cote from folowyng shepe to be a ruler ouer my people Israel.
2 Samuel 7:9 And I was wyth the in all that thou wentest to, & haue destroyed all thyne enemyes out of thy syght, and haue made the a great name, lyke vnto the name of the great men of the world.
2 Samuel 7:10 And I wyl appoynte a place for my people Israel, and wyll plant it and they shall contynue in one place and shall moue no more, neyther shall wycked people trouble them anye more as they dyd at the begynnynge,
2 Samuel 7:11 & sence the tyme I commaunded Iudges to be ouer my people Israel, & I wyll geue the reste from all thyne enemyes. And the Lorde telleth the, that he wyl buylde the an housholde.
2 Samuel 7:12 And when thy dayes be fulfilled and thou layde to rest wyth thy fathers, then I wyll set vp thy sede after the, which shall proceade out of thy bodye, and will stablysh his kingdome.
2 Samuel 7:13 And he shal buylde an house for my name, & I wyll stablyshe the seate of hys kyngdome for euer:
2 Samuel 7:14 I wylbe hys father & he shalbe my sonne: in so muche that yf he synne, I wyl but rebuke hym wyth such a rodde as men be rebuked wyth, and wyth suche plages as the chyldren of men be plaged with.
2 Samuel 7:15 But my mercye wyll I not take awaye from hym, as I toke it from Saule, whome I put doune before the.
2 Samuel 7:16 And thyne house and thy kyngdome shall endure wythoute ende after the, and thy seate shalbe stablyshed for euer.
2 Samuel 7:17 And when Nathan had tolde Dauid all these wordes & all thys vysyon,
2 Samuel 7:18 Then went kynge Dauid & set hym doune before the Lorde, and sayde: What am I Lorde Iehouah, and what is my kynne, that thou shuldest haue broughte me this farre forth?
2 Samuel 7:19 And is thys a small thyng in thy syght Lorde Iehouah, but that thou shuldest speake also of the seruauntes house for a greate while to come? is this a lawe amonge men Lorde Iehouah?
2 Samuel 7:20 And what can Dauid saye more vnto the, seyng thou knowest thy seruaunt Lorde Iehouah?
2 Samuel 7:21 Euen for thy wordes sake & accordynge to thyne owne herte hast thou done all these greate thynges to make them knowen vnto thy seruaunt.
2 Samuel 7:22 Wherfore thou arte great O Lorde God and there is none lyke the, neyther is there any God saue thou accordyng to al that we haue hearde wyth oure eares.
2 Samuel 7:23 And what one people in the earth is like thy people Israel, whiche God went and delyuered to be hys people, and to make him a name, and to shew them great and terryble thynges in the earthe, before thy people whiche thou redemedst to the oute of Egypte, euen from the people & from theyr Goddes.
2 Samuel 7:24 And thou haste ordeyned thy people Israel to be thy people for euer. And thou Lorde arte theyr God.
2 Samuel 7:25 And nowe Lorde God the thyng thou haste sayd of thy seruaunt and of hys house make it good for euer, and do as thou haste sayde.
2 Samuel 7:26 And let thy name be great for euer, that men maye saye, the Lorde of hostes is the God of Israel: and let the house of thy seruaunt Dauid be stablyshed before the.
2 Samuel 7:27 For thou Lorde of Hostes God of Israel haste tolde in the eare of thy seruaunt saying: I wyll buylde the an house. And therfor hath thy seruaunt founde in hys harte to pray this prayer vnto the.
2 Samuel 7:28 And nowe Lorde Iehouah thou arte the God, and thy wordes muste be true: for thou haste tolde thys goodnesse vnto thy seruaunte.
2 Samuel 7:29 And now go to, and blesse the housholde of thy seruaunte, that it maye contynue for euer before the. For thou Lorde Iehouah hast sayd that of thy blessyng the house of thy seruaunt shalbe blessed for euer.

CHAPTER: 8

2 Samuel 8:1 After that, Dauid bette the Philistines and subdued them and toke the brydell of bondage oute of theyr haudes.
2 Samuel 8:2 And he bette the Moabytes, and measured them wyth a lyne makynge them lye a longe on the earth, and then meatynge the length of .ij. lynes to sley, and the length of one lyne to saue a lyue. And so became the Moabites Dauids seruauntes & payde trybute.
2 Samuel 8:3 Dauid smote also Adadezer the sonne of Rehob kynge of Zobah as he went to make the ende of hys coastes at the ryuer Euphrates.
2 Samuel 8:4 And Dauid toke a thousande and seuen hundred horsemen of hys, and twentye thousand fote men & destroied all hys charettes reseruynge one hundred of them.
2 Samuel 8:5 Then came the Syryans of Damascon to succour Adadezer kyng of Zobah. And Dauid slue of them two and twentye thousande men
2 Samuel 8:6 and put soudyours in Syra Damascon. And the Syryans became seruauntes to Dauid, payeng trybute. And thus the Lord saued Dauid in all that he went to.
2 Samuel 8:7 And Dauid toke the shyldes of golde that were vpon the seruauntes of Adadezer and broughte them to Ierusalem.
2 Samuel 8:8 And therto out of Betah & Berathai cyties of Adadezer he broughte excedynge great aboundaunce of brasse.
2 Samuel 8:9 When Thoi Kyng of Hemath had hearde how Dauid had discomforted all the hoste of Adadezer,
2 Samuel 8:10 he sent Ioram hys sonne vnto king Dauid to salute hym wyth peace & to blesse hym because he had fought against Adadezer and beaten hym, for Thoi kepte warre wyth Adadezer, which sonne brought vessels of syluer, golde, and of brasse wyth him.
2 Samuel 8:11 And them also kynge Dauid dyd dedicate vnto the Lorde wyth the syluer and gold that he consecrated of all nacyons whiche he subdued:
2 Samuel 8:12 of the Syryans, the Moabytes, the chyldren of Ammon the Phylystines, the Amaleckites, and of the spoyle of Adadezer sonne of Rehob kynge of Zobah.
2 Samuel 8:13 And Dauid made hym a name after he returned from the slaughter of the Syryans in the valey of Salt where he slew .xviij. thousand men.
2 Samuel 8:14 And he put kepers in Edom, euen thorow oute al Edom put he soudyars and al Edom became hys seruauntes. And the Lorde kepte Dauid whatsoeuer he toke in hand.
2 Samuel 8:15 And Dauid raygned ouer all Israel, and executed ryght and iustice vnto all hys people.
2 Samuel 8:16 And Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah was ouer the host and Iehosaphat the sonne of Ahilud was recorder.
2 Samuel 8:17 And Sadoch the sonne of Ahitob and Ahimelech the sonne of Abiathar were the Priestes, and Saraiah was the Scrybe.
2 Samuel 8:18 And Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the Cerethites and the Phelethytes, and Dauids sonnes were chefe rulars.

CHAPTER: 9

2 Samuel 9:1 Then sayde Dauid: is there yet any man lefte of the house of Saule, that I maye shew hym mercye for Ionathas sake?
2 Samuel 9:2 And there was of the housholde of Saul a seruaunt named Zibah which was called vnto Dauid. And the kynge sayde vnto hym: art thou Zibah. And he sayde: thy seruaunt is the man.
2 Samuel 9:3 Then sayd the kynge: remayneth there yet any man of the kynred of Saul, whom I may shewe the mercye of God vpon? And Zibah sayde vnto the kynge: Ionathas hath yet a sonne whiche is lame on both fete.
2 Samuel 9:4 And the kynge sayde vnto hym: where is he? And Zibah sayde vnto the kynge: beholde, he is in the house of Machir, the sonne of Amyel in Lodaber.
2 Samuel 9:5 Then kynge Dauid sent & fet hym out of the house of Machir the sonne of Amyell, out of Lodaber.
2 Samuel 9:6 Nowe when Miphiboseth the sonne of Ionathas the sonne of Saul was come vnto Dauid, he bowed hym selfe, and fel on hys face. Then sayde Dauid: Miphiboseth? And he aunswered: Behold thy seruaunt.
2 Samuel 9:7 And Dauid sayde: feare not: for I wyll surely shew the kyndnesse for Ionathas sake, and wyll restore the all the feldes of Saul thy father, and thou shalt eat meate on myne owne table alwaye.
2 Samuel 9:8 And the other bowed him selfe and sayd: what is thy seruaunt that thou shuldest vouchesafe to loke vpon suche a dead dog as I am.
2 Samuel 9:9 Then the kyng called vnto Zibah Saules young man saying vnto him: I geue vnto thy maysters sonne all that pertayned to Saule & to all hys kynne.
2 Samuel 9:10 Se therfore that thou & thy sonnes and thy seruauntes tyll the lande for hym, and bryng in, that thy maysters sonne maye haue fode to eate. For Miphiboseth thy maysters sonne shall eate meate alwaye vpon my table. For this Zibah had fyftene sonnes and twentye seruauntes.
2 Samuel 9:11 Then sayde Zibah vnto the kynge: all that my Lorde hathe sayd vnto hys seruaunt, thy seruaunt shall do. For (sayde the kyng) Miphiboseth must eate vpon my table, as one of the kynges sonnes.
2 Samuel 9:12 Thys Miphiboseth had a sonne that was young named Micha, and al that dwelled in the house of Zibah were seruauntes vnto Miphiboseth.
2 Samuel 9:13 And Miphiboseth dwelt in Ierusalem, for he ate euer at the kynges table, and was therto hault on both legges.

CHAPTER: 10

2 Samuel 10:1 It happened after this, that the kynge of the chyldren of Amnon dyed, & Hanon his sonne raygned in hys steade.
2 Samuel 10:2 Then sayde Dauid: I wyl shew kyndnesse vnto Hanon the sonne of Nahas, as hys father shewed kyndnesse vnto me. And thervpon Dauid sente to conforte hym by the hande of hys seruauntes ouer the death of hys father. Now when Dauids seruauntes were come into the land of the chyldren of Amnon:
2 Samuel 10:3 the Lordes of the chyldren of Amnon sayde vnto Hanon theyr Lorde: thynkest thou that Dauid doth honoure thy father, because he hath sent to comfort the? Naye, he hath rather sent hys seruauntes vnto the, to searche the cytye and to spye out, euen to ouerthrow it.
2 Samuel 10:4 Wherfore Hanon toke Dauids seruauntes and shaued of the one halfe of euerye mannes bearde & cut of theyr garmentes euen in the myddle, euen harde by the buttockes of them and sent them awaye.
2 Samuel 10:5 When it was tolde Dauid he sent against them (for they were men excedyngly ashamed) & saide: tarye at Iericho vntyll your beerdes be growen, & then returne.
2 Samuel 10:6 And when the chyldren of Amnon sawe that they stancke vnto Dauid, they sent & hyred the sonnes of Bethrehob & of the Syryans of Zobah .xx. thousande fote men & of kyng Maacah a thousande men, & of Istob twelue thousande men.
2 Samuel 10:7 And when Dauid hearde of it, he sent Ioab & all the host of strong men.
2 Samuel 10:8 And the chyldren of Amnon came out & waged battell before the gate & the Syryens of Zobah, of Rehob, Istob and Maacah were by themselues in the feldes.
2 Samuel 10:9 When Ioab sawe that the front of the battell was before and after, he chose of all the best of Israell & put them in araye agaynst the Syryens.
2 Samuel 10:10 And the rest of the people he delyuered into the hand of Abisai his brother, which put them in araye agaynst the children of Amnon.
2 Samuel 10:11 And he sayd: yf the Syryens ouercome me, then succoure me. But yf the chyldren of Amnon be to good for the, I wyll come and succoure the,
2 Samuel 10:12 quyte the lyke a man, and let vs fyght lustely for oure people, & for the cytyes of our God. And the Lorde do what semyth best in hys eyes.
2 Samuel 10:13 And forthwyth Ioab proceded & the people that was with him into battell against the Syryens, which fleed before him.
2 Samuel 10:14 And when the chyldren of Amnon saw that the Syriens were fled, then fled they also before Abisai, and entred into the cytye. And so Ioab returned from the chyldren of Amnon & came to Ierusalem.
2 Samuel 10:15 And when the Syryens sawe that they were put to the worsse before Israel, they gathered them together.
2 Samuel 10:16 And Hadadezer sente & brought out the Syryens that were beyound the ryuer. And the host of them came, & Sobah the captayne of the host of Hadadezer before them.
2 Samuel 10:17 And when it was shewed Dauid, he gathered all Israell, and passed ouer Iordan and came to Helom: where the Syryans put them selues in araye agaynste Dauid and foughte wyth hym:
2 Samuel 10:18 howe be it the Syryens fled before Israel. And Dauid destroyed seuen hundred charettes of them and fourtye thousand horsmen and smote Sobah the captayne of hys hoste, that he there dyed.
2 Samuel 10:19 And when all the Kynges that were seruauntes to Hadadezer sawe that they were put to the worsse before Israel, they made peace wyth them, & serued them. And so the Syryens feared to helpe the chyldren of Amnon any more.

CHAPTER: 11

2 Samuel 11:1 And it came to passe in the begynning of a new yeare, in the tymes when kinges are wont to go forth to battell, that Dauid sent Ioab & his seruauntes with him & all Israell. And they destroyed the children of Amnon, & beseged Rabah. But Dauid taryed styll at Ierusalem.
2 Samuel 11:2 And it chaunged in an euenynge that Dauid arose from hys couche & walked vpon the roufe of the kynges palace, & from the roufe sawe a very bewtyfull woman washing her selfe.
2 Samuel 11:3 And he sente to enquyre what woman it shulde be. And it was aunswered agayne, that she was Bethsabe the doughter of Eliam and wyfe to Vrias the Hethite.
2 Samuel 11:4 And Dauid sente messengers and fet her, and she came vnto hym, & he laye with her. And she was straight waye puryfyed from her vnclennesse, & returned vnto her house.
2 Samuel 11:5 And when the woman had perceyued that she had conceyued, she sent & tolde Dauid, and sayde. I am wyth chylde.
2 Samuel 11:6 Then Dauid sent to Ioab, to sende vnto him Vrias the Hethite. And Ioab sent Vrias to Dauid.
2 Samuel 11:7 And when Vrias was come vnto him he demaunded how Ioab dyd, and howe the people fared, and howe the warre prospered.
2 Samuel 11:8 And Dauid sayd more ouer to Vrias: go doune to thyne house and washe thy fete. And Vrias departed out of the kinges palace, & there folowed hym a seruyce from the kynges table.
2 Samuel 11:9 But Vrias slept at the dore of the kynges palace wyth all the seruauntes of thys Lord, and went not doune to hys house.
2 Samuel 11:10 Then they tolde Dauid, saying: Vrias descended not into hys house Then sayd Dauid vnto Vrias: Seynge that thou art come from iorneyinge, why doest thou not go doune vnto thine house?
2 Samuel 11:11 And Vrias sayd vnto Dauid: the arck and Israel & Iuda dwell in pauilions: & my Lord Ioab and the seruauntes of my Lorde lye in tentes vpon the flat earthe: and shulde I then go into myne house, to eate and to dryncke & to lye wyth my wyfe? By thy lyfe and as sure as thy soule lyueth, I wyll not do that thyng.
2 Samuel 11:12 Then sayde Dauid vnto Vrias: tarye here this daye also, and to morow I wyll let the departe. And so Vrias abode in Ierusalem that daye, and on the morowe.
2 Samuel 11:13 And Dauid called hym, and he ate and drancke before hym, & he made hym dronck. And at euen he went out to lye on hys couche with the seruauntes of the Lorde, and went not doune to hys house.
2 Samuel 11:14 Wherfore on the morowe Dauid wrote a letter to Ioab, and sent it by Vrias.
2 Samuel 11:15 And he wrote in the letter, saying: put Vrias in the fore front of the battel where it is moste strong, and come back from hym that he may be smyten to death.
2 Samuel 11:16 And as Ioab beseged the cytye, he assygned Vrias vnto a place where he wist that strong men were.
2 Samuel 11:17 And the men of the cytye came oute & fought with Ioab. And there were certen ouerthrowen of the people and of the seruauntes of Dauid, and Vrias the Hethite dyed also.
2 Samuel 11:18 Then Ioab sent and tolde Dauid all the processe of the warre,
2 Samuel 11:19 and charged the messengers, saying: when thou hast made an end of tellynge the storye of the warre vnto the king
2 Samuel 11:20 yf he begynne to fume & saye vnto the: wherfore approched ye so nye vnto the cytye to fyght? wyst ye not that men wold hourle and shote from the walles?
2 Samuel 11:21 who smote Abimelech sonne of Ierobeseth? dyd not a woman caste a pece of a mylstone vpon hym from of the walles, that he dyed in Thebes? why then went ye nye the walles, then saye thou? thy seruaunt Vrias the Hethite is dead also.
2 Samuel 11:22 And the messengers went and came & shewed Dauid all that Ioab had sent hym with,
2 Samuel 11:23 and sayde vnto Dauid: the men preuayle agaynst vs, and came out vnto vs into the feld, & we stacke vnto them, euen vnto the entering of the gate.
2 Samuel 11:24 And the shoters shotte from the walles, and some of the seruauntes of the king be dead. And thy seruaunt Vrias the Hethite is dead also.
2 Samuel 11:25 Then sayde Dauid vnto the messenger, thus wyse saye vnto Ioab, let not the thyng trouble the. For the swerde deuoureth one as well as another: make thy battell more stronge agaynste the cytye, and destroye it, & se that thou courage Ioab.
2 Samuel 11:26 And when the wife of Vrias hearde that her husbande was dead, she mourned for hym,
2 Samuel 11:27 & as sone as the mournyng was ended, Dauid sente and fet her to hys house, and she was hys wyfe & bare him a sonne. But the deade that Dauid had committed, dyspleased the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 12

2 Samuel 12:1 And the Lorde sent Nathan vnto Dauid. And he came vnto hym & sayde vnto hym: there were .ij. men in one cytye, a ryche and a poore.
2 Samuel 12:2 And the ryche had excedyng great aboundaunce of shepe and oxen.
2 Samuel 12:3 But the pore had nothynge saue one lytle lamb which he bought & noryshed vp. And it grew vp with hym and hys chyldren, and dyd eate of hys owne meate and drancke of hys owne cuppe, and slept in hys bosome, & was as dere vnto hym as hys doughter.
2 Samuel 12:4 And there came a straunger vnto the ryche man. And he coulde not fynde in hys herte to take of hys owne shepe nor of hys beastes to dresse for the straunger that was come vnto hym. But toke the pore mannes lambe, and dressed it for the man that was come to hym.
2 Samuel 12:5 And Dauid was exceding wroth with the man, and sayde to Nathan: as surely as the Lorde lyueth the felowe that hathe done thys thynge, is the chylde of death
2 Samuel 12:6 and shall restore the lambe foure folde, because he dyd thys thynge, and because he had no pitie.
2 Samuel 12:7 Then Nathan sayd to Dauid: thou arte the man. Thys sayth the Lorde God of Israel: I annoynted the kynge ouer Israel, & rydde the out of the handes of Saule.
2 Samuel 12:8 And I geue the thy maysters house and thy maysters wyues into thy bosome, and gaue the the house of Israel and of Iuda, and wolde yf that had bene to lytle, haue geuen the twyse so muche more.
2 Samuel 12:9 Wherfore hast thou despised the commaundement of the Lorde, to do wyckednesse in hys syght? thou hast kylde Vrias the hethyte with the swerde, and hast taken hys wyfe to thy wyfe, & hast slayne hym wyth the swerde of the chyldren of Amnon.
2 Samuel 12:10 Now therfore the swerd shal neuer depart from thyne house, because (saythe the Lorde) thou hast despysed me, and taken the wyfe of Vrias the Aethite, to be thy wyfe.
2 Samuel 12:11 Thus saith the Lorde: beholde I wyl stere vp euyl against the euen of thyne owne house & wyll take thy wyues before thyne eyes, and geue them vnto thy neyghboure, which shal slepe with them in the syght of the sonne.
2 Samuel 12:12 And thou dyddeste it secretely, yet wyll I do this thinge before al Israel and in the open sonne lyght.
2 Samuel 12:13 Then sayde Dauid vnto Nathan: I haue synned agaynst the Lorde. And Nathan sayde agayne to Dauid: the Lorde hath put awaye thy synne, thou shalt not dye.
2 Samuel 12:14 Howe be it because in doynge this deede thou hast geuen the enemyes of the Lorde a cause to rayle, the chyld that is borne the shall dye surelye.
2 Samuel 12:15 And Nathan departed vnto hys house. And the Lorde stroke the chylde that Vryas wyfe bare Dauid and it sickened.
2 Samuel 12:16 And Dauid besought god for the boye and fasted and wente & laye all nyght vpon the earthe.
2 Samuel 12:17 And the elders of hys house arose and wente to him to take hym vp from the earthe. But he wolde not, neyther yet eat meat wyth them.
2 Samuel 12:18 And it happened the seuenth daye that the chylde dyed. But the seruauntes of Dauid durst not tell hym that the chylde was dead. For they said, se while the child was yet aliue, we spake vnto hym, and he wolde not herken vnto oure voyce. How much more then wil he vexe hym selfe yf we tell hym that the chylde is dead?
2 Samuel 12:19 But Dauid sawe hys seruauntes whysperyng and therby perceyued that the childe was dead, and sayde vnto hys seruauntes: is the chylde dead. And they sayd ye.
2 Samuel 12:20 Then Dauid arose from the earth, & wasshed & anoynted hym self & chaunged his apparell, & went into the house of the Lorde & prayed, & after came to hys owne house & bade that they shulde set meate before hym, and he dyd eate.
2 Samuel 12:21 Then sayd hys seruauntes vnto hym: what is thys that thou hast done? Thou fastedest and wepest for thy chylde whyle it was aliue, and as sone as it was dead thou dyddest ryse vp, and dyddest eate meate.
2 Samuel 12:22 And he aunswered: while the chylde was alyue, I fasted and wept. For I this thought: who can tel whether God wil haue mercye on me that the chylde may lyue.
2 Samuel 12:23 But now seynge it is dead, wherfore shulde I fast? can I brynge hym agayne any more? I shall go to hym: but he shall not come agayne to me.
2 Samuel 12:24 And Dauid comforted Bethsabe hys wyfe, & went in vnto her & laye with her, and she bare a sonne whose name was called Salomon, and the Lorde loued hym.
2 Samuel 12:25 And he sent by the hand of Nathan the Prophete & called his name Iedidiah, of the Lordes behalfe.
2 Samuel 12:26 And as Ioab fought agaynst Rahab the cytye of the chyldren of Amnon he toke the kynges toure,
2 Samuel 12:27 and sent messengers to Dauid saying: I haue made assaute to Rabah, & also haue taken the castell from whence they had theyr water.
2 Samuel 12:28 Now therfore gather the reste of the people together, and come and besege the cytie and take it: leste yf I take it, the victorye be ascrybed to me.
2 Samuel 12:29 And Dauid gathered all the people together, and went to Rabah and assauted it and gat it.
2 Samuel 12:30 And he toke the kinges croune from of hys heade whiche wayed an hundred wayght of golde, and was set wyth precious stones. And Dauid ware it on hys head. And he brought out the spoyle of the cytye in excedyng great aboundaunce.
2 Samuel 12:31 And he brought oute the people that was therein and sawed them and drue harowes of yron vpon them, and shred some of them with shredynge knyues of yron, & thrust some into fornaces. And so he serued all the cyties of the children of Ammon. And then Dauid and all the people returned vnto Ierusalem.

CHAPTER: 13

2 Samuel 13:1 And it chaunsed that Absalom Dauids sonne had a fayre sister named Thamar, whom afterwarde Amnon another sonne of Dauid loued.
2 Samuel 13:2 And this Amnon was so vexed that he fell sicke for the loue of his sister Thamar: for it thought him harde to come by his purpose of her, seyng she was yet a virgyn.
2 Samuel 13:3 But Amnon had a companyon called Ionadab the sonne of Samah the brother of Dauid: which Ionadab was a very wyse man.
2 Samuel 13:4 And he said vnto him: howe cometh it that thou beynge the kynges sonne arte thus consumed euery mornynge? maiest thou not tell it me? And Amnon aunswered him: I loue Thamar my brother Absaloms sister.
2 Samuel 13:5 Then sayde Ionadab vnto him: lye on thy bedde & fayne thy selfe sicke. And when thy father is come to se the, saye vnto hym: let my sister Thamar come & geue me meate, & dresse it in my sight, that I maye se it and eate it of her hande.
2 Samuel 13:6 And Amnon laye doune & made hym selfe sicke. And when the king was come to se hym Ammon said vnto him: let Thamar my syster come & make me a couple of frytters in my syght, that I maye eat of her hande.
2 Samuel 13:7 And Dauid sent home to Thamar sayinge: go to thy brother Amnons house and dresse him meate.
2 Samuel 13:8 When Thamar came to her brother Amnons house he laye. And she toke flour & made past & made frytters in hys sight, & dyd bake them,
2 Samuel 13:9 & toke a platter & powred them out before hym. And Amnon wolde not eate,
2 Samuel 13:10 but commaunded to haue out all men from hym. And they went all out from hym. Then sayde Amnon vnto Thamar: bryng the meat into the chambre that I maye eate of thyne hand. And Thamar toke the frytters which she had made, & broughte them into the chambre to Amnon her brother
2 Samuel 13:11 & set them before hym to eate. And he toke her & said vnto her: come lye wt me my sister.
2 Samuel 13:12 And she aunswered him: naye, my brother do not force me, for it ought not to be so in Israel do not this follye.
2 Samuel 13:13 For whether shal I go with my shame? And thou shalt be as one of the foles in Israel. But speake vnto the kynge & he shall not denye me vnto the.
2 Samuel 13:14 Howe be it he wolde not herken vnto her voyce, but was to strong for her & forced her & laye wyth her.
2 Samuel 13:15 And then Amnon hated her excedynglye: so that the hate wherewyth he hated her, was greater then the loue with which he before loued her. And he sayd vnto her: vp & away.
2 Samuel 13:16 Then she sayde vnto him: this greate cruelnesse that thou puttest me awaye, passeth the other that thou dyddest vnto me. Neuerthelesse he wolde not heare her,
2 Samuel 13:17 but called his lad that wayted vpon him, & said: put her out at the dores from me & bolt the dore after her.
2 Samuel 13:18 And she had a kirtell of dyuerse colours vpon her: for with such were the kynges doughters that were virgins apparelled, made strayt vnto them. Then his seruaunt brought her oute at the dores, & locked the dores after her.
2 Samuel 13:19 And Thamar put asshes on her head and rent her gaye kyrtell that was on her, & put her hande on her head & so went, & as she wente, cryed.
2 Samuel 13:20 Then Absalom her brother sayd vnto her: hath Amnon, thy brother bene with the? Now then be styll my syster: for he is thy brother. And let not this thynge greue thyne herte. And so Thamar remayned discomforted in her brother Absaloms house.
2 Samuel 13:21 And Kyng Dauid heard of all these thynges, & was very wroth.
2 Samuel 13:22 And Absalom sayde vnto hys brother Amnon neyther good nor bad. Howe be it Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his syster Thamar.
2 Samuel 13:23 And it happened two yeare after that Absalom had a shepesheryng in Baal Hazor besydes the trybe of Ephraim, & bad all the kynges sonnes,
2 Samuel 13:24 & he came to the kinge & saide: beholde thy seruaunt hath a shepesheryng, let the kyng & hys seruauntes come with thy seruaunt.
2 Samuel 13:25 And the kyng sayd vnto Absalom: Oh nay my sonne, let vs not go euerye one of vs that we be not chargeable vnto the. And Absalom laye sore vpon hym: howe be it he wolde not go, but blessed hym.
2 Samuel 13:26 Then sayd Absalom: then let my brother Amnon go wyth vs. And the kynge aunswered what nedeth it that he go with the
2 Samuel 13:27 But Absalom made such instaunce that he let Amnon go wyth hym, & al the kynges chyldren.
2 Samuel 13:28 Then Absalom commaunded hys younge men sayinge: marke when Amnons herte is mery wyth wyne, & when I byd you smyte Amnon then kyll him: feare not, for it is I that byd you, be bolde therfore, & playe the lustye bloudes.
2 Samuel 13:29 And the young men of Absalom serued Amnon euen as Absalom commaunded them. And al the kynges sonnes arose & toke eche man hys Mule & fled.
2 Samuel 13:30 And whyle they were yet in the waye, tydynges came to Dauid that Absalom had slayne all the kynges sonnes, so that none was left a lyue.
2 Samuel 13:31 Then the king arose, & tare his garmentes, & laye a longe on the earth: & all hys seruauntes stode by wyth theyr clothes rent.
2 Samuel 13:32 Then Ionadab the sonne of Samah Dauids brother aunswered & sayd: let not my Lorde suppose that they haue slayne all the younge men the kynges sonnes, saue Amnon onelye is dead. For that hath ben euer in Absaloms mouthe sence he forced his sister Thamar.
2 Samuel 13:33 Now therfore let not my Lorde the kynge take the thyng so greuouslye to thinck that all the kynges sonnes were deade, when Amnon onelye is dead.
2 Samuel 13:34 But Absalom fled. And the younge man that kepe the watche, lyfte vp hys eyes and loked aboute. And beholde there came much people by a waye that was behynde his backe a long by an hylles syde.
2 Samuel 13:35 Then sayd Ionadab vnto the kynge: beholde, the kynges sonnes are come, and as thy seruaunt sayde, so it is.
2 Samuel 13:36 And as sone as he had lefte speakyng: behold, the kinges sonnes came and lyfte vp theyr voyces, & wept. And therto the kynge and all hys seruauntes wept excedynglye.
2 Samuel 13:37 But Absalom escaped and went to Tholmai the sonne of Amihud kynge of Gesur. And the kynge mourned for hys sonne contynually.
2 Samuel 13:38 And so Absalom escaped and went to Gesur, & was there thre yeares.
2 Samuel 13:39 And by that tyme the kynge turned hys mynde from pursuynge Absalom. For he had lefte mournynge for the death of Amnon.

CHAPTER: 14

2 Samuel 14:1 When Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah perceyued that the kynges herte was turned againe to Absalom,
2 Samuel 14:2 he sent to Thekoa, and fet thence a wyse woman, and sayde vnto her: feyne thy selfe to be a mourner, and put on mournyng apparell. And annoynt not thy selfe wyth oyle. But be as a woman that had long tyme mourned for the death of some bodye.
2 Samuel 14:3 And go to the kynge & speake of thys maner vnto him. And so Ioab taught her what she shulde saye.
2 Samuel 14:4 And when the wyfe of Thekoa was come to speake wyth the kynge, she fell on her face to the grounde & dyd obeysaunce & sayd: help me O kynge.
2 Samuel 14:5 And the kynge sayde vnto her: what ayleth the? & she aunswered. I am a wydow, and myne husbande is deade.
2 Samuel 14:6 And thy handmayde had two sonnes which fought together in the feldes where was no man to go betwene them, & the one slewe the other.
2 Samuel 14:7 And beholde, the whole kynred arose agaynst thy handmayde & sayde: delyuer vs hym that smote hys brother: that we may kil him for the soule of hys brother whome he slue, for we wyl destroy the heyre also. And so they shal quenche my sparkle whiche is lefte that he shall stere vp neyther name or yssue vpon the earth vnto my husbande.
2 Samuel 14:8 And the kynge sayde vnto the wyfe: go home to thyne house, & I wyll geue a charge for the.
2 Samuel 14:9 And the woman of Thekoa sayde vnto the kynge. My Lorde Kynge, the trespace be on me, and on my fathers house, and the kynge and his seate be gyltelesse.
2 Samuel 14:10 And then sayde the kynge: yf any man saye ought vnto the, bryng hym to me, & he shall no more trouble the.
2 Samuel 14:11 Then sayde she: let the kynge remember hys Lorde God, that the next of the bloude gather not on heapes together to destroye, and that they slaye not my sonne. And he sayde: as sure as the Lorde lyueth, there shall not one hearre of thy sonnes head fal to the earthe.
2 Samuel 14:12 Then the woman sayd: let thyne handmaid speake one worde more vnto my Lorde the kynge: & he sayde: saye on.
2 Samuel 14:13 And the woman sayde: wherfore then hast thou determined on thys same maner agaynst the people of God? that the kyng shuld speake thys thing and be fautye therein, so that the kynge shulde not fet home agayne hys banyshed.
2 Samuel 14:14 For we must nedes dye and perish as water spylt on the ground whiche cannot be gathered vp agayne & God wyl not take awaye the lyfe but fynde the meanes that the banyshed be not vtterly expelled from hym.
2 Samuel 14:15 And nowe concernynge that I am come to speake of thys thinge vnto the kinge my Lorde in the presence of the people: thy handmayde thought: suerlye I wyll speake vnto the kynge, paraduenture the kynge wyl here the request of his handmayde.
2 Samuel 14:16 And the king shal heare his handmayde & deliuer her oute of the hand of the man that wolde haue destroied me & my sonne also oute of the enheritaunce of God.
2 Samuel 14:17 Then thine handmaid sayd: I praye God that the worde of my Lorde the kinge maye be immutable. For my Lord the kynge is as an angell of God, in hearinge of good or bad: and therfore the Lorde thy God be with the.
2 Samuel 14:18 Then the kyng aunswered & sayd vnto the woman: hyde not from me I pray the the thing that I shall aske the. And the woman saide: let my Lorde the kyng say on.
2 Samuel 14:19 Then said the king: Is not the hand of Ioab with the in all this matter? And the woman aunswered and said: as sure as thy soule liueth my Lorde kinge, it is neyther on the right hande nor on the lefte, that my Lorde the kinge hath spoken. For thy seruaunt Ioab he bad me, and he put all these wordes euen in the mouthe of thyne handemayde.
2 Samuel 14:20 And the turnynge of my tale another waye, that made thy seruaunte Ioab. And so I se that my Lorde is wise euen as an Angell of God, to vnderstande all thinges that are in the earth.
2 Samuel 14:21 Then sayd the kinge to Ioab, beholde I am content to do this thinge. Go therfore fet home the lad Absalom.
2 Samuel 14:22 And Ioab fell to the grounde on his face, & bowed him selfe and blessed the kinge and saide: now thy seruaunt knoweth that I haue founde grace in the sight of my Lorde the kyng in that he hath fulfylled the request of his seruaunt.
2 Samuel 14:23 And so Ioab arose & went to Gesur & broughte Absalom to Ierusalem.
2 Samuel 14:24 Then sayde the kinge: let hym turne to hys owne house, but se that he come not in my presence. And so Absalom went to his owne house, but came not in the kinges presence.
2 Samuel 14:25 Moreouer in all Israel there was not so goodlye a man as Absalom, or so greatly praysed, from the soole of hys fote to the toppe of his head there was no blemesh in him.
2 Samuel 14:26 And when he shaued hys head (for at euery yeres end he shaued it because it was heuye on hym, & therfore he shaued it) the hearre therof wayed .ij. hundred cicles weyght of the kynges weight.
2 Samuel 14:27 And this Absalom had thre sonnes borne hym & one doughter named Thamar, whiche was a fayre woman to loke vpon.
2 Samuel 14:28 When Absalom had dwelt two yeare in Ierusalem wythoute comyng into the kynges presence
2 Samuel 14:29 he sente for Ioab, to haue sente hym to the kynge. But he wolde not come to hym. And he sent agayne, & for all that he wolde not come.
2 Samuel 14:30 Then he said vnto hys seruauntes: behold, Ioab hath a parcell of lande fast by myne, & hath barley there in. Go and set it on fyre. And Absaloms seruauntes went and set it on fyre.
2 Samuel 14:31 Then Ioab arose & came to Absalom vnto hys house, & sayde vnto hym: wherfore haue thy seruauntes burnt my feld wyth fyre?
2 Samuel 14:32 And Absalom said to Ioab: beholde, I sente for the desyringe the to come, because I wolde haue sente the to the Kinge, for to saye: Wherfore am I come from Gesur: It had bene as good for me to haue bidden there styll. Now therfor let me come to the kynges presence, or els yf there be any trespace in me, kyll me.
2 Samuel 14:33 And Ioab wente to the King & tolde him. And he sent for Absalom, whiche when he was come, fell to the grounde on hys face before the Kynge. And the kynge kissed him.

CHAPTER: 15

2 Samuel 15:1 After thys Absalom gat him charettes & horsses & fyftye men to runne before him.
2 Samuel 15:2 And therto he vsed to ryse vp erlye in the mornynges & to stand by the wayes side that led to the gate of the cytye. And all the men of Israel that had complayntes & came to the kynge for Iudgemente, he called vnto hym & sayde: of what cytye arte thou? And when the other aunswered: thy seruaunte is of suche a trybe of Israel.
2 Samuel 15:3 Then sayde Absalom vnto hym: se, thy matter is good and ryghteous, & yet no man is deputed of the kynge to heare the.
2 Samuel 15:4 Then Absalom sayd moreouer: Oh, that I were a Iudge in the lande, and that all men whiche haue pleyes and matter in the lawe, shulde come to me. For I wold do them iustice.
2 Samuel 15:5 And also when any man came nye to him to do hym obeysaunce, he put forth his hand & toke him to him & kyssed hym.
2 Samuel 15:6 And on this maner dyd Absalom to all Israel that came to the kynge for iudgement, & therwyth stale the hertes of the men of Israel.
2 Samuel 15:7 And at fourtye yeres ende Absalom sayde vnto the kynge: let me go I praye the to Hebron, & paye my vowe which I haue vowed, vnto the Lorde:
2 Samuel 15:8 for thy seruaunt vowed a vowe when I was in Gesur in the land of Siria saying: yf the Lord shall brynge me agayne to Ierusalem, I wyl serue the Lorde.
2 Samuel 15:9 And the Kynge sayd: go in peace. And so he arose and went to Hebron.
2 Samuel 15:10 Then Absalom sent spyes thorow out al the trybes of Israel sayinge: as sone as ye heare the voyce of the trompet blowe, saye: Absalom raygneth kynge in Hebron.
2 Samuel 15:11 And wyth Absalom went .ij. hundred men out of Ierusalem that were called. And they went with pure hertes & wist nothing of the matter.
2 Samuel 15:12 And Absalom sente also for Ahithophel the Gilonite Dauids counseller, and fet hym out of hys citie Giloh, when he sacrifyed sacrifyces. And there was wrought strong treason. And the people drue to Absalom great multytude.
2 Samuel 15:13 And there came a messenger to Dauid & sayd: the hertes of the men of Israel are to folow Absalom.
2 Samuel 15:14 Then sayd Dauid vnto all hys seruauntes that were wyth hym at Ierusalem: vp & let vs flee, for we shall not else escape from Absalom: Make spede to depart: leste he come sodenly & catche vs, & bryng some myscheue vpon vs, & smyte the cytie with the edge of the swerde.
2 Samuel 15:15 And the kynges seruauntes sayde to hym: beholde thy seruauntes are ready to whatsoeuer my Lord the kynge shall appoynte.
2 Samuel 15:16 And the kyng and all hys houshold departed a fote. And he left behynde hym ten wiues that were hys concubynes, to kepe the house.
2 Samuel 15:17 And so the king & al the people went out a fote, & taryed farre from the house,
2 Samuel 15:18 And all hys seruauntes went by hys syde. And al the Cerethites & all the Phelethites, and al the Hethytes euen .vi. hundred men which were come a fote from Geth, went before the kyng.
2 Samuel 15:19 Then sayd the kyng to Ethai the Gethite, wherfore shuldest thou go wyth vs also. Returne and abyde wyth the kynge, for thou art a straunger, and arte remoued from thyne owne place.
2 Samuel 15:20 Thou camest but yesterdaye, and shulde I vnquyet the to daye to go wyth vs? I wyl go whether I go. But returne thou and carye agayne thy brethren: Mercy and truth be with the.
2 Samuel 15:21 And Ethai aunswered the kyng & said: as surelye as the Lorde lyueth, & as surelye as my Lorde the kynge lyueth, in what place my Lorde the Kyng shalbe, whether in deathe or lyfe, euen there wyll thy seruaunt be.
2 Samuel 15:22 Then sayde the kynge to Ethai, come & go forward. And Ethai the Gethite went forthe, & all hys men, and all the chyldren that were wyth him.
2 Samuel 15:23 And all the countrey wept wyth a loud voice. And all the people went forwarde the straight waye to the wyldernesse.
2 Samuel 15:24 And beholde, Sadock and all the Leuytes were wyth him and bare the arcke of the appoyntmente of God. And when they had set doune the arck of god Abiathar came vp, vntyll the people were all come ouer, oute of the cytye.
2 Samuel 15:25 Then sayde the kynge vnto Sadock. Carye the arcke of God agayne into the cytye. If I shall fynd fauour in the eyes of the Lorde, he wyll bryng me agayne, and shewe me both it and the tabernacle therof also.
2 Samuel 15:26 But and yf the Lorde thus say: I haue no luste vnto the. Beholde, here am I, let hym do wyth me what semeth best in hys eyes.
2 Samuel 15:27 The kynge sayde also vnto Sadoch the prieste: thou arte a sear. Returne therfore into the cytye in peace. And take youre two sonnes wyth you: Ahimaaz thy sonne, and Ionathas the sonne of Abiathar.
2 Samuel 15:28 And se, I wyll tarye in the feldes of the wyldernesse vntyll there come some worde from you to be tolde me.
2 Samuel 15:29 And so Sadock and Abiathar caryed the arcke of God agayne to Ierusalem, and they taryed there.
2 Samuel 15:30 And Dauid went vp on mount Oliuet & wepte as he wente, and had hys head couered & went therto barefote. And all the people that was wyth him, had euery man hys head couered, and as they went wepte also.
2 Samuel 15:31 And one tolde Dauid saying: Ahithophel is one of them that haue conspyred wyth Absalom. Then sayde Dauid: O Lorde, turne the councell of Ahithophel into folyshnes.
2 Samuel 15:32 When Dauid was come to the toppe of the mount, & had bowed hym self vnto God: beholde, Husai the Arachite came agaynst hym with hys coote torne and earth vpon his head.
2 Samuel 15:33 Vnto whom Dauid sayde: yf thou go wyth me thou shalt be a burthen vnto me.
2 Samuel 15:34 And yf thou returne to the cytye: then shalt thou saye vnto Absalom: I wyl be thy seruaunt O kyng: thus long haue I ben thy fathers seruaunt, & now I am thyne. And destroye me the councell of Ahithophel.
2 Samuel 15:35 And thou hast there with the Sadock & Abiathar the priestes, vnto which thou shalt shew all that thou canst heare out of the kynges house.
2 Samuel 15:36 And behold, ye haue there with you theyr two sonnes: Ahimaaz Sadockes sonne, & Ionathas Abiathars sonne, by whiche ye shall sende me all that ye can heare.
2 Samuel 15:37 And so Husai Dauids frende gat hym to the cytye. And Absalom also entered into Ierusalem.

CHAPTER: 16

2 Samuel 16:1 And when Dauid was a lytle past the toppe of the hyll: behold Ziba the seruaunt of Miphiboseth came agaynste hym with a couple of Asses sadelled, & vpon them two hundred loues and one hundred bonches of Resynges, and an hundred frayles of dryed fygges, & a bottell of wyne.
2 Samuel 16:2 Then sayde the kynge to Ziba: what hast thou there? And Ziba sayde: Asses for the Kynges houshold to ryde on, and bread & frute for the young men to eate, and wyne to drincke, yf any man fainte in the wyldernesse.
2 Samuel 16:3 Then sayde the kynge: where is thy maysters sonne? and Ziba sayd vnto the kyng: beholde, he taryeth styll at Ierusalem. For he sayde: thys daye shall the house of Israell restore me the kyngdome of my father.
2 Samuel 16:4 Then sayd the kynge to Ziba: beholde, thyne are all that pertayned vnto Miphiboseth. And Ziba aunswered: I beseche the that I maye fyude grace in thy syghte my Lorde Kynge.
2 Samuel 16:5 And when Kynge Dauid came to Baharim: beholde, thence came out a man of the kinrede of the house of Saul named Semei, the sonne of Gera, and he came out cursyng.
2 Samuel 16:6 And therto he cast stones at Dauid and at all the seruauntes of Kynge Dauid, all the people & al the men of warre goyng part on his right hand, and part on hys lefte.
2 Samuel 16:7 And thus sayde this Semei as he cursed: come forthe, come forthe thou bloudesheder and thou vnthriftye man.
2 Samuel 16:8 The lord hath brought vpon the all the bloude of the house of Saul, in whose stede thou hast raygned, and he hathe delyuered the kyngedome into the hand of Absalom thy sonne. And thou art wrapped aboute wt thyne owne myscheue, because thou arte a bloudesheder.
2 Samuel 16:9 Then sayde Abisai the sonne of Zaruiah vnto the kynge: why dothe this deade dogge curse my Lorde the Kyng? let me go and take of the head of hym.
2 Samuel 16:10 And the King sayde: what haue I to do with you ye sonnes of Zaruiah? let him curse: for the Lorde hath bydden him curse Dauid. And who dare presume to saye wherfore dothe he so?
2 Samuel 16:11 And Dauid sayde to Abisai, and to all his seruauntes: beholde, my sonne whyche came out of mine owne bowelles seketh my life. How muche more then may thys sonne of Iemini do it? Suffre hym therfore to curse, for the Lorde hath bidden hym:
2 Samuel 16:12 haplye the Lorde wyl loke on my wretchednesse, and do me good for hys cursynge thys daye.
2 Samuel 16:13 And thus as Dauid and hys men went by the waye, Semei went a longe on the hylles syde ouer agaynste hym, and cursed as he went, and threwe stones at him, and cast dust.
2 Samuel 16:14 And the Kynge and all that were wyth hym, came werye, and refresshed them selues there.
2 Samuel 16:15 And Absalom and al the people of the men of Israel came to Ierusalem and Ahithophel with hym.
2 Samuel 16:16 And as sone as he was come, Husai the Arachite went vnto Absalom and said vnto hym: God saue the Kinge, God saue the kynge.
2 Samuel 16:17 And Absalom sayde agayne to Husai: is thys the kindnesse thou owest to thy frend? Why wentest thou not with him?
2 Samuel 16:18 And Husai said vnto Absalom: naye not so, but whom the Lorde and thys people and al the men of Israel chose, his wil I be, and wyth hym wil I dwel.
2 Samuel 16:19 And forthermore vnto whome shall I do seruice, but euen to his sonne? And as I was seruaunt before wyth thy father, euen so shall I be with the.
2 Samuel 16:20 Then spake Absalom to Ahithophell: geue counsel, what is best for vs to do?
2 Samuel 16:21 And Ahithophell sayde vnto Absalom: get the in vnto thy fathers concubines, whiche he hath lefte to kepe the house. For when all Israell shall heare, that thou hast made thy father to styncke, then shall the handes of all that are with the, be stronge.
2 Samuel 16:22 And so they pitched Absalom a tent vpon the toppe of the house. And he went in vnto his fathers concubynes in the syght of al Israel.
2 Samuel 16:23 And the councell of Ahithophel whiche he counceled in those dayes, was a man had asked counsel of God: euen so was al the counsel of Ahithophel, bothe vnto Dauid and also vnto Absalom.

CHAPTER: 17

2 Samuel 17:1 Then Ahithophel sayd vnto Absalom: let me chose out, I pray the, twelue thousand men. And I will vp and folowe after Dauid by night.
2 Samuel 17:2 And I wil come vpon hym whyle he is werye and weake handed, and will feare him, that all the people that are wt hym shal flee. And so wyl I smyte the kinge onlye,
2 Samuel 17:3 and wyl brynge agayne al the people vnto the. And when al these men whyche thou sekest, are turned to the, and al the people shal haue rest.
2 Samuel 17:4 And the sayinge pleaseth Absalom well and all the elders of Israel.
2 Samuel 17:5 Then sayde Absalom: cal also Husai the Arachite and lette vs heare hys sentence.
2 Samuel 17:6 When Husai was come to Absalom, Absalom spake vnto him saying: Ahithophel hathe geuen suche counsel: whether it be best, we do after his saying or not, tell thou.
2 Samuel 17:7 Then sayde Husai to Absalom: the counsel that Ahitophel hath geuen, is not good at this tyme.
2 Samuel 17:8 For (sayd Husai) thou knowest thy father, & the men that are with him, how that they be strong men. And they be chafed in theyr mindes, euen as a beare robbed of her whelpes. And thy father is a man practised in warre and wyll not lye a nyghtes amonge the comen people.
2 Samuel 17:9 Beholde he lurketh now in some caue or in som other place. And therto though some of hys men be ouerthrowen at the fyrst brunt, yet they that heare it wil thinck the people that foloweth Absalom be put to the worsse.
2 Samuel 17:10 By the reason wherof the best men thou hast whose hertes are as the hertes of Lyons, shal shrynke therat. For all Israel knoweth that thy father is a man, and that they whyche be with hym be children of actiuite.
2 Samuel 17:11 But my counsel is, that all Israel be gathered vnto the, from Dan to Bersabe, as the sande of the sea in nombre, and that thou go to batayle in thyne owne person.
2 Samuel 17:12 And we wyll come vpon him in one place or other, where we shall fynde hym, and we wyl pitche a feld agaynst hym, euen as thycke as the dew falleth on the grounde. And there shall not one of them be lefte, nether he or any of all that are wyth him.
2 Samuel 17:13 Moreouer yf he take a towne then shall al the men of Israel brynge ropes to that cytye, and we wil drawe it into the ryuer, vntyl there be not one stone found vpon another.
2 Samuel 17:14 And Absalom & al the men of Israel sayd: that the counsel of Husai the Arachite was better then the counsel of Ahithophel. For it was euen the lordes determinacion to destroy the counsel of Ahithophel: whych was good that the Lorde myght brynge euyl vpon Absalom.
2 Samuel 17:15 Then sayd Husai vnto Sadock and Abiathar the pryestes: of thys and that maner dyd Ahithophel and the elders of Israel counsel Absalom. And thus and thus haue I counseled.
2 Samuel 17:16 Nowe therfore send quycklye and shew Dauid sayinge: tarye not al the night in the feldes of the wildernesse, but get the ouer, lest the kinge be deuoured, and al the people that are with him.
2 Samuel 17:17 Now Ionathas and Ahimaaz abode by the wel rogel: for they might not be sene to come into the cytie. And a wenche went and tolde them. And they to go and shewed kynge Dauid.
2 Samuel 17:18 Neuerthelesse there was a lad sawe them whyche tolde it to Absalom. But they went bothe of them awaie quickely and came to a mannes house in Bahurim, which had a well in his yarde, into whiche they went doune.
2 Samuel 17:19 And the wyfe toke and spred a couerlet on the toppe of the wel and strawed theron steaped barleye to drie. And the thinge was not spyed.
2 Samuel 17:20 And when Absaloms seruauntes came to the wyfe to the house and asked where one Ahimaaz and Ionathas were, the wyfe sayde vnto them: they be gone ouer the lyttel brocke of water. And when they had sought them, & coulde not fynde them, then they returned to Ierusalem.
2 Samuel 17:21 And as sone as they were departed, the other came out of the wel, and went and tolde kynge Dauid and sayde vnto him: vp and get you quyckely ouer the water for suche counsel hath Ahithophel geuen.
2 Samuel 17:22 Then Dauid arose and al the people that were with him, & they were come ouer Iordan be that it was daye, that there lacked not one of them, that was not come ouer Iordan.
2 Samuel 17:23 And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not folowed, he sadelleth his asse, and arose, & gate hym home to hys owne house and to his own cytye, and put his housholde in order and hanged him selfe and dyed, and was buryed in the sepulchre of hys father.
2 Samuel 17:24 Then Dauid came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed ouer Iordan, both he and all the men of Israel wt him.
2 Samuel 17:25 And Absalom made Amasa captayne of the hoste in stede of Ioab, whyche Amasa was a mannes sonne named Iethra a Iesrahelite that went into Abigail the doughter of Naah syster to Zaruiah Ioabs mother.
2 Samuel 17:26 And Israell and Absalom pytched in the lande of Galaad.
2 Samuel 17:27 And when Dauid was come to Mahanaim, Sobi the sonne of Naah out of Rabath the cyty of the children of Ammon, and Machir the sonne of Amiell out of Lodaber and Berzelai the Galaadite out of Rogelim,
2 Samuel 17:28 brought beddes, basens, and earthen vesselles: and also corne, barly, floure & parched corne, benes & ryce
2 Samuel 17:29 hony, butter, shepe and chese of knye, for Dauid & all the people that were with him to eate. For they supposed that the people shoulde be hongrye, faintye, and thurstye in the wildernesse.

CHAPTER: 18

2 Samuel 18:1 And the kynge nombred the people that were with him, and set captaynes ouer thousandes and of hundredes ouer them.
2 Samuel 18:2 And he sent one parte of them with Ioab and another parte wyth Abisai the sonne of Zaruiah Ioabs brother, and the thyrde parte with Ethai the Gethite. And the kynge sayde vnto the people shal I go with you?
2 Samuel 18:3 And the people answered: naye, for yf we fle, our aduersaries will not care for vs, nether thoughe halfe of vs were slaine, shal they regarde vs. But thou were worth ten thousand of vs. And therto it is better, that thou be ready to succoure vs out of the cytye.
2 Samuel 18:4 Then said the king: what semeth you best, that wil I do. And the Kynge stode vp the Gates syde, & all the people came out by hundredes and by thousandes.
2 Samuel 18:5 And the kynge commaunded Ioab, Abisai, and Ethai sayinge: intreate me Iently my sonne Absalom. And all the people hearde when the Kynge gaue all the capitaynes charge ouer Absalom.
2 Samuel 18:6 And the people went out into the felde agaynst Israel, and the battel was in the wode of Ephraim.
2 Samuel 18:7 Where the people of Israel were put to the worsse before the seruauntes of Dauid, and there was a great slaughter that daye, euen of twenty thousand men.
2 Samuel 18:8 And the felde was foughte in dyuerse places, al abroade vpon the earthe. And the wodes deuoured mo people that day then dyd the swerde.
2 Samuel 18:9 And it chaunced Absalom to come before the seruauntes of Dauid rydynge vpon a Mule whiche caryed hym vnder the thycke bowes of a great Oke. And his heade caught in the Oke, and he was left betwene heauen and earth, and the Mule that was vnder him, went his waye.
2 Samuel 18:10 And one that saw it tolde Ioab saying: beholde, I saw Absalom hangen in an Oke:
2 Samuel 18:11 and Ioab sayd vnto him that tolde him: lo, sawest thou hym? And why diddest not thou there smyte him to the ground, that I shoulde haue geuen the ten sicles of syluer and a soudyoures gyrdle.
2 Samuel 18:12 And the man answered Ioab: thoughe I had a thousand sycles of syluer tolde in my hande yet woulde I not stretche out myne hande agaynst the kynges sonne? For we hearde with oure eares when the kinge charged the, Absai and Ethai sayinge: spare me the lad Absalom.
2 Samuel 18:13 Moreouer though I had ieoparded my lyfe and done falslye therto, yet coulde nought of al the matter haue bene hyd from the kynge: ye and thou thy selfe wouldest be against me.
2 Samuel 18:14 Then sayde Ioab I may not stand taryeng with the. And therwith he toke thre speares in hys hand and thrust them into the hart of Absalom, whyle he was yet a lyue on the bodye of the tree.
2 Samuel 18:15 And ten seruauntes that bare Ioabs wepons, turned and smote Absalom and slue him.
2 Samuel 18:16 Then Ioab blewe a trompet, and the people returned from folowing Israel: for Ioab spared the people.
2 Samuel 18:17 And they toke Absalom & cast him into a great pit that was in the wood and cast a myghty great heape of stones vpon him. And al Israel fled euery man to his tent.
2 Samuel 18:18 And this Absalom yet in hys life time, toke and reared vp a pyler, whiche is yet in kynges dale. For he sayd: I haue no male chylde. And therfore to kepe my name in remembraunce do I it. And he called the piller after his own name. And it is called vnto this daye, Absaloms pyller.
2 Samuel 18:19 Then sayd Ahimaaz the sonne of Sadock: let my runne I pray the, and beare the kynge tydynges, how that the lord hath iudged him quyte of the handes of all hys enemies.
2 Samuel 18:20 And Ioab said vnto him: thou art no man to beare tydinges to daye: thou shalt beare tydynges another tyme: but to daye thou shalt beare none, because the kynges sonne is dead.
2 Samuel 18:21 Then said Ioab to Chusi: go and tel the kyng what thou hast sene. And Chusi bowed him selfe vnto Ioab, and ranne.
2 Samuel 18:22 Then saide Ahimaaz the sonne of Sadock agayn to Ioab: come what come wil, let me run I pray the after Chusi. And Ioab sayde: wherfore shouldest thou runne my sonne? for and thou runne, thou gettyst no rewarde: well come, what wyll let me runne.
2 Samuel 18:23 And he sayde vnto hym: runne. Then Ahimaaz ranne by the playne and ouerraune Chusi.
2 Samuel 18:24 And Dauid sat betwene the two gates. And the watcheman went vp to the rouffe ouer the gate vnto the walle, and lyfte vp his eyes and sawe: and beholde, there came a man runnynge alone.
2 Samuel 18:25 And the watcheman called, and tolde the kynge. And the kynge sayde: yf he come alone, there is tidinges in his mouth. And he came and drewe nye.
2 Samuel 18:26 And the watcheman saw another man runninge, and called vnto the porter and sayd: behold there cometh another runnyng alone. And the kyng answered: he is also a tydynges brynger.
2 Samuel 18:27 And the watcheman saide: me thynketh, the runnynge of the formost is lyke the runnynge of Ahimaaz the sonne of Sadock. And the king said: he is a good man, and cometh wyth good tydynges.
2 Samuel 18:28 And Ahimaaz called and sayde to the kynge: good tydynges, and bowed hym selfe to the earthe vpon hys face before the kynge and sayde: blessed be the Lord thy god whyche hath shut vp all the men that lyft vp theyr handes agaynst my Lorde the Kynge.
2 Samuel 18:29 And the kynge saide: is the lad Absalom safe? And Ahimaaz answered: I sawe a great a do when the kynges seruaunt Ioab sent me thy seruaunt. But I wote not what it was.
2 Samuel 18:30 And the kynge sayde: turne and stande here. And he turned and stode.
2 Samuel 18:31 And beholde Chusi came and sayde: tydynges my lord the king, the Lorde hathe quyte the thys daye out of the handes of all that rose agaynst the.
2 Samuel 18:32 And the kyng said to Chusi: is the lad Absalom safe? And Chusi answered: the enemies of my Lorde the kynge and all that ryse agaynst the, to haue the, be as thy lad is.
2 Samuel 18:33 And the kynge was moued and went vp to a chambre ouer the gate and wept. And as he went, thus he sayde: my sonne Absalom my sonne, my sonne, my sonne Absalom, woulde to God I had dyed for thy Absalom, my sonne, my sonne.

CHAPTER: 19

2 Samuel 19:1 And it was tolde Ioab, how that the kyng wepte and mourned for Absalom.
2 Samuel 19:2 And the victory was turned that daye into mourning vnto al the people. For the people heard saye that daye, how the kinge sorowed for his sonne,
2 Samuel 19:3 and the people went stealynge into the cytie, as people confounded stele awaye, when they flee in battel.
2 Samuel 19:4 And the kynge hyd hys face and cryed with a loude voyce: my sonne Absalom, Absalom my sonne, my sonne.
2 Samuel 19:5 And Ioab went into the house to the king and sayde: thou hast shamed thys daye the faces of all thy seruauntes, whyche thys daye haue saued thy lyfe, and the lyues of thy sonnes and doughters, and the lyues of thy wyues and concubines,
2 Samuel 19:6 in that thou louest thyne enemies and hatest thy frendes. Thou hast declared thys daye that thou comest nether for thy Lordes nor seruauntes. For this daye I do perceyue, yf Absalom had lyued, and all we dyed this daye, that then it had pleased the wel.
2 Samuel 19:7 Now therfore vp & come out, and speake kyndely vnto thy seruauntes, I sweare by the Lorde excepte thou come out, there wil not tarye one man with the this nyght. And that wilbe worsse vnto the, then al the euyl that fel on the from thyne youth vnto this hour.
2 Samuel 19:8 Then the kinge arose and sat doune in the Gate. And it was tolde vnto al the people, how the kynge sat in the Gate. And then al the people came before the kynge. But Israel fled euery man to his tent.
2 Samuel 19:9 And al the people were at stryffe thorowoute al the trybes of Israel sayinge: the kinge deliuered vs out of the hand of oure enemies, And he delyuered vs out of the hand of the Philistines. And nowe he is fled out of the land for Absalom.
2 Samuel 19:10 For Absalom whom we anoynted ouer vs is dead in battel. Now therfore why are ye so styl, that ye bringe not the kynge agayne.
2 Samuel 19:11 And kinge Dauid sent to Sadock & Abiathar the priestes saying: speake vnto the elders of Iuda and saye: why should ye be the last that shoulde brynge agayne the kynge to his house, seynge that suche tydynges is come from all Israel vnto the kynge euen to hys house?
2 Samuel 19:12 ye are my brethren, my bones and my fleshe: wherfore then shoulde ye be the last that shoulde come to brynge the kinge home agayne?
2 Samuel 19:13 And saye to Amasa: art thou not my bone and my fleshe. And god do so to me and so therto: except thou be captayne of the host to me for euer in the roume of Ioab.
2 Samuel 19:14 And he bowed the hertes of all the men of Iuda, as a man woulde bowe the hert of one man: so that they sent worde to the kynge, that he shoulde returne with al his seruauntes.
2 Samuel 19:15 And the kynge returned and came to Iordan. And Iuda came to Galgal for to go against the kynge to conueye him ouer Iordan.
2 Samuel 19:16 And Semei the sonne of Gera the sonne of Iemini, whiche was of Bahurim, hasted and came with the men of Iuda against king Dauid,
2 Samuel 19:17 and a thousande men of Beniamin wt hym, and Ziba the seruaunt of the house of Saul and his .xv. sonnes and twentye seruauntes with him. And they whypte ouer Iordan before the kyng. And ther went ouer a Botte
2 Samuel 19:18 to carye ouer the kynges housholde and to do hym pleasure. And Semei the sonne of Gera fel before the kinge, as he was come ouer Iordan
2 Samuel 19:19 and saide vnto him: let not my Lord impute wickednesse vnto me, no: let him not remember the wickednesse that thy seruaunt dyd, when my Lorde the kynge departed out of Ierusalem that the kynge should take it to herte.
2 Samuel 19:20 For thy seruaunt dothe knowe how that I haue done amysse. And therfore beholde, I am the fyrst this daye of all the house of Ioseph that am come to mete my Lorde the king.
2 Samuel 19:21 But Abisai the sonne of Zaruiah answered and said: shall Semei not dye for that cause, whyche cursed the Lordes anoynted.
2 Samuel 19:22 And the Kynge sayd: what matter is betwene you and me ye sonnes of Zaruiah, that ye shoulde this daye be aduersaries vnto me? There shall no man dye this daye in Israel: for I know that I am thys daye kinge ouer Israel.
2 Samuel 19:23 And the kynge sayde vnto Semei: thou shalt not dye, & sware vnto hym.
2 Samuel 19:24 And Miphiboseth the sonne of Saul came also to mete the kinge, and hath nether dressed his fete nor shauen hys beard nor washed his clothes from the tyme the kyng departed, vntyl he came again in peace.
2 Samuel 19:25 And when he was come to Ierusalem towarde the kynge, the kynge sayde vnto hym: wherfore wentest not thou with me Miphiboseth?
2 Samuel 19:26 And he said: my Lorde kinge, my seruaunt deceyued me. For thy seruaunt sayde: that I woulde haue mine Asse sadled to ride theron, for to go to the king because thy seruaunt is lame.
2 Samuel 19:27 And he hathe therto complayned on thy seruaunt vnto my Lorde the kynge. But my Lord the kynge is as an angel of God: do therfore what semeth best in thyne eyes.
2 Samuel 19:28 For all my fathers house were but deadmen vnto my Lorde the Kyng: and yet dyddest thou put me amonge them that eate at thyne owne table. What ryght therfore haue I yet, to crye any more vnto the king?
2 Samuel 19:29 And the kynge sayde: it neadeth the not to speake any more, for I haue sayd, that thou & Ziba shall deuyde the landes betwene you.
2 Samuel 19:30 And Miphiboseth sayde vnto the kynge: ye let hym take al: for so muche as my Lorde the Kynge is come in peace vnto his owne house.
2 Samuel 19:31 And Berselai the Galaadite came from Rogelim and went ouer Iordan with the king, to accompanye him ouer Iordan,
2 Samuel 19:32 which Berselai was a very aged man, euen foure skore yeares olde, and had prouyded the kynge of sustenaunce whyle he laye at Mahanaim: for he was a man of verye great substaunce.
2 Samuel 19:33 And the kinge sayd vnto Berselai: come thou with me, that I may fede the with me in Ierusalem.
2 Samuel 19:34 But Berselai sayde vnto the kynge: of what age am I of, that I shoulde go with the king in Ierusalem?
2 Samuel 19:35 I am this day four skore yeare olde, and therfore cannot decerne sauery from vnsauery, nether hath thy seruaunt pleasure in that he eateth or dryncketh: nor yet delectacyon in the songes of men or women. It is no nede that thy seruaunt be a burthen vnto my Lorde the kynge:
2 Samuel 19:36 let thy seruannt go a lytle waye ouer Iordan with the kynge: for why shoulde the kynge render me suche a reward?
2 Samuel 19:37 But let thy seruaunt turne back agayne, that I maye dye in mine owne cytie, by the graue of my father and mother. But lo here is thy seruaunt Chamaam: let hym go wyth my Lorde the kynge, and to do hym, what shall please the.
2 Samuel 19:38 And the Kynge answered: Chamaam shal go with me. And I wyll do to him that thou shalt be content with. And therto whatsoeuer thou shalt requyre of me, that same will I do for the.
2 Samuel 19:39 And al the people went ouer Iordan. And when the kynge was come ouer Iordan he kissed Berselai and toke his leaue of him, and he went backe agayne vnto hys owne place.
2 Samuel 19:40 And then the Kynge went to Galgal, and Chamaam went wyth hym. Nowe all the men of Iuda were at the bryngynge ouer of the kynge, and but halfe the men of Israel.
2 Samuel 19:41 Wherfore all the men of Israel came to the kinge and sayde vnto hym: why haue oure brethren the men of Iuda stolen the awaye, & haue brought the kinge and his housholde & al Dauids men with him ouer Iordan.
2 Samuel 19:42 And al the men of Iuda answered the men of Israel: for the kinge is nere of kinne to vs: wherfore be ye angry for that master? thyncke ye that we eate of the kinges cost, or that the king geueth vs any gyftes
2 Samuel 19:43 And the men of Israel answered the men of Iuda & said: we haue ten partes in the kynge, and haue therto more ryght to Dauid them ye. Why then did ye despise vs, that oure aduyse had not bene fyrste had in restoryng oure kinge againe? And the wordes of the men of Iuda were fearcer then the wordes of the men of Israel.

CHAPTER: 20

2 Samuel 20:1 And there happened to be an vnthryftye felow named Seba the sonne of Bochri a man of Gemini whyche blewe a trompet and sayde: we haue no parte in Dauid, nor inheritaunce in the sonne of Isai, o Israel, let vs depart therfore euery man to hys tent.
2 Samuel 20:2 And al Israel went from Dauid and folowed Seba the sonne of Bochri. But the men of Iuda claue fast vnto the kyng, from Iordan to Ierusalem.
2 Samuel 20:3 And when Dauid was come to his house to Ierusalem, he toke the ten wyues hys concubynes that he had left behinde him to kepe the house, & put them inward and ministred all thynges vnto them: but laye no more with them. And so they were enclosed vnto the day of the death of them, and lyueth a wydowes lyfe.
2 Samuel 20:4 Then sayde the kynge to Amasa: call me the men of Iuda together with in thre dayes and present thy selfe here.
2 Samuel 20:5 And Amasa went together, the men of Iuda together: but taried longer then the tyme whiche was apoynted him.
2 Samuel 20:6 Wherfore the kinge saide to Abisai: now shal Seba the sonne of Bochri be worsse to vs then Absalom. Take thou therfore thy Lordes seruauntes and folowe after him: lest he get him walled cyties and escaped vs.
2 Samuel 20:7 And there went out after him Ioabs men and the Cerethites and the Phelethites and the men of myght. And they departed out of Ierusalem to folow after Semei the sonne of Bochri.
2 Samuel 20:8 And when they were come to the great stone in Gabaon, Amasa met them. And Ioab had his garment that he had about him, gyrde vnto him, and had gyrde theron a knyfe ioyned fast to his loynes, in soche a shethe that as he went it fell some tymes out.
2 Samuel 20:9 And Ioab sayde to Amasa: are all thynges in rest and peace my brother? And Ioab toke Amasa by the chynne wyth the ryghthande, as thoughe he woulde haue kyssed hym.
2 Samuel 20:10 And Amasa toke no hede to the knyfe that was in Ioabs hand, with which Ioab smote hym in the shorte rybbes & shed out hys bowelles to the ground and smote him but one strocke, and he dyed. And then Ioab and Abisai his brother folowed after Seba the sonne of Bochri.
2 Samuel 20:11 And one of Ioabs men that stode by hym sayde: what is he that he woulde be as Ioab, & what is he that he woulde be vnto Dauid in stede of Ioab?
2 Samuel 20:12 And Amasa lay walowing in bloud in the middes of the waye. And there was a man, that sawe al the people stande styl. And when he saw that al that came by hym, stode styl, he rouled Amasa out of the waye into the felde, and cast a cloth vpon hym.
2 Samuel 20:13 And as sone as he was tombeled out of the waye, all the people went after Ioab, to folowe after Seba the sonne of Bochri.
2 Samuel 20:14 And he went thorow all the trybes of Israel vnto Abel, Bethmaacah and al Barim. And the people gathered vnto him and went also after him.
2 Samuel 20:15 And they came & beseged him in Abel Bethmaacah. And they cast vp a banck agaynst the cytye. And it was beseged. Al the people that was with Ioab, labored busely to ouerthorow the wal.
2 Samuel 20:16 Then cryed a wyse woman out of the cytie, heare heare, byd I praye you Ioab that he come hyther, that I maye speake with him.
2 Samuel 20:17 When Ioab was come, the woman said: art thou Ioab? And Ioab answered: the am I. And she said to him: heare the wordes of thy handmaid: And he sayd: I am ready to heare.
2 Samuel 20:18 And she sayde: it hath bene a comen sayinge in the olde tyme, men muste aske of Abel, and then go to and fynyshe the worcke.
2 Samuel 20:19 Abel is one of the quyetest and faithfullest cities that are in Israel. And thou goest aboute to destroye a cytie that is as a mother in Israel. Why deuourest thou the enheritaunce of the Lorde.
2 Samuel 20:20 And Ioab answered and sayde: God forbid, God forbid it me, that I should eyther deuoure or destroye it.
2 Samuel 20:21 The matter is not so: But there is a man of mount Ephraim, Seba the sonne of Bochri by name, whiche hath lyfte vp his hand against king Dauid. Delyuer vs him only, and I will depart from the cytye. And the woman sayde vnto Ioab: Beholde, his head shalbe throwen thorow the walle to the.
2 Samuel 20:22 And then the woman went vnto all the people in her wysedome. And they smote of the heade of Seba the sonne of Bochri, & cast it to Ioab. And he blewe a trompet, and they skatered from the cytye, euery man to his tent. And Ioab returned to Ierusalem vnto the kynge.
2 Samuel 20:23 And Ioab was ouer al the hoste of Israel. And Baianah the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the Cerethites and the Phelethites.
2 Samuel 20:24 And Aduram was ouer the trybute. And Iehosaphat the sonne of Ahilud was Recorder.
2 Samuel 20:25 Seua was scribe. And Sadock & Abiathar were the pryestes.
2 Samuel 20:26 And Ira the Iairite was lykewyse Dauids prieste.

CHAPTER: 21

2 Samuel 21:1 Then there fell an hongre in the daies of Dauid thre yeares, year by yeare. And Dauid enquyred of the Lorde. And the Lorde answered it is for Sauls sake and the house of bloude, because he slue the Gabaonites.
2 Samuel 21:2 And the kyng called the Gabaonites, and sayde vnto them: Nowe these Gabaonites are not of the chyldren of Israell, but a remnaunt of the Ammorites, and the chyldren of Israel sware vnto them. And yet Saul sought to sley them, for a zele that he had to the children of Israel and of Iuda.
2 Samuel 21:3 Wherfore Dauid sayde vnto them: what shal I do for you? and wherwyth shall I content you that ye maye blesse the enheritaunce of the Lorde.
2 Samuel 21:4 And the Gabaonites sayde vnto hym: we haue no matter of siluer or of gold with Saul or with his house: nether haue we any man that we woulde kyl in Israel. Then he saide: what saie ye that I shall do for you.
2 Samuel 21:5 And they saide vnto the kynge: the man that consumed and imagened to brynge vs to nought, hym we ought to destroye, that nought of hym continew in any of the coastes of Israel,
2 Samuel 21:6 let seuen men of his sonnes be delyuered vnto vs, that we maye hang them vp vnto the Lorde, in Gabaah of Saul the Lordes electe. And Dauid sayde: I wyl geue them you.
2 Samuel 21:7 But the kinge hath compassion on Miphiboseth the sonne of Ionathas, the sonne of Saul, because of the Lordes othe that was betwene them, that is to saye betwene Dauid, and Ionathas the sonne of Saul.
2 Samuel 21:8 But he toke the two sonnes of Rezphah the doughter of Aiah whiche she bare vnto Saul, Armoni and Myphiboseth, and the fyue sonnes of Michol the doughter of Saul which she bare to Adriel the sonne of Berselai the Molathite,
2 Samuel 21:9 and delyuered them vnto the handes of the Gabeonites, whiche hanged them in the hill before the Lorde. And they fell all seuen together in the fyrst dayes of heruest, euen in the begynning of Barley heruest.
2 Samuel 21:10 And Rezphah the doughter of Aiah toke Sackclothe and spred it vnder her vpon the Rocke, euen from the beginning of haruest vntyl rayne dropped vpon them out of heauen, & suffered neyther the birdes of the ayre to fall on them by daye, nor beastes of the felde by nyght.
2 Samuel 21:11 And when it was tolde Dauid what Rezphah the doughter of Aiah the concubine of Saul had done,
2 Samuel 21:12 he went & toke the bones of Saul & of Ionathas his sonne, of the men of Iabes in Galaad, which they hath stolen from the strete of Bethsan, where the Philistines had hanged them in the dayes when the Philistines had slain Saul in Gelboe:
2 Samuel 21:13 & he brought thence the bones of Saul and the bones of Ionathas his sonne, and they fet awaye the bones of them that were hanged,
2 Samuel 21:14 and buried them with the bones of Saul and Ionathas his sonne in the countrey of Beniamin, in Zela, in the sepulchre of Cis his father. And when they had performed all that the Kynge commaunded, God was then at one with the lande.
2 Samuel 21:15 And the Philistines had yet agayne warre with Israel. And Dauid went doune and his seruauntes with hym, and fought with the Philistines. And Dauid waxed fayntie,
2 Samuel 21:16 and Iesbi of Nob one of the sonnes of Haraphah whose speare heade wayed thre hundred sicles of Brasse, & was gyrde wyth a newe swerde thought to haue slayne Dauid.
2 Samuel 21:17 But Abisai the sonne of Zaruiah succoured him & smote the Philistine and killed him. Then the seruauntes of Dauid sware vnto him sayinge. Thou shalt go no more out with vs to battel, that the lyght of Israel be not put out.
2 Samuel 21:18 And there was yet after this battel with the Philistines at Nob, in whiche Sobochai the Husathite slew Saph of the sonnes of Haraphah.
2 Samuel 21:19 And there was yet the third battel in Gob, with the Philistines, where Elhanan the sonne of the Iaere Orgim, a Bethlehemite slue one Goliath a Gethite: the staffe of whose speare was a great as a weauers cloth beame.
2 Samuel 21:20 And there was yet battel in Geth, where was a man of a size and had on euery hande .vi. fyngers, and on euery fote .vi. toes .xxiiij. in al. And was also of the kinred of Haraphah
2 Samuel 21:21 and defyed Israel. And Ionathas the sonne of Samach the brother of Dauid slue hym:
2 Samuel 21:22 These foure were the sonnes of Haraphah in Geth, and were ouerthrowen by the hande of Dauid & by the handes of his seruauntes.

CHAPTER: 22

2 Samuel 22:1 And Dauid spake the wordes of this songe vnto the Lord, what tyme the Lorde delyuered hym out of the handes of al his enemies, & out of the handes of Saul.
2 Samuel 22:2 And he sayde: the Lord is my rocke, my castel and my delyuerer.
2 Samuel 22:3 God is my strength & in him will I truste: my shylde & the horne that defendth me: mine hye holde and refuge: O my sauer, saue me from wronge.
2 Samuel 22:4 I wil prayse and calle on the Lorde, and so shalbe saued from myne enemies.
2 Samuel 22:5 For the waues of death haue closed me aboute, and the flodes of Belial haue feared me.
2 Samuel 22:6 The cordes of hel haue compased me about, and the snares of death haue ouertake me.
2 Samuel 22:7 In my trybulacyon I called to the Lorde, and cryed to my God. And he hearde my voyce out of his temple, and my crye entered into hys eares.
2 Samuel 22:8 And the earth trimbled and quoke, and the foundacions of heauen moued and shoke, because he was angry.
2 Samuel 22:9 Smoke went vp out of his nostrelles, and consuminge fyre out of hys mouth, that coles were kendled of him.
2 Samuel 22:10 And he bowed heuen and came doune, and darcknesse vnder nethe hys fete.
2 Samuel 22:11 And he rode vpon Cherub and flew: and appered vpon the wynges of the winde.
2 Samuel 22:12 And he made darkenesse a tabernacle round about him, with water gathered together in thycke cloudes.
2 Samuel 22:13 Of the brightnesse, that was before him, coles were set on fyre.
2 Samuel 22:14 The Lorde thundred from heauen, and the most hye put out his voyce.
2 Samuel 22:15 And he shotte arowes and skatered them, and hurled lyghtenynge and turmoyled them.
2 Samuel 22:16 And the bottome of the sea appeared, and the foundacyons of the worlde were sene, by the reason of the rebukinge of the Lord, and thorow the blasting of the breath of his nostrelles.
2 Samuel 22:17 He sent from an hye & fet me, and plucked me out of mightye waters.
2 Samuel 22:18 He delyuered me from my mighty enemy & from them that hated me and were to strong for me.
2 Samuel 22:19 When they had compased me in the daye of my trybulacion, the Lorde stayed me vp.
2 Samuel 22:20 And he brought me out into roumeth, and delyuered me, because he delyted me.
2 Samuel 22:21 The Lorde rewarded me accordyng to my ryghteousnesse, & accordinge to the purenesse of my handes he dealt with me.
2 Samuel 22:22 For I kept the wayes of the lorde, and dyd no wyckednesse forsakynge my God.
2 Samuel 22:23 But I had all hys lawes in my syght, and turned my face from none of hys ordinaunces.
2 Samuel 22:24 But was pure vnto him ward, & kept my self from wyckednesse.
2 Samuel 22:25 And the Lorde dyd to me agayne, accordynge to my ryghteousnes, and after my purenesse that I had in hys sight.
2 Samuel 22:26 With the holy thou shalt be holy, and with the man that is vncorrupt, thou shalte be vncorrupt.
2 Samuel 22:27 Wyth the pure thou shalte be pure, and wyth the froward thou shalt be froward also.
2 Samuel 22:28 And the people that are in aduersite, thou shalt helpe. And on the proude shalt thou cast thyne eyes.
2 Samuel 22:29 Thou art my light O Lorde, and the Lorde shall light my darcknesse.
2 Samuel 22:30 Wyth thy helpe I wyll runne thorow an Hoste of men, and by the ayde of my God will springe ouer a walle.
2 Samuel 22:31 The waye of God is vndefyled, and the worde of the Lorde fyned as golde, and he a shylde to all that trust in him.
2 Samuel 22:32 Who is a God saue the Lorde, and who mightye saue our God?
2 Samuel 22:33 God is my strength in warre, and ryddith the waye cleare before me,
2 Samuel 22:34 & maketh my fete as swyfte as an hinde and setteth me fast vpon my hye holde.
2 Samuel 22:35 And teacheth my handes to fyght, that a bowe of brasse is to weake for myne armes.
2 Samuel 22:36 And thou hast saued me with thy shylde, and kepest me euer in meakenes.
2 Samuel 22:37 And thou madest me space to walke in, that my fete should not stomble.
2 Samuel 22:38 I folowed myne enemyes and destroyed them, and turned not agayne vntil I had consumed them.
2 Samuel 22:39 I wasted them and so clouted them, that they coulde not aryse: but fell vnder my fete.
2 Samuel 22:40 And thou compasedest me about wt might to battel, & madest them that rose agaynste me to stoupe vnder me.
2 Samuel 22:41 And thou madest myne enemyes to turne their backes to me, and them that hated me, & I destroyed them.
2 Samuel 22:42 They loked for helpe: But none came to saue them: vnto the Lorde they cryed, but he hearde them not.
2 Samuel 22:43 And I wyl beate them as smalle as the duste of the earth, and wil stampe them as the dyrte of the strete, and wil spreade them abroade.
2 Samuel 22:44 And thou delyueredst me from the dissencyon of my people, & kepest me to be an heade ouer nacyons, for the people whiche I knew not, became my seruauntes.
2 Samuel 22:45 And the alyentes crouched vnto me, and obeyed me at a worde.
2 Samuel 22:46 And the alyentes that shryncke away shal tremble for feare in their defenced places.
2 Samuel 22:47 The Lorde lyue, and blessed be he that is my strength, and exalted be God the strength that saueth me.
2 Samuel 22:48 It is God that aduengeth me, and bryngeth doune the people vnder me.
2 Samuel 22:49 And delyuereth me from myne enemies, thou lyftest me vp on hye from them that ryse against me, & delyuerest me from the wycked men.
2 Samuel 22:50 And therfore I wyll prayse the O Lorde amonge the Hethen, and wyll synge vnto thy name.
2 Samuel 22:51 For thy great & manyfolde sauing of thy kyng, & shewynge mercy vnto thyne anointed, euen to Dauid, & his seede for euer.

CHAPTER: 23

2 Samuel 23:1 These be the last saynges of Dauid. Dauid the sonne of Isai said: And the man is lyfte vp on hye; the anointed of the God of Iacob and pleasaunt Psalmist of Israel sayde,
2 Samuel 23:2 the spyryt of the Lord spake in me, and his wordes were on my tonge.
2 Samuel 23:3 The God of Israel spake vnto me, and the strength of Israel sayde, he that beareth rule ouer men, he that ruleth iustly in the feare of God.
2 Samuel 23:4 And he shalbe as the mornynge lyght, when the sunne shyneth in a mornynge in whyche are no cloudes to lette the bryghtnesse, and as the grasse of the earthe is by the vertue of the raygne.
2 Samuel 23:5 And is not myne house so with God? in that he hath made wyth me an euerlastyng couenaunt perfecte in all poyntes: and in that he shall fulfyll all that is healthe some vnto me, and all my desyres therto.
2 Samuel 23:6 When the vnthriftye men are all of them as thornes taken out of their places, whiche can not be taken with handes:
2 Samuel 23:7 But the man that shal touch them, muste be armed wyth yron on a longe helue. And then shall they be burnt with fyre to syt therby.
2 Samuel 23:8 These be the names of the myghty men that were about Dauid Ioseb of Sebeth the Thachmonite, fyrst of thre, otherwyse called Adino the Azonite, whiche slue .viij. hundred at one tyme.
2 Samuel 23:9 And nexte to hym Eleazar the sonne of Dodi the sonne of Ahohi, one of the thre princypall that were with Dauid, which when they defyed the Philistines that were there gathered together in battell (and the men of Israel were gone vp)
2 Samuel 23:10 arose and layed on the Philistines vntil his hande aked and claue vnto the swerde. And the Lorde made a great victory the same day. And the people returned and went after him onely to spoile.
2 Samuel 23:11 After him was Sema the sonne of Ageh the Hararite, (whiche when the Philistines were gathered together in Lahaia where was a parcell of lande full of ryce, and the people were fled for feare of the Philistines)
2 Samuel 23:12 stode in the middes of the sayde grounde, and defended it & slue the Philistines. And the Lorde gaue hym a great vyctory.
2 Samuel 23:13 And these thre of the thirtye of the Lordes went doune and came to Dauid in the haruest tyme vnto the caue Odolom. And the Host of the Philistines had pytched in the valeye of Geauntes.
2 Samuel 23:14 And Dauid was then in an hold. And the Soudioures of the Philistines were then in Bethlehem.
2 Samuel 23:15 And Dauid longed and sayde: Oh, that I had of the water that is in the wel in the gate of Bethlehem for to drynke.
2 Samuel 23:16 And anone the thre mightie brake thorow the Hoste of the Philistines and fet water out of the well of Bethlehem that was in the gate, and toke, and brought it to Dauid. Neuerthelesse he woulde no dryncke therof, but offered it vnto the Lorde
2 Samuel 23:17 and sayde: the Lorde forbyd that I shoulde do so, shoulde I dryncke the bloude of men that were in ieopardy of their lyues? & so he woulde not dryncke it. These thinges dyd these thre mighty men.
2 Samuel 23:18 Then Abisai the brother of Ioab, the sonne of Zaruiah, he was a captayne ouer the thre, and he lift vs his speare agaynst the hundred and slue them, & was named with the thre.
2 Samuel 23:19 For he was nobler man then the thre and was their capitayne. How be it he attayneth not vnto those thre in actes.
2 Samuel 23:20 Then Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada the sonne of a lusty man valiant in actes of Kabzeel, he slue two lyons of Moab. He went doune and slue a lion in a pit in time of snow.
2 Samuel 23:21 And he slue an Egiptian a goodly man which had a speare in his hand. And Banaiah went doune to him with a staffe, and plucked the speare out of the Egipcians hande, and slue him with his owne speare.
2 Samuel 23:22 Suche thinges did Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiad
2 Samuel 23:23 and was the noblest of thirtie. But not like to anye of the thre in factes of warre. And Dauid made him of his counsel.
2 Samuel 23:24 Asahel the brother of Ioab was one of the thirtye. Then Elehanan the sonne of Dodo of Bethlehem:
2 Samuel 23:25 Semah the Harodite: Elica the Harodite:
2 Samuel 23:26 Helez the Paltite: Ira the sonne of Akes the Thekoite:
2 Samuel 23:27 Abiezer of Anathoth: Mobonai the Husathite:
2 Samuel 23:28 Zelmon an Ahohite: Maharai the Netophathite:
2 Samuel 23:29 Heleb the sonne of Baanah an Netophathite: Ithai the sonne of Ribai of Gabaah a citie of the chyldren of Beniamin:
2 Samuel 23:30 Banaiah the Pharathonite: Hedai of the riuer of Gaas:
2 Samuel 23:31 Abialbon the Arbathite: Asmaueth the Berhomite:
2 Samuel 23:32 Elihaba a Salabonite: Of the sonnes of Iasen Ionathas:
2 Samuel 23:33 Semah the Harorite: Ahiam the sonne of Sarar an Ararite:
2 Samuel 23:34 Eliphelet the sonne of Aasbai the sonne of a Maachathite: Eliam the sonne of Ahithophel the Gilonite:
2 Samuel 23:35 Hezrai the Carmelite. Pharai the Arbite:
2 Samuel 23:36 Igaal the sonne of Nathan of Zobah: Bani the Gadite:
2 Samuel 23:37 Zelec an Amonite: Naharai a Berathite the harnesbearer of Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah:
2 Samuel 23:38 Ira the Iethrite: Gareb the Iethrite
2 Samuel 23:39 Vriah the Hethithe: in all thirthy and seuen.

CHAPTER: 24

2 Samuel 24:1 And the Lorde was wrath again agaynst Israel, and stered vp Dauid against them sayinge: go and nombre bothe Israel & Iuda.
2 Samuel 24:2 And forth with the kyng said to Ioab the captayne of his host: go abroade I pray the, thorow out all the tribes of Israel euen from Dan to Bersabe and nombre the people that I may knowe the nombre of them.
2 Samuel 24:3 And Ioab sayde vnto the kynge: I beseche that the Lorde thy God make the people as many mo as they be: ye & an hundred tymes so many mo, and that the eyes of my Lorde the Kynge maie se them. But howe it is that my Lorde the Kyng hath a lust in this thing?
2 Samuel 24:4 Notwithstandinge the Kynges wordes preuayled agaynst Ioab and agaynst all the captaynes of the hoste. Then Ioab and the captaynes of the hoste went oute from the kynge, to vewe the people of Israell,
2 Samuel 24:5 and they passed ouer Iordan and pytched in Aroer on the ryght syde of the cytye that lyeth in the myddes of the valeye of Gad, and so forthe to Iazer.
2 Samuel 24:6 And then they went to Galaad, and to the nether lande of Hosedi, and from thence to Dan Iaan, and aboute to Sidon,
2 Samuel 24:7 and came to the stronge towne of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Heuites and of the Cananites, and then went out to the South of Iuda, euen to Bersabe.
2 Samuel 24:8 And so when they had bene abroade thorow oute al the lande, they returned to Ierusalem agayne at the ende of nyne monethes and twentye dayes.
2 Samuel 24:9 And then Ioab delyuered vp the rekenynge of the nombre of the people vnto the Kynge. And there were found in Israel nyne hundred thousande men of might that drewe swerdes. And the men of Iuda were fyue hundred thousande men.
2 Samuel 24:10 And Dauids herte smote him after that he had nombred the people. And he sayde vnto the Lorde: I haue sinned excedingly in that I haue done. And nowe Lorde take away the trespace of thy seruaunt: for I haue done folishely.
2 Samuel 24:11 And when Dauid was vp in a mornynge the worde of the Lorde came vnto the prophete Gad Dauids sear sayinge:
2 Samuel 24:12 go, and saye vnto Dauid, this sayeth the Lord: I offer the thre thinges, chose whyche of them I shal do to the.
2 Samuel 24:13 And Gad came to Dauid and shewed him and sayde vnto hym: whether wilt thou haue seuen yeares hunger in thy lande, or that thou flee thre monethes before thyne enemies, and they folowyng the, or that there be thre daies pestilence in thy lande. Now vnderstand and se, what worde I shal brynge agayne to hym that sent me.
2 Samuel 24:14 Then sayd Dauid vnto Gad: I am in a maruelous straite. But let me falle I praye the, into the handes of the Lorde, for muche is hys mercy, and let me not fall into the handes of men.
2 Samuel 24:15 And the Lorde sent a pestylence in Israell from the morninge vnto the ende of the tyme appoynted. And there dyed of the people betwene Dan and Bethsabe .lxx. thousand men.
2 Samuel 24:16 And when the Aungel stretched out his hand vnto Ierusalem to haue destroyed it, the Lord had compassion to do that euyl, and sayde to the Aungel that destroyed the people: it is suffycyent: let thyne hande cease. And the aungell was at the thressinge place of Areunah the Iebusite.
2 Samuel 24:17 Then spake Dauid vnto the Lorde, when he sawe the Aungel that smote the people, and sayde: lo, it is I that haue synned, and I that haue done wickedly. But these shepe what haue they done? let I praye the thyne hande be on me, and on my fathers house.
2 Samuel 24:18 And Gad came the same daye to Dauid, and sayde vnto him: go vp and reare an aultare vnto the Lorde in the thressinge floure of Areunah the Iebusite.
2 Samuel 24:19 And Dauid according to the sayinge of Gad went vp as the Lorde commaunded.
2 Samuel 24:20 And when Areunah loked and sawe the kynge and his seruauntes comynge towarde him, he went out, and bowed hym selfe to the kyng flat on hys face to the ground
2 Samuel 24:21 and sayde: wherfore is my Lorde the kynge come to hys seruaunt? And Dauid sayde: to bye the thressinge floure of the, for to make an aultare vnto the Lorde, that the plage maye cease from the people.
2 Samuel 24:22 And Areunah sayd vnto the kynge: let my Lorde the kynge take and offer what semyth hym good in his eyes: Behold, oxen for sacrefyce and sleades and the other instrumentes of the oxen for wood.
2 Samuel 24:23 And Areunah the kynges frende gaue al to the kynge, and said moreouer vnto the Kynge the Lorde: the Lorde God accept the.
2 Samuel 24:24 But the kynge sayde vnto Areunah: not so, but I wyll bye it of the at a pryce, and wyl not offer sacryfyce vnto the Lord my God that shal cost me nought. And so Dauid bought the thressinge floure, & the oxen for fyfty sycles of syluer,
2 Samuel 24:25 & Dauid buylt there an aultare vnto the Lord, and ofred burnt sacrifices and peace offeringes And so the Lorde was agreed wyth the lande. And the plage cea. from Israel.

BOOK: 1 Kings

CHAPTER: 1

1 Kings 1:1 When Kynge Dauid was waxen olde and stryken in yeares, thoughe they couered him with clothes yet he caught no heate.
1 Kings 1:2 Wherfore hys seruauntes sayde vnto him: let there be sought for my lord the kynge a young mayden to wayt vpon him, and to cheryshe hym. And let her lye in thy bosome, that my Lorde the kynge maye get heate.
1 Kings 1:3 And so they sought for a fayre damosell thorow all the coastes of Israel and founde one Abisag a Sunamite and brought her to the kynge.
1 Kings 1:4 And the Damosel was excedynge fayre, and cheryshed the kynge and ministred to hym. But the kynge knewe her not.
1 Kings 1:5 But Adoniah the sonne of Hagith exalted hym selfe sayinge. I wylbe kynge. And he gat hym a charet and horsmen and fyfty men to runne before hym.
1 Kings 1:6 And hys father rebuked hym not at anye tyme nor sayde so muche to him, as why doest thou so? And he was therto a goodly man, and hys mother bare him next after Absalom.
1 Kings 1:7 And he communed wyth Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah and with Abiathar the prieste. And they holpe Adoniah.
1 Kings 1:8 But Sadock the pryeste, Bahaiah the sonne of Iehoiada, Nathan the prophet, Semei and Rei and the men of myght whyche were with Dauid fauered not Adoniah.
1 Kings 1:9 And Adoniah sacrificed shepe and oxen and fatlynges at the stone of Zoheleth, whyche is fast by the well of Rogel, and bad all his brethren the kynges sonnes and all the men of Iuda the kynges seruauntes.
1 Kings 1:10 But Nathan the prophet and Banaiah and the myghtye men and Salomon hys brother he bad not.
1 Kings 1:11 Whervpon Nathan spake vnto Bethsabe the mother of Salomon sayinge: haste thou not hearde how that Adoniah the sonne of Hagith doth raygne vnwetinge vnto our mayster Dauid?
1 Kings 1:12 Nowe therfore come that I may geue the counsel, how to saue thyne own lyfe and the life of thy sonne Salomon.
1 Kings 1:13 Hence and get the vnto kyng Dauid and saye vnto him: diddest not thou my Lorde kynge swere vnto thy handmayde sayinge? Salomon thy sonne shall raigne after me, and he shall syt vpon my seate, why is then Adoniah made kynge?
1 Kings 1:14 & se, whyle thou yet talkest there with the king, I wyll come in after the and wyll ende thy wordes.
1 Kings 1:15 And Bethsabe went in vnto the kinge into the chambre: And the kinge was verye olde and Abisag the Sunamite ministred vnto hym.
1 Kings 1:16 And Bethsabe stouped and made obeysaunce vnto the kynge. And the kynge sayde: what is thy matter?
1 Kings 1:17 And she answered and sayde: My Lorde thou swarest by the Lorde thy God vnto thyne handmaide: Salomon thy sonne shall raygne after me and he shall syt vpon my seate.
1 Kings 1:18 But nowe se, Adoniah is kinge and thou my Lord kinge wottest it not.
1 Kings 1:19 And he hath offered oxen, fatlynges & shepe aboundantly, and hath called all the sonnes of the kynge, and Abiathar the priest, and Ioab the captayne of the hoste. But Salomon thy seruaunt hath he not bydden.
1 Kings 1:20 And nowe my lord king the eyes of all Israel wayte on the, to tell them who shal sytte on the seate of my Lorde the king after him.
1 Kings 1:21 For elles when my Lorde the Kinge is layd to rest with his fathers, I & my sonne Salomon shalbe synners.
1 Kings 1:22 And behold, while she yet talketh with the kinge, Nathan the prophet was come.
1 Kings 1:23 And they tolde the kinge sayinge: here cometh Nathan the prophet. And when he was come before the kynge, he made obeysaunce vnto the kynge vpon hys face vnto the grounde,
1 Kings 1:24 and sayde: My Lorde kinge, hast thou sayde Adoniah shall raygne after me, and he shall sytte vpon my seate?
1 Kings 1:25 For he is gone doune this day and hath offered, oxen, fatlynges and shepe aboundantlye, and hath called al the Kynges sonnes and the captaynes of the hoste, and Abiathar the priest. And se, they eate and drinck before hym, and saye: God saue kynge Adoniah.
1 Kings 1:26 But me thy seruaunt and Sadock the pryest and Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada, & thy seruaunt Salomon he hath not called.
1 Kings 1:27 Is thys thynge done of my Lorde the kinge and yet wouldest not shewe me thy seruaunt, who shoulde sit on the seate of my Lorde the kinge after hym?
1 Kings 1:28 Then kynge Dauid answered and sayde: call me Bethsabe. And she came in and stode before him.
1 Kings 1:29 And the kinge sware sayinge: As sure as the Lorde (that had ryd my soule oute of all aduersyte) lyueth,
1 Kings 1:30 euen as I sware vnto the by the Lorde God of Israel sayinge: Salomon shall raygne after me, and he shall sytte vpon my seate for me, so wyl I do this daye.
1 Kings 1:31 And Bethsabe bowed on her face to the earth, and dyd obeysaunce vnto the kynge and said: I praye God my Lorde kynge Dauid maye lyue euer.
1 Kings 1:32 Then sayde kynge Dauid: call me Sadock the priest and Nathan the prophet & Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada. And when they came before the kynge,
1 Kings 1:33 the kinge sayde vnto them: take with you the seruauntes of youre Lorde, and set Salomon my sonne vpon myne owne mule and carye him doune to Gihon.
1 Kings 1:34 And let Sadock the pryest and Nathan the prophet anoynte hym there, to be kynge ouer Israel. And then blowe ye with a trompet and saye: God saue kinge Salomon.
1 Kings 1:35 And then come vp after him, and let him come and sytte vpon my seate. For he shalbe kynge in my steade. And hym I haue commaunded to be captayne ouer Israel and Iuda.
1 Kings 1:36 And Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada answered the kynge and sayde: Amen, and so pray I God that the Lorde God of my Lorde the kynge saye so to.
1 Kings 1:37 And as the Lorde hath bene wyth my Lorde the kynge, euen so, I praye God, he maye be, with Salomon and that he make his seate gloryouser then the seate of my lorde kynge Dauid.
1 Kings 1:38 And Sadock the pryest, and Nathan the prophet of Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada & the Cerethites and Phelethites went doune, and set Salomon vpon kinge Dauids Mule and led him to Gihon.
1 Kings 1:39 And Sadock the priest toke an horne of oyle out of the tabernacle and anoynted Salomon. And they blewe a trompet, and all they sayde: God saue king Salomon.
1 Kings 1:40 And all the people came vp after hym pyppynge wyth pypes and reioysinge greatly, so that the earth range with the sounde of them.
1 Kings 1:41 And Adoniah and all the gestes that were with him, hearde it euen as they had made an ende of eatynge. And when Ioab hearde the sounde of the trompet, he said: how happeneth it that there is suche a noyse in the cytye?
1 Kings 1:42 And as he yet spake, se, Ionathas the sonne of Abiathar the priest came. And Adoniah said: come. for thou arte a lustye bloude, and bryngest good tydynges.
1 Kings 1:43 And Ionathas answered & sayde to Adoniah: Verely oure Lorde kynge Dauid hath made Salomon kynge.
1 Kings 1:44 And the kynge sent with him Sadock the prieste and Nathan the prophet: and Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada and the Cerethites and the Phelethites, and they haue set hym vpon the kinges Mule.
1 Kings 1:45 And Sadock the pryeste and Nathan the Prophet haue anoynted him kynge in Gihon. And as they came vp againe, they reioysed that the citie did sounde againe. And that is the noise that ye haue hearde.
1 Kings 1:46 And therto Salomon sitteth on the seate of the kyngedome.
1 Kings 1:47 And moreouer the kynges seruauntes went in to blesse oure Lorde Kynge Dauid sayinge: thy God make the name of Salomon more fauoure then thyne, and hys seate more gloriouse then thyne. And the king bowed him selfe vpon the bede.
1 Kings 1:48 And last of all thus sayde the kinge: blessed be the Lorde God of Israel whiche hath made one to sytte on my seate thys daye, euen myne eyes seinge it.
1 Kings 1:49 And al the gestes that were with Adoniah were afrayed and rose vp and went euery man his waye.
1 Kings 1:50 And Adoniah fearinge Salomon, arose and went and caught holde on the hornes of the aultare.
1 Kings 1:51 And it was tolde Salomon howe that Adoniah for feare of kinge Salomon hathe caught hantfast by the hornes of the aultare sayinge: let kyng Salomon swere vnto my this daie, that he wyll not sley hys seruaunt with the swerd.
1 Kings 1:52 And Salomon said: yf he wylbe a childe of vertue, there shal not an heere of him fal to the earth. But and yf wyckednesse shalbe founde in him, he shal dye for it.
1 Kings 1:53 And thervpon kynge Salomon sent and fet hym doune from the aultare. And he came and dyd obeisannce vnto kynge Salomon. And Salomon sayde to hym: get the to thyne house.

CHAPTER: 2

1 Kings 2:1 When the dayes of Dauid were draune nye, that he should dye, he charged Salomon his sonne sayinge:
1 Kings 2:2 I must walke by the way of all the world, neuerthelater be thou strong and quyte thy self manfully,
1 Kings 2:3 and se that thou kepe thy appointment of the Lorde thy God, that thou walke in his waies and kepe his commaundementes, ordinaunce, lawes and testimonies, euen as it is written in the law of Moses: that thou mayest vnderstand al that thou oughtest to do, and al that thou shouldest medyll wyth.
1 Kings 2:4 That the Lorde maye make good his promesse whiche he hath promised me sayinge: yf thy children shal take heede to their wayes, that they walke before me in truthe, with all their hertes and with al their soules, then thou shalt neuer be without one syttynge on the seate of Israell.
1 Kings 2:5 Moreouer thou wottest howe Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah hath serued me, and what he hath done to the two captayues of the Hostes of Israel: vnto Abner the sonne of Ner & vnto Amasa the sonne of Iether: how he slue them and shed the bloude of warre in tyme of peace, and put the bloude of warre vpon hys gyrdle that was about hys loynes and in hys shoes that were on his fete.
1 Kings 2:6 Deale with hym therfore accordynge to thy wysedome and se that thou brynge not hys horre head doune to the graue in peace.
1 Kings 2:7 And shew kindnesse vnto the sonnes of Berselai the Galaadite, and let them be among them that eate at thyne owne table, because they so claue to me when I fled from Absalom thy brother.
1 Kings 2:8 And se, thou hast with the, Semei the sonne of Gera the sonne of Gemini of Bahurim, whiche cursed me with a bytter curse, what tyme I went to Mahanaim. But he came against me to Iordan, and I sware to hym by the lorde sayinge. I wyl not sley the wyth the swerde.
1 Kings 2:9 But pardon thou him not. Thou art a man of wysdome and shalt know what to do to him, se therfore that thou brynge hys horre head to the graue wyth bloude.
1 Kings 2:10 And so Dauid rested with his fathers, & was buryed in the cytye of Dauid.
1 Kings 2:11 And the dayes whyche Dauid raygned vpon Israell were fourtye yeares: seuen yeares in Hebron, and thyrtye and thre yeare in Ierusalem.
1 Kings 2:12 And Salomon sate vpon the seate of Dauid hys father, and hys kyngdome was stablyshed myghtely.
1 Kings 2:13 After that Adoniah the sonne of Hagith came to Bethsabe the mother of Salomon. And she said: Betokeneth thy coming peace? And he sayde: it betokeneth peace.
1 Kings 2:14 Then sayde he: I haue a matter to shew the. And she said: saye on.
1 Kings 2:15 And he sayde: thou knowest that the kyngdome was myne, and that all Israel put their eyes on me, that I shoulde raygne, howe be it the kyngdome was turned away and geuen to my brother, for it was appoynted hym of te Lorde:
1 Kings 2:16 and now I aske a petycyon of the: wherof denye me not. And she sayde vnto hym: tell what it is.
1 Kings 2:17 Then he sayde: speake I pray the, vnto Salomon the kynge (for he wyl not saye the naye) that he geue me Abisag the Sunamite to wyfe.
1 Kings 2:18 And Bethsabe sayde: wel I will speake for the vnto the kynge.
1 Kings 2:19 And thervpon Bethsabe went vnto kynge Salomon to speake vnto hym for Adoniah. And the kynge rose vp agaynst her & bowed hym selfe vnto her, and sat him doune on hys seate. And there was a seate for the kynges mother, and she sat on his right syde.
1 Kings 2:20 Then she sayde: I must desyre a lyttel peticyon of the: saye me not naye. And the kynge sayde vnto her: Aske on my mother: for I wil not say the naye.
1 Kings 2:21 And she sayde: let Abisag the Sunamite be geuen to Adoniah thy brother to wyfe:
1 Kings 2:22 And kynge Salomon answered and sayde vnto his mother: why doest thou aske Abisag the Sunamite for Adoniah? but rather aske for hym the kingdome, seynge he is myne elder brother: Euen for hym aske it and for Abiathar the pryeste, and for Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah.
1 Kings 2:23 Then kynge Salomon sware by the Lorde sayinge: God do so to me, and so therto yf Adoniah haue not spoken this worde agaynst hym selfe.
1 Kings 2:24 Now therfore as surely as the Lorde lyueth whyche hath stablyshed me and set me on the seate of Dauid my father, & which hath made me an house as he promysed me, Adoniah shall dye thys daye.
1 Kings 2:25 And kynge Salomon sent by the hande of Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada, and smote hym that he dyed.
1 Kings 2:26 And vnto Abiathar the pryest sayde the kynge: get the to Anatoth vnto thyne owne feldes for thou art worthy of death, but I will not at this tyme kyl the, because thou barest the Arcke of the Lorde Iehouah before Dauid my father, and because thou sufferedst wt my father in al hys afflyccyons.
1 Kings 2:27 And so Salomon put awaye Abiathar from beynge priest vnto the Lorde: to fulfil the wordes of the Lorde whyche he spake ouer the house of Eli in Siloh.
1 Kings 2:28 Then tydinges came to Ioab: for Ioab had turned after Adoniah but not after Salomon. Whervpon he fled vnto the tabernacle of the Lorde and caught handfast on the hornes of the aultare.
1 Kings 2:29 And it was tolde kynge Salomon, how that Ioab was fled vnto the tabernacle of the Lorde and stode by the aultare. Then Salomon sent Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada saying: go and smyte him:
1 Kings 2:30 And when Banaiah was come to the tabernacle of the Lorde, he sayde vnto hym: thus sayth the kynge, come out. And he sayde, nay. But I wil dye euen here: & Banaiah brought the kyng worde sayinge: thus sayde Ioab & thus he answered me.
1 Kings 2:31 And the kynge sayde: do euen as he hathe sayde: smyte hym and burye him, and take awaye the bloude (whiche Ioab shed causelesse) from me, and from the house of my father.
1 Kings 2:32 And the Lorde brynge hys bloude vpon his owne heade, for he smote two men ryghteouser and better then he, and slue them with the swearde, my father vnwetynge: euen Abner the sonne of Ner capitayne of the hoste of Israel, and Amasa the sonne of Iether captayne of the hoste of Iuda.
1 Kings 2:33 And their bloude returne vpon the heade of Ioab, and on the heade on hys sede for euer. And prosperyte be vnto Dauid, and vnto hys seade, and vnto hys house, and vnto hys seate, of the Lorde for euer.
1 Kings 2:34 And Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada went vp and smote him & slue him & buried hym in hys owne house in the wildernesse.
1 Kings 2:35 And the king put Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada in his roume ouer the host, and put Sadock the priest in the roume of Abiathar.
1 Kings 2:36 Then the kynge sent and called Semei, and sayde to hym: buylde the an house in Ierusalem and dwel there, & se that thou go not once thence any whether.
1 Kings 2:37 For be thou sure of it, the daye thou goest out and passest ouer the ryuer of Cedron, thou shalt dye for it, and thy bloud shalbe on thine owne heade.
1 Kings 2:38 And Semei sayde vnto the kinge: it is wel sayd: as my Lorde the kinge hath sayed, so wil his seruaunt do. And Semei dwelt in Ierusalem many a daye.
1 Kings 2:39 And it chaunced at the ende of thre yeare that two of the seruauntes of Semei ranne awaye vnto Achis sonne of Maacah kynge of Geth. And one tolde Semei saying: se, thy seruauntes be in Geth.
1 Kings 2:40 And Semei stode vp and sadled hys Asse, and gat him to Geth to Achis to seke his seruauntes, and came and brought them agayne from Geth.
1 Kings 2:41 But it was tolde Salomon howe that Semei had gone from Ierusalem to Geth and was come againe.
1 Kings 2:42 And the kynge sent and called Semei, and sayde vnto hym: Dyd I not adiure the by the Lorde, and testifyed vnto the sayinge: be sure whensoeuer thou goest oute and walkest abroade any whether, thou shalt dye for it? And thou answeredst me: it is good tydynges that I haue hearde.
1 Kings 2:43 Why then hast thou not kept the othe of the Lorde, and the commaundement that I commaunded the?
1 Kings 2:44 And then the kinge sayde to Semei: thou remembrest all the wyckednesse whych thyne hert knoweth that thou diddest to Dauid my father. The Lorde therfore render agayn thy wyckednesse vpon thyne owne heade:
1 Kings 2:45 & kyng Salomon be blessed, and the seate of Dauid be stablyshed before the Lorde for euer.
1 Kings 2:46 And the kyng commaunded Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada: whiche went out and smote hym that he dyed And so was the kyngdome setled in the hand of Salomon.

CHAPTER: 3

1 Kings 3:1 Then Salomon drewe affinite wt Pharao kynge of Egypte, and toke Pharaos doughter, and brought her into the citie of Dauid vntyll he had made an ende of buildinge his owne house, and to the house of the Lorde, and the walles of Ierusalem rounde about.
1 Kings 3:2 Only the people sacrificed in aultares made on hylles, because there was no house built vnto the name of the lord, vntil those dayes.
1 Kings 3:3 And Salomon loued the Lorde, and walked in the ordinaunces of Dauid hys father, saue onlye that he sacrificed & offered incense vpon aultares in hylles.
1 Kings 3:4 And the king went to Gabaon, to offer there, for that was a great offering place. And there Salomon offered a thousand burntofferinges vpon the aultare.
1 Kings 3:5 And in Gabaon the Lorde apered to Salomon in a dreame by nyghte. And God sayde: Aske what I shall geue the.
1 Kings 3:6 And Salomon sayde: thou hast shewed vnto thy seruaunt Dauid my father great mercye accordinge as he walked before the in truthe & in ryghteousnesse & playnesse of herte wyth the. And thou hast kept for hym thys great mercy, that thou hast geuen him a sonne to sit on his seate: as it is come to passe thys daye.
1 Kings 3:7 And now Lord, my God, it is thou that hast made thy seruaunt kynge in steade of Dauid my father. And I am a young lad & wote not how to order my selfe.
1 Kings 3:8 And thy seruaunt is in the myddes of thy people which thou hast chosen, a people that are so many that they can not be told nor nombred for multitude.
1 Kings 3:9 Geue therfore vnto thy seruaunt an vnderstandynge herte to iudge thy people, & to decerne betwene good, and bad. For who is able to iudge thys thy so waightye a people.
1 Kings 3:10 And it pleased the Lord well, that Salomon had desyred thys thynge.
1 Kings 3:11 Wherfore God said vnto him: because thou hast asked this thynge and hast not asked long life, nether hast asked ryches, nor the lyues of thyne enemies, but hast asked the discrecion to vnderstand equite.
1 Kings 3:12 Se, I haue done accordynge to thy petycyon: and beholde: I haue geuen thy a wyse and an vnderstandynge hert, so that there was none lyke the before, nether after the shal any aryse lyke vnto the.
1 Kings 3:13 And therto I haue geuen the, that thou askedst not, bothe rychesse and honoure: so that there shalbe no kynge lyke the all the dayes.
1 Kings 3:14 And yf thou wilt walke in my wayes, to kepe myne ordynaunces and commaundementes, as Dauid thy father dyd walke, I will lengthen thy dayes also.
1 Kings 3:15 When Salomon awoke, this was his dreame. And he came to Ierusalem and presented him selfe before the Arcke of the testament of the Lorde and offered burntofferynges and peace offerynges, and made a feast to al hys seruauntes.
1 Kings 3:16 Then came there two wemen that were harlottes vnto the kyng & stode before him.
1 Kings 3:17 And the one of them saide: Oh my lord I & this woman dwell in one house. And I was delyuered of a chyld with her in the said house.
1 Kings 3:18 And the thirde day after that I was delyuered, she was delyuered also: we two beynge together and no straunger with vs in the house saue we two alone.
1 Kings 3:19 And this wyues childe dyed in a nyght, for she had ouerlaide it.
1 Kings 3:20 And then she arose at midnight, and toke my sonne from my syde, whyle thyne handmayde slept and laide it in her bosome, and put her dead childe in my bosome.
1 Kings 3:21 And when I rose vp in the mornynge to geue my child sucke, se, it was deade. But when I had loked more dylygentlye vpon it in the mornynge, beholde, it was not my sonne, whiche I dyd beare.
1 Kings 3:22 And the other woman sayde: it is not so: But the lyuing is my sonne, and the dead thyne. And she said agayne: thou saiest vntrue, for the dead is thy sonne, and the lyuynge myne. And thus they pleated before the kynge.
1 Kings 3:23 Then sayd the king: the one sayeth, this that is a lyue, is my sonne & the dead is thyne. And the other saieth nay. But thy sonne is the dead & the lyue chylde is myne.
1 Kings 3:24 Then sayd the kyng: bryng me a swerd. And they brought a swerde before the kyng.
1 Kings 3:25 And then the kynge sayd: Deuyde thy liuing chylde in two, and geue the one halfe to the one, and the other to the other.
1 Kings 3:26 Then spake the woman whose the lyuyng chylde was, vnto the kynge (for her bowelles yerned vpon her sonne) and sayde: I beseche the my Lorde, geue her the lyuynge chylde, and in no wyse sley it. And the other sayde: it shalbe neyther myne nor thyne, but deuide it.
1 Kings 3:27 Then the kynge aunswered & sayd: geue her the lyuyng chylde, and sley it not, for she is the mother therof.
1 Kings 3:28 And all Israel hearde of the iudgement which the kyng had iudged and feared the kynge: for they sawe that the wysdome of God was in hym to do iustice.

CHAPTER: 4

1 Kings 4:1 And so king Salomon was king ouer all Israel.
1 Kings 4:2 And these were hys Lordes: Azariah the sonne of Sadock the priest:
1 Kings 4:3 Elihoreph and Ahiah the sonnes of Sisa, scrybes. Ieosaphath the sonne of Ahilud the recorder.
1 Kings 4:4 And Baianah the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the host. And Sadock and Abiathar were the priestes.
1 Kings 4:5 And Azariah the sonne of Nathan was ouer the generall receyuers. And Zabud the sonne of Nathan was a wayter & the kynges companyon.
1 Kings 4:6 And Asihar stewarde of housholde: And Adinoram sonne of Abda ouer the trybute.
1 Kings 4:7 And Salomon had twelue generall receyuers ouer al Israel which sustayned the king & hys housholde: eche man hys moneth in a yeare.
1 Kings 4:8 Whose names are these: the sonne of hur in mount Ephraim:
1 Kings 4:9 the sonne of Dekar in Makez, in Salem in Bethsames, in Elon & in Bethhanan:
1 Kings 4:10 the sonne of Hesed in Aruboth & to him pertayned Socoh and all the land of Hepher:
1 Kings 4:11 the sonne of Abinadab, which had al the regyons of Dor, and Tapheth the doughter of Salomon was hys wyfe:
1 Kings 4:12 Baanah the sonne of Ahilud had Thanach Magedo and all Bethsan which is by Zarhanah benethe Iezrahel, and from Bethsan to Abel Mehulah & vnto beyounde Iecmaam,
1 Kings 4:13 the sonne of Gaber had Ramoth Galaad, and hys were the tounes of Iair the sonne of Manasse which lye in Galaad, and hys was the coastes of Argob in Basan, threskore greate cytyes wyth walles and Barres of Brasse.
1 Kings 4:14 Ahinadab the sonne of Ado had Mahanaim:
1 Kings 4:15 Ahimaaz; had Nephtalim, & he had taken Basemath the doughter of Salomon to wife.
1 Kings 4:16 Baanah the sonne of Hasai had Aser & Aloth:
1 Kings 4:17 Iehosaphat the sonne of Pharuah had Isachar.
1 Kings 4:18 Semei the sonne of Elah had Beniamin:
1 Kings 4:19 Gaber the sonne of Vry had the contreye of Galaad and the lande of Sehon kynge of the Amorytes & of Og kyng of Basan, and was alone receyuer in the lande.
1 Kings 4:20 And Iuda & Israel were manye euen as the sande of the sea in nombre, eatyng, drynckyng, & makynge merye.
1 Kings 4:21 And Salomon raygned ouer al kyngdomes from the ryuer thorowout al the land of the Phylistines vnto the borders of Egipt and they brought presentes & serued Salomon all dayes of hys lyfe.
1 Kings 4:22 And Salomons fode was in one day thyrtye quarters of manchet floure and thre skore quarters of mele:
1 Kings 4:23 ten stalled oxen, & twentye out of the pastures & an hundred shepe and gootes, besydes, hertes, buckes and buballes & fat pultrye.
1 Kings 4:24 For he ruled in all the regyons on the other syde Euphrates, from Thaphsah to Gaza, and also ouer all the kinges on the other syde the sayd Euphrates. And he had peace with all hys seruauntes on euery syde.
1 Kings 4:25 And Iuda and Israell dwelt wythout feare, euery man vnder his vyne & vnder his fygge tre from Dan to Bersabe, all the dayes of Salomon.
1 Kings 4:26 And Salomon had fourtye thousand stalles of horsses for charettes, & twelue thousand horsmen
1 Kings 4:27 And the forsayde general receyuers made purueyaunce for kyng Salomon and for all that came to kynge Salomons table, euery man hys moneth, so that there lacked nothynge.
1 Kings 4:28 And as for barleye and strawe for the horsses & beastes, they brought vnto the places where the offycers were, euery man in his offyce.
1 Kings 4:29 And God gaue Salomon wisdome & vnderstandyng excedyng muche & a large herte euen as the sande a longe by the sea bancke:
1 Kings 4:30 so that Salomons wysdome exceded the wysdom of all them of the east countreye & all the wysdome of the Egypcyans.
1 Kings 4:31 And he excelled all men in wysdome, both Ethan the Ezrahite, & Heman, Chalcol and Dorda the sonnes of Mahol. And hys name sprede abroade amonge all nacyons on euerye syde.
1 Kings 4:32 And Salomon wrote thre thousande prouerbes. And his songes were a thousande and fyue.
1 Kings 4:33 And he disputed of trees, euen from the Cedar tre that groweth in Lybanon vnto the Isope that spryngeth out of the walle. And he dysputed of beastes, foules, wormes and fyshes.
1 Kings 4:34 And there came of all nacyons to heare the wysdome of Salomon, and from all kynges of the earthe which had hearde of hys wysdome.

CHAPTER: 5

1 Kings 5:1 And Hiram kynge of Tyre sente hys seruauntes vnto Salomon, for he had hearde that they had anoynted hym kyng in the roume of hys father. And therto Hiram was euer a louer of Dauids.
1 Kings 5:2 And Salomon sent agayne to Hiram, sayinge:
1 Kings 5:3 thou knowest of Dauid my father, howe he could not build an house vnto the name of the Lorde his god for warre which he had on euery syde, vntyll the Lorde had put them vnder hys fote.
1 Kings 5:4 But nowe the Lorde my God hath geuen me rest on euery syde, so that there is neyther aduersarye nor any euyll plage.
1 Kings 5:5 And therfore I am disposed to buylde an house vnto the name of the Lorde my God, as he promysed Dauid my father, saying: thy sonne which I wyl put vpon thy seate for the, he shal buylde an house vnto my name.
1 Kings 5:6 Nowe then commaunde that they hewe me Cedar trees in Libanon. And let my seruauntes be with thine, and I will geue the hire of the seruauntes in all soche thinges as thou shalt appoynte, for thou knowest that there are not among vs that can skyll to hewe tymber lyke vnto the Sidones.
1 Kings 5:7 When Hiram hearde the wordes of Salomon, he reioysed greatlye & sayde: Blessed be the Lorde this daye whiche hath set Dauid a wyse sonne ouer this myghtie people.
1 Kings 5:8 And Hiram sent agayne to Salomon saying: I haue accept the request whiche thou sentest to me for, & wyll satisfye all thy luste, concernynge tymbre of Cedar trees & fyre.
1 Kings 5:9 My seruauntes shall brynge them from Lybanon to the sea. And I wyll conueye them by shippe vnto the place that thou shalt sende me worde, & wyll cause them to be discharged there, that thou mayst receyue them. And thou shalt do me this pleasure agayne, to mynistre fode for myne house.
1 Kings 5:10 And so Hiram gaue Salomon Cedar trees & fyrre trees, as moche as he desyred.
1 Kings 5:11 And Salomon gaue Hiram twentie thousand quarters of wheate to fede his housholde wt al, & twentye buttes of pure oyle. And so moch gaue Salomon to Hiram yere by yere.
1 Kings 5:12 And the Lord gaue Salomon wisdome as he promysed hym. And there was peace betwene Hiram and Salomon and they were confedered together.
1 Kings 5:13 And kynge Salomon areysed a trybute thorowe out al Israel. And the trybute was thyrty thousand men,
1 Kings 5:14 which he sent to Lybanon, ten thousand a monethe by coursse, so that they were one moneth in Lybanon, and two monethes at home. And Adoniram was ouer the trybute.
1 Kings 5:15 And Salomon had thre skore & ten thousande that bare burdens, & threskore and ten thousande that hewed in the mountaynes
1 Kings 5:16 besydes the Lordes he had, to ouer se the worcke, in nombre thre thousande & thre hundred, whiche ruled people that wrought in the worcke.
1 Kings 5:17 And at the commaundemente of the kynge, they brought great stones and that fre stones, and hewed therto, to laye in the foundacyon of the house.
1 Kings 5:18 And Salomons masons and the masons of Hyram dyd hew them, with them of the borders. And so they prepared bothe tymbre and stone to buylde the house.

CHAPTER: 6

1 Kings 6:1 And it came to passe the foure hundred and foure skore yeare after the chyldren of Israel were come out of the lande of Egypte, and the fourth yeare of the raigne of Salomon vpon Israell, and the second moneth called Zif that he beganne to buylde the temple vnto the Lorde.
1 Kings 6:2 And the house whiche Salomon buylt for the Lorde, was thre skore cubytes longe and twentye broade & thyrtye cubytes hye.
1 Kings 6:3 And the porche that was before the bodye of the temple, was twentye cubites longe after the measure of the bredeth of the house & .x. broade, euen at the very ende of the house.
1 Kings 6:4 And he made vnto the house windowes to open and shut.
1 Kings 6:5 And vnder the walles of the house he made galaryes rounde aboute, bothe rounde aboute the temple and also the quere. And so made sydes rounde aboute.
1 Kings 6:6 And the neyther most galery was .v. cubytes broade & the mydle galeri .vi. And the third .vij. cubytes broad. For he made the walles wythout wheron the beames laye, euer thynner & thynner, so that they were not fastened in the walles of the house.
1 Kings 6:7 And the house was built of stone made perfecte all ready yer it was brought thither, so that there was neyther hammer of axe eyther any tole of yron heard in the house, while it was in buyldynge.
1 Kings 6:8 And the dore of the myddle galary was in the ende of the house on the ryghte syde. And men went vp wyth wyndyng steares into the myddle galarye, and out of the myddle into the thyrde.
1 Kings 6:9 And so he buylte the house & finyshed it, and roufte it wyth beames of Cedar tymber made holowe and ioyned together.
1 Kings 6:10 And then he buylt chambres ouer all the temple of fyue cubytes heyght, and coupled the house together wyth beames of Cedar.
1 Kings 6:11 And the worde of the Lorde came to Salomon saying:
1 Kings 6:12 concerning the house which thou arte in buyldynge, yf thou wylte walcke in myne ordynaunces and execute my lawes & kepe all my commaundementes, to walcke in them, then wyll I make good vnto the, my promes whiche I promysed Dauid thy father.
1 Kings 6:13 And I wyll dwell amonge the chyldren of Israel, and wyll not forsake my people Israel.
1 Kings 6:14 And so therfore Salomon buylt the house and fynyshed it,
1 Kings 6:15 and syled the walles of the house wythin, wyth rybbes of Cedar tre: euen from the pauement vnto the rouffe dyd he syle it within, and borded the floore of the house wyth planckes of fyre.
1 Kings 6:16 And he syled twentye cubytes in the ende of the temple both floore & walles wyth Cedar, and dressed it within to be the quere and place most holye.
1 Kings 6:17 And the fyrste house, that is to saye, the bodye of the temple, was fourtye cubytes longe.
1 Kings 6:18 And the Cedar of the house wythin was kerued with knoppes, & grauen wyth floures, and all was Cedar tymber, so that no stone was sene.
1 Kings 6:19 And the quere that was wythin the temple, he prepared to set there the arcke of the appoyntmente of the Lorde.
1 Kings 6:20 And the quere was twentye cubytes longe, and twentye in bredth & twentye in heyght. And he syled it wyth pure golde, & borded the aultare wyth Cedar.
1 Kings 6:21 And Salomon syled the house wythin also with pure golde. And he made golden barres runne a longe the quere, which he had couered wyth golde.
1 Kings 6:22 And the whole house he ouerlayde wyth golde vntyll he had ended it. And the aultar that was in the quere he ouerlayde wyth golde also.
1 Kings 6:23 And within the quere he made two Cherubyns of olyue tree, ten cubytes hye a pece,
1 Kings 6:24 and euery wynge fyue cubytes longe: so that from the vttermoste parte of the other were ten cubytes.
1 Kings 6:25 And the other Cherub was ten cubytes hye also: so that bothe the Cherubes were of one measure and one syse.
1 Kings 6:26 The heyghte of the one Cherub was ten cubytes, & so was it of the other. And he put the Cherubes in the midle of the ynner house.
1 Kings 6:27 And the Cherubes stretched their wynges, so that the one winge of the one touched the one wall, and the one wynge of the other touched the other walle, And the other two wynges of them touched one another in the middes of the house.
1 Kings 6:28 And he ouerlayde the Cherubes with golde.
1 Kings 6:29 And all the walles of the house rounde aboute, he garneshed wyth worke of Cherubes and palme trees and grauen floures, both within in the quere and wythout in the temple.
1 Kings 6:30 And the floure of the house he couered wyth golde both wythin in the quere and also wythout in the temple.
1 Kings 6:31 And in the entering of the quere he made two dores of olyue tree, wyth the vpper and two syde postes fyue square.
1 Kings 6:32 And the two dores of olyue tree, he graued wyth grauynge of Cherubes, and Palme trees and graued floures, and couered them wyth golde, and layde golde ouer the Cherubes and also the Palme trees.
1 Kings 6:33 And in lyke maner vnto the doore of the temple he made postes of olyue tre .iiij. square,
1 Kings 6:34 and two dores of fyre tree, and ether dore wyth two foldynge leues
1 Kings 6:35 and graued theron Cherubes Palme trees and floures, and couered them with golde made plaine by a ruler.
1 Kings 6:36 And then he buylte the ynner courte wyth thre rowes of hewed stone and one rowe of Cedar wode.
1 Kings 6:37 In the fourth yere of his raygne was the foundacyon of the house of the Lorde layde,
1 Kings 6:38 euen in the moneth Zif, & in the .xi. yeare in the moneth bul which is the .viij. moneth, it was full fynyshed in al that pertayned therto, and fashyoned as it shulde be in all poyntes: And so was he .vij. yeare in buyldyng of it.

CHAPTER: 7

1 Kings 7:1 And Salomon buylt hys owne house in .xiij. yeare space and ful fynyshed it.
1 Kings 7:2 And he buylte the house of the wood of Lybanon, an hundred cubytes long & fyftye broad, and thyrtye hye, foure square wyth rowes of Cedar pyllers, and Cedar beames a longe vpon the pyllers.
1 Kings 7:3 And the rouffe was Cedar aboue an hye vpon the beames that lay an hye on the pyllers, whiche pyllers were fourtye & fyue in nombre, fyftene on a rowe,
1 Kings 7:4 and the spaces betwene the pyllers were one agaynste another thre folde,
1 Kings 7:5 And all the dores wyth the syde postes were foure square one agaynste another thre folde.
1 Kings 7:6 And he made a porche of pyllers fyftye cubytes longe and thyrtye cubytes broade: and yet a porche before that wyth pyllers, and a thycke pyller before that.
1 Kings 7:7 Then he made a porche to syt and iudge in, syled wyth Cedar thorow out al the pauementes.
1 Kings 7:8 And his owne house where he kepte resydence in another courte wythoute that porche was of the same worcke. And then Salomon made an house for Pharaos doughter whiche he had taken to wyfe, lyke vnto that porche.
1 Kings 7:9 And all these thinges were of ryche stones hewed after a measure & sawed with sawes within & wythout, euen from the foundacyon vnto that wheron the beames were layed, & on the out syde therto toward the great court.
1 Kings 7:10 And the foundacyon was of ryche stones & the myghtye greate stones of ten cubytes and of eyght.
1 Kings 7:11 And aboue were ryche stones hewed according to the same syse, and also with Cedar.
1 Kings 7:12 And the great court round about was wyth thre rowes of hewed stone and one row of Cedar planckes. And lykewyse was it in the ynner courte of the house of the Lorde and of the porche of the temple.
1 Kings 7:13 And kyng Salomon sent & fet one Hiram out of Tyre,
1 Kings 7:14 a wedowes sonne of the trybe of Nephtalim, hys father beyng of Tyre. Which Hyram was a craftes man in brasse, & full of wysedome, vnderstandynge & connyng to worcke all maner of worcke in brasse. And he came to kyng Salomon and wrought all hys worcke.
1 Kings 7:15 He caste two pyllers of brasse of .xviii. cubytes a pece hye and a strynge of .xij. cubytes myght compase eyther of them aboute.
1 Kings 7:16 And he made two head peces of molten brasse to set on the toppes of the pyllers, of fyue cubytes long
1 Kings 7:17 a pece wyth garlandes of brayded worcke and whopes of chayne worcke for the heade peces that were on the pillers .vij. for one and .vij. for the other.
1 Kings 7:18 And he made the pyllers, & for eyther of the head peces a garland wyth two rowes of pomegranetes to couer them wyth al.
1 Kings 7:19 And the head peces that were on the toppes of the pyllers were wrought wyth lylyes in the porche the space of foure cubytes of them.
1 Kings 7:20 And the pomegranetes aboue & beneth on the wrethen chaynes that compased the mydle of the head peces were in nombre two hundred on eyther heade pece.
1 Kings 7:21 And he set vp the pyllers in the porche of the temple, and when he had set vp the right pyller, he called the name therof Iachin, & when he had set vp the left pyller he called the name therof Boaz.
1 Kings 7:22 And the toppes of the pyllers were thus wroughte wyth lylyes, and so was theyr worckemanshyp fynyshed.
1 Kings 7:23 Then he caste a sea of brasse, ten cubytes wyde from brym to brym and rounde in compase, & fyue cubytes hye. And a strynge of .xxx. cubytes myghte compase it aboute,
1 Kings 7:24 & vnder the brym of it as it were apples compased and embrased the sea of ten cubytes wyde in two rowes cast wyth it when it waste cast.
1 Kings 7:25 And it stode on twelue oxen: of which thre loked North, thre West, thre South, & thre East & the sea on hye vpon them, and all theyr hynder partes were inwarde.
1 Kings 7:26 And it was an hand breadeth thycke, and the brym wroughte lyke the brym of a cup with floures of lylyes. And it contayned two thousande Bathes.
1 Kings 7:27 And he made ten botomes of brasse, foure cubytes long & foure cubytes broade a pece, & thre hye.
1 Kings 7:28 And the workes of the botomes was on this maner that the sydes were as it were flat bordes betwene the ledges.
1 Kings 7:29 And on the flat bordes betwene the ledges were lyons, oxen & Cherubes. And vpon the ledges that were aboue & beneth the lyons and oxen, was ioyned pendant worcke.
1 Kings 7:30 And euery bottom had foure brasen wheles, whose axel trees were also of brasse. And in the .iiij. corners were vndersetters vnder the lauatorye caste eche ouer agaynst hys felowe.
1 Kings 7:31 And the stalcke of the lauatorye was in the myddle of the bottome one cubyte hye, & a cubyte & an halfe round, & it had knoppes there on in the bare places which were four square not rounde.
1 Kings 7:32 And vnder the sydes were foure whelles and theyr axeltrees ioyned fast to the bottome. And the heyght of euery whele was a cubyte and an halfe.
1 Kings 7:33 And the wortkemanshyp of the wheles was lyke the worcke of a charet whele. And the axeltrees, the nauelles, spokes and shaftes were al moulten.
1 Kings 7:34 And the foure vndersetters in the foure corners were of the verye bottomes.
1 Kings 7:35 And vnder the stalcke of the lauatorye in the myddes of the bottome was there a rounde fote of halfe a cubyte hye.
1 Kings 7:36 And thereon plaine places and ledges of the selfe. And he graued in the playne and also on the ledges, Cherubes, lyons, and paulmetrees, euery were round aboute.
1 Kings 7:37 And on thys maner he made the ten bottoms cast worcke: all of one measure and one syse.
1 Kings 7:38 Then he made ten lauers of brasse contaynynge fourtye Bathes a pece, and they were of foure cubytes a pece, for euerye one of the bottomes a lauer.
1 Kings 7:39 And he put fiue of those bottomes on the ryght corner of the temple, and other fyue on the lefte: And put the sea on the ryght corner of the temple Eastewarde & towarde the South.
1 Kings 7:40 And Hiram made pottes, shouelles and basons, and so fynyshed all the worcke that he made kynge Salomon for the house of the Lorde:
1 Kings 7:41 that is to saye, two pyllers & two skalpes of the heades that were on the toppes of the two pyllers,
1 Kings 7:42 and foure hundred pomegranetes vpon two wrethes, two rowes on eyther wrethe, to couer the two skalpes of the heades that were on the toppes of the two pyllers:
1 Kings 7:43 And the ten bottomes of brasse wyth ten lauers vpon them: & a sea
1 Kings 7:44 with twelue oxen vnder it:
1 Kings 7:45 & pottes, shouels & basens. And al these vesselles whiche Hiram made to kyng Salomon for the house of the Lorde were of bright brasse.
1 Kings 7:46 And in the playne of Iordan dyd the kynge cast them; euen in the claye of the earth betwene Socoh and Zarthan.
1 Kings 7:47 And Salomon left all the vesselles vnwayed, for the excedinge abundaunce of brasse that was in them.
1 Kings 7:48 And Salomon made all the vesselles that pertayned vnto the house of the Lord: the aultare of goulde, and the table of goulde wheron the shewe bread was put:
1 Kings 7:49 And fyue candelstickes, for the ryghte syde, and as manye for the left, before the quere, of pure goulde: wyth floures,
1 Kings 7:50 lampes, and snoffers of goulde: and Bolles, Psalteries, basons, spones and fyre pannes of pure goulde: and hynges of gould bothe for the dores of the quere, the place most holye, and for the dores of the temple also.
1 Kings 7:51 And so was ended all the worcke that kynge Salomon made for the house of the Lorde. And then Salomon brought in the thynges which Dauid hys father had dedicated in siluer, goulde and other vesselles, & put them to the treasure of the house of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 8

1 Kings 8:1 Then Salomon gathered the elders of Israel, all the heades of the trybes and auncyent Lordes of the chyldren of Israel, vnto him to Ierusalem, to bryng vp the arcke of the appoyntment of the Lord out of the cytye of Dauid which is Syon.
1 Kings 8:2 And al the men of Israel assembled vnto kynge Salomon to the feast that falleth in the moneth Ethanim which is the seuenth moneth.
1 Kings 8:3 And when al the elders of Israel were come, the priestes toke vp the Arcke of the Lorde,
1 Kings 8:4 and brought it, & also the tabernacle of witnesse & all the holye vesselles that were therein. And the priestes & the Leuites brought them vp.
1 Kings 8:5 And kynge Salomon and all the congregacyon of Israell that were assembled, and were wyth hym before the arcke, dyd offer shepe & oxen that coulde not be tolde nor nombred for multitude.
1 Kings 8:6 And so the priestes brought the arcke of the apoyntment of the Lorde vnto hys place: euen into the quere of the temple, and place moste holy, vnder the wynges of the Cherubes.
1 Kings 8:7 For the Cherubes stretched oute theyr wynges ouer the arcke, and couered bothe it and also the staues therof a hye vpon it.
1 Kings 8:8 How be it the staues were so longe that the endes of them appered oute of the holy place before the quere, but were not sene wythoute. And there they be vnto thys dayes.
1 Kings 8:9 And there was nothynge in the arcke saue the two tables of stone whiche Moyses put there at Horeb, when the Lorde made an appoyntment wyth the chyldren of Israel after they were come oute of Egypte.
1 Kings 8:10 And when the priestes were come oute of the holye place, then a cloude fylled the house of the Lorde,
1 Kings 8:11 that the priestes coulde not endure to mynyster because of the cloud, for the glorye of the Lorde had filled the house of the Lorde.
1 Kings 8:12 Then spake Salomon: the Lorde sayd, that he wolde dwell in darckenesse.
1 Kings 8:13 I haue built the an house to dwell in, & an habytacion for the to abyde in for euer.
1 Kings 8:14 And the king turned hys face, and blessed all the congregacyon of Israel, all the congregacyon standyng.
1 Kings 8:15 And he sayde. Blessed be the Lorde God of Israel, which hath fulfylled wyth hys hande, that he spake wyth hys mouthe vnto Dauid my father sayinge:
1 Kings 8:16 from the daye I brought my people Israel out of Egypte, I chose no cytye among any of the trybes of Israel, to buylde an house, that my name myght be there: But I haue chosen Dauid to be ruler ouer my people Israel.
1 Kings 8:17 And it was in the herte of Dauid my father, to buylde an house for the name of the Lorde God of Israel.
1 Kings 8:18 But the Lorde GOD sayde vnto Dauid my father: in that it was in thyne herte to buylde an house for my name, thou dyddest well, that thou wast so mynded.
1 Kings 8:19 Neuerthelesse thou shalt not buylde the house, but thy sonne that shal come out of thy loynes he shal buylde an house for my name.
1 Kings 8:20 And the Lorde hath made good hys worde that he spake. For I stode vp in the roume of Dauid my father, and sate on the seate of Israel, as the Lorde promysed, & haue buylt an house for the name of the Lorde God of Israel.
1 Kings 8:21 And I haue prepared therein a place for the arcke wherein the couenaunt of the Lorde is, which he made with our father, after he had brought them out of the lande of Egypte.
1 Kings 8:22 And Salomon stode before the aultare of the Lorde in the syght of all the congregacyon of Israel, and stretched oute hys handes to heauen
1 Kings 8:23 & sayde: Lorde God of Israel, there is no God lyke the in heauen aboue or in the earthe benethe, that kepest appoyntment & mercye wyth thy seruauntes that walcke before the wyth all theyr hertes:
1 Kings 8:24 which also hast kepte wyth thy seruauntes Dauid my father, that thou promysedeste hym. Thou spakest wyth thy mouthe & haste fulfylled with thyne hande, as it is come to passe thys daye.
1 Kings 8:25 And now Lorde God of Israel, kepe wyth thy seruaunte Dauid my father, that thou promysedest hym saying: thou shalt not be wythoute one or other before me, syttyng on the seat of Israel: How be it yf thy chyldren shall take hede to theyr wayes that they walcke before me, as thou haste walked before me.
1 Kings 8:26 Now then O Lord God of Israel, let thy worde be stable whiche thou spakeste vnto thy seruaunt Dauid my father.
1 Kings 8:27 But in deade can God dwell on the earthe? Beholde neyther heauen, nor heauen aboue all heauens are able to contayne the: howe muche lesse then thys house that I haue built?
1 Kings 8:28 but loke to the prayer of thy seruaunt and his supplicacyon O Lorde my God, to geue an eare vnto the noyce and prayer which thy seruaunt prayeth before the thys daye,
1 Kings 8:29 that thine eyes maye be open vpon thys house nyght & daye, & vpon the place, of whiche thou haste sayde, my name shalbe there: that thou herken vnto the prayer which thy seruaunt shal pray in thys place.
1 Kings 8:30 And herken vnto the supplicacyon of thy seruaunte and of thy people Israel whiche they shall praye in thys place. And heare thou vp vnto heauen thy dwellynge place, and when thou heareste, haue mercye.
1 Kings 8:31 And yf any man trespace agaynst hys neyghboure, and hys neyghboure take an adiuracyon to adiure hym with all, and the adiuarcyon come before thyne aultare at thys house,
1 Kings 8:32 then herken thou vp to heauen, & worke and iudge thy seruauntes, that thou condempne the wicked to brynge hys waye vpon hys heade, & iustifye the ryghteous to geue hym accordynge to hys ryghteousnesse.
1 Kings 8:33 When thy people Israel be put to the worsse before theyr enemyes, because they haue synned agaynste the & afterwarde turne agayne to the, & prayse thy name, & praye, and make supplicacion vnto the in thys house:
1 Kings 8:34 then heare thou vp to heauen, and be mercyfull vnto the synne of thy people Israel, and brynge them agayne vnto the lande whiche thou gauest vnto theyr fathers.
1 Kings 8:35 Yf heauen be shut vp, that there be no rayne, because they haue synned against the: yet yf they praye in thys place, and prayse thy name, and turne from theyr synnes, thorowe thy skourgynge of them:
1 Kings 8:36 then heare thou vp to heauen, and be mercyfull vnto the synne of thy seruauntes & of thy people Israel, that thou shewe them a good waye to walke in, & geue raygne vpon thy lande that thou haste geuen vnto thy people to enheret.
1 Kings 8:37 If there chaunce death in the lande, pestylence, blastynge, or wytheryng of corne, or that the frutes be deuoured of Grashoppers or Caterpyllers, or yf theyr enemyes besege them in the lande & in theyr owne cytyes, or whatsoeuer plage or sycknesse chaunce:
1 Kings 8:38 then heare thou vp to heauen thy dwelling place, all the prayers and supplicacyons that shalbe made of all men thorowout all thy people Israel, which shal knoweledge euery man the plage of hys owne herte, and stretche forth hys handes vnto thys house,
1 Kings 8:39 and be mercyfull, and worcke, and geue euery man according to his wayes (euen as thou onelye knowest euerye mannes herte, for thou knowest the hertes of all the children of Adam)
1 Kings 8:40 that they may feare the as long as they liue vpon the earth which thou gauest vnto theyr fathers.
1 Kings 8:41 And likewise yf a straunger that is not of thy people Israel come oute of a farre countreye for thy names sake
1 Kings 8:42 (for they shal heare of thy great name and of thy myghtye hande and stretched out Arme) and therfore yf he come & praye at thys place,
1 Kings 8:43 heare thou vp to heauen thy dwellyng place, and do accordynge to all that the straunger calleth to the for, that all nacyons of the erth maye knowe thy name, to feare the as do thy people Israel, and that it maye be knowen that this house which I haue buylt is called after thy name.
1 Kings 8:44 And when they go out to battell agaynst their enemyes whether soeuer thou shalt send them, & shall praye vnto the Lorde towarde the cytie which thou hast chosen and towarde the house that I haue buylt for thy name:
1 Kings 8:45 heare thou their prayers and supplicacions, vp to heauen, and iudge their cause.
1 Kings 8:46 And finally when they shall haue synned agaynst the (for there is no man that synneth not) & thou art angrye with them and hast delyuered them to their enemyes, that they be caryed awaye prysoners vnto the land of theyr enemyes, whether ferre or neare,
1 Kings 8:47 yet yf they turne agayne vnto their hertes in the lande where they be in captiuite, and returne and praye vnto the in the lande of them that holde them captiue, sayinge: we haue synned & haue done wyckedlye & haue trespaced,
1 Kings 8:48 & so turne agayne vnto the with all their hertes and all their soules in the land of their enemyes which holde them captyue, and praye vnto the, towarde the land which thou gauest vnto their fathers, & towarde the cytie which thou hast chosen, and house which I haue buylt for thy name:
1 Kings 8:49 then heare thou their prayer & supplicacion vp to heauen thy dwellyng place, & iudge their causes,
1 Kings 8:50 and be mercyfull vnto thy people that haue synned agaynst the, and vnto all their trespace that they haue trespaced agaynst the, and get the fauoure in the syght of them that hold them captyue that they may haue compassyon on them.
1 Kings 8:51 For they be thy people and thyne enherytaunce whiche thou broughtest oute of Egypte, from the fornace of yron.
1 Kings 8:52 And let thyne eyes be open vnto the prayer of thy seruaunte, & vnto the prayer of thy people Israel, to herken vnto them, in all that they call vnto the for.
1 Kings 8:53 For thou dyddeste separat them, to be thyne enheritaunce, aboue all the nacyons of the earthe, as thou saydeste by the hande of Moses thy seruaunte, when thou broughtest oure fathers oute of Egypte O Lorde Iehouah.
1 Kings 8:54 And when Salomon had made an ende of prayinge all thys prayer & supplicacyon vnto the Lorde, he arose from before the aultare of the Lorde, & from knelyng on hys knees, and stretchynge of hys handes vp to heauen
1 Kings 8:55 and stode, & blessed all the congregacion of Israel wyth a loud voyce, saying:
1 Kings 8:56 Blessed be the Lord that hath geuen reste vnto hys people Israel according to all that he promysed, so that there is not one worde escaped of all the good promyses which he promysed by the hand of Moses hys seruaunte.
1 Kings 8:57 And the Lorde oure God be wyth vs, as he was wyth our fathers, and forsake vs not
1 Kings 8:58 neyther leue vs, but that he bowe oure hertes vnto him, to walcke in all hys wayes, and to kepe hys commaundementes, ordinaunces and customes whiche he commaunded oure fathers.
1 Kings 8:59 And these my wordes which I haue prayed before the Lorde, be nye vnto the Lorde oure God daye and nyghte, that he defende the cause of hys seruaunte and of hys people Israel euermore,
1 Kings 8:60 that all nacyons of the earth maye knowe that the Lorde, he is God and none but he.
1 Kings 8:61 And I praye God that youre hertes maye be sounde wyth the Lorde oure God, to walke in hys ordinaunces and to kepe hys lawes as we do thys daye.
1 Kings 8:62 And the kyng and al Israel wyth him, offered offerynges before the Lorde.
1 Kings 8:63 And the peace offerynges that Salomon offered vnto the Lorde, were .xxij. thousand oxen & an hundred and twentye thousande shepe. And so the kynge and al the chyldren of Israel dedicated the house of the Lorde.
1 Kings 8:64 And the same daye the kynge halowed the mydle of the courte that is before the house of the Lord: for there he offered burntofferynges & meateofferynges, & the fat of the peaceofferynges, because the brasen aultare that was before the Lord, was to lytle to receyue the burntofferynges & meate offerynges, and the fat of the peaceofferynges.
1 Kings 8:65 And Salomon helde that same tyme an hye feast & all Israell wyth hym, a myghtye congregacyon, euen from the coastes of Hemath vnto the ryuer of Egypte, before the Lorde oure God, seuen dayes & yet seuen dayes, that is .xiiij. dayes.
1 Kings 8:66 And the .viij. daye he sente the people awaye. And they blessed the kynge and went vnto theyr tentes ioyouse & glad in herte for all the goodnesse that the Lord had shewed vnto Dauid hys seruaunt and to Israell hys people.

CHAPTER: 9

1 Kings 9:1 And when Salomon had fynyshed the buyldynge of the house of the Lorde, and of the kynges palace, and of all that hys desyre & luste was to make:
1 Kings 9:2 the Lord appered vnto him agayne, as he appered to him at Gabaon.
1 Kings 9:3 And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: I haue hearde thy prayer and intercessyon that thou madest before me, & haue halowed thys house which thou hast buylt, to put my name there for euer, and myne eyes and myne herte shalbe there perpetuallye.
1 Kings 9:4 And yf thou wylte walcke before me, as Dauid thy father walcked, in purenesse of herte & playnesse, to do all that I haue commaunded the, and shalt kepe myne ordynaunces & customes:
1 Kings 9:5 then I wil stablyshe the seate of thy kyngdome vpon Israell for euer, as I promysed to Dauid thy father, sayinge: Thou shalt not be wythoute one or other vp on the seate of Israell.
1 Kings 9:6 But and yf ye and youre chyldren shall turne away from after me, and shall not kepe myne ordynaunces whiche I haue set before you, but shall go, & serue other Goddes and bowe youre selues vnto them:
1 Kings 9:7 then I wyll weede Israel oute of the lande whiche I haue geuen them. And this house which I haue halowed for my name, I wyll put out of my syghte, And Israell shall be a prouerbe and a fable vnto all nacyons.
1 Kings 9:8 And hys house which is so hye, al that passeth by it, shalbe astonyed, & shall hysse, & saye: why hath the Lord dealt on hys maner with this land & wyth thys house?
1 Kings 9:9 And it shalbe aunswered them, because they forsoke the Lord theyr God which broughte theyr fathers out of the lande of Egipt, & haue taken holde vpon other Goddes and haue stouped vnto hym, & serued them: therfore hath the Lord brought vpon them al thys euil.
1 Kings 9:10 Then at the ende of twentye yeares in which Salomon had buylte the two houses, that is to wete, the house of the Lorde & the kinges pallayce:
1 Kings 9:11 because Hyram the kynge of Tyre had supported hym with Cedar, fyre & gould, as much as he desyred: therfore Salomon gaue Hiram .xx. cytyes in the lande of Galyle.
1 Kings 9:12 And when Hiram was come from Tyre to se the cytyes which Salomon had geuen him, they pleased hym not.
1 Kings 9:13 Wherfore he sayd: what cytyes are these whiche thou hast geuen me, my brother? and he called them the land of Cabul vnto thys daye.
1 Kings 9:14 This Hiram had sent the kyng .vi. skore hundred wayght of gould.
1 Kings 9:15 And thys is the summe of the trybute, whiche kyng Salomon raysed, to buylde the house of the lord and hys owne house, and Melo and the walles of Ierusalem and Hezer, and Magedo, and Gazer.
1 Kings 9:16 For Pharao kyng of Egypt went vp and toke Gazer, and burnte it wyth fyre, and slue the Cananites that dwelt in the cytye, & gaue it for a presente vnto hys doughter that was Salomons wyfe.
1 Kings 9:17 And Salomon buylte Gazer and Beth Horon the nether:
1 Kings 9:18 and Baalath & Thamar in the wyldernesse that is in the lande:
1 Kings 9:19 and all the store cities that Salomon had, & cyties for hys charettes, & cytyes for his horsemen & all that hys luste was to buylde in Ierusalem and Lybanon, and in all the lande of hys Kyngdome.
1 Kings 9:20 And all the people that were lefte of the Amorites, Hethites, Pheresites, Heuytes and Iebusites, whiche were not of the chyldren of Israel,
1 Kings 9:21 the chyldren of the sayde nacyons that were lefte in the lande, because the chyldren of Israel were not able to destroy them, dyd Salomon make trybutaryes vnto thys day.
1 Kings 9:22 And of the chyldren of Israel dyd Salomon make no bond men. But they were men of warre & hys seruauntes, and hys lordes and Captaynes and rulars of hys charettes and of hys horsemen.
1 Kings 9:23 And these manye lordes that ouersawe the worcke had Salomon, fyue hundred and fyfty, which ruled the people that wrought in the worcke.
1 Kings 9:24 And Pharaos doughter came vp oute of the cytye of Dauid vnto the house which Salomon had buylt for her. And after that he buylt Melo.
1 Kings 9:25 And thryse a yeare dyd Salomon offer burntofferynges & peaceofferinges vpon the aultare which he had buylt vnto the Lorde, to burne the fat thereon: whiche aultare is before the Lord. And when kyng Salomon had made the house perfecte,
1 Kings 9:26 he made shyppes in Azion Gaber which is besyde Eloth, on the bryncke of the read sea, in the lande of Edom.
1 Kings 9:27 And Hiram sent by shyppe also of hys seruauntes, that were shypmen and expert in the sea, wyth the seruauntes of Salomon.
1 Kings 9:28 And they went to Ophir, & fet from thence gould, to the summe of .iiij. hundred and .xxij. talentes, and brought it to Salomon.

CHAPTER: 10

1 Kings 10:1 And the quene of Saba hearde of the wysdome of Salomon concernyng the name of the Lord, and came to proue hym wyth rydelles.
1 Kings 10:2 And she came to Ierusalem wyth a myghtye great multitude of Camels that bare swete odoures and goulde exceding much, & precious stones. And when she was come to Salomon, she communed wyth hym of all that was in her hert.
1 Kings 10:3 And Salomon expounded her all her questions, that there was not one thynge hyd from the kynge which he expounded her not.
1 Kings 10:4 And when the quene of Saba had sene all Salomons wysdome, & the house that he had buylt,
1 Kings 10:5 & the meate of hys table, & the syttynge of hys seruauntes, and the standynge of hys seruytours & their apparell, & his buttelers, & hys sacrifyce that he offered in the house of the Lord, she was astonyed.
1 Kings 10:6 Then she said to the kynge: the worde I hearde in myne owne land of thy dedes and wysdome, is true.
1 Kings 10:7 How be it I beleued it not, tyll I came and sawe it wyth myne eyes. And se, the one halfe was not told me: for thy wysdome and goodnesse exceadeth the fame which I hearde.
1 Kings 10:8 Happy are thy men: and happye are these thy seruauntes, whiche stande euer before the, and heare thy wysdom.
1 Kings 10:9 And blessed be the Lorde thy God which had a luste to the, to set the on the seate of Israell, because the Lorde loued Israel for euer, and therfore made the kynge, to do equite & ryghtuousnesse.
1 Kings 10:10 And she gaue the kynge an hundred and .xx. talentes of gould, and of swete odours excedinge moche, & precyouse stones There came neuer after such aboundaunce of swete odours as the quene of Saba gaue to kyng Salomon.
1 Kings 10:11 And therto the shyppes of Hiram that brought goulde from Ophir, broughte from Ophir great plentye of Almuge tre & precyouse stones.
1 Kings 10:12 And kynge Salomon made of the Almuge trees pyllers in the house of the Lord & in the kynges palace, & made harpes & Psalteryes for syngers There came no more Almuge tre so, nor was any more sene vnto this daye.
1 Kings 10:13 And kyng Salomon gaue vnto the Quene of Saba al her desyre that she asked of him besydes that he gave her with hys owne hand. And so she returned vnto her owne countrey wyth her seruauntes.
1 Kings 10:14 The weyght of gould that came to Salomon in one yeare, was .vi. hundred thre skore and .vi. talentes of gould,
1 Kings 10:15 besydes that he had of chapmen and of merchauntes of Potycaries, and of all the kynges of Arabie and of the Lordes of the countreye.
1 Kings 10:16 And kyng Salomon made two hundred boukelers of beaten goulde .vi. hundred sicles of goulde went to a boukeler.
1 Kings 10:17 And he made thre hundred shyldes of beaten goulde, thre pounde of gould going to a pece, & put them in the house of the wood of Lybanon.
1 Kings 10:18 And the kynge made a great seat of Iuorye and couered it wyth precious golde.
1 Kings 10:19 And the seate had sixe steppes. And the toppe of the seat was rounde behynde hys backe with pomelles on eyther syde on the place where he satte, and two Lyons standing besyde the pomelles.
1 Kings 10:20 And there stode .xij. Lyons on the steppes .vi. on a syde. There was none lyke sene in anye kingdome.
1 Kings 10:21 And all kynge Salomons drynckynge vesselles were of goulde, and all the vesselles of the house of the woode of Lybanon were of pure gould. And as for syluer it was nothynge worth in the dayes of Salomon.
1 Kings 10:22 For the sea shyppes whiche the kynge had in the sea, wyth the shippes of Hiram, came everye thyrde yeare laden wyth goulde, syluer, Iuory, apes and pecockes.
1 Kings 10:23 And so kynge Salomon exceaded all the kynges of the earthe in rychesse and wysdome.
1 Kings 10:24 And all the worlde resorted to Salomon, to heare his wysdome, which God had put in hys herte.
1 Kings 10:25 And brought hym euery man hys present vesselles of syluer and goulde, and of rayment, harnesse, swete odoures, horsses and Mules, yeare by yeare.
1 Kings 10:26 And Salomon gathered together charettes and horsemen: so that he had a thousande, and .iiij. hundred charettes, and .xij. thousand horsmen, whiche he bestowed in the charet cytyes and wyth the kynge at Ierusalem.
1 Kings 10:27 And the kynge made syluer in Ierusalem as plenteous as stones, and Cedar as plenteous as the mulbery trees that growe in the valeys.
1 Kings 10:28 And Salomons horsses came oute of Egypte from Keua: The marchauntes fet them from Keua at a pryce.
1 Kings 10:29 A charet came oute of Egypt for .vi. hundred sicles of syluer, and an horsse for an hundred and fyftye. And euen so by the handes of the sayde marchauntes, horsses were brought out for all the kynges of the Hethytes and for the kynges of Syrya.

CHAPTER: 11

1 Kings 11:1 Bvt kynge Salomon loued manye outlandysh wemen: the doughter of Pharao: and of the Moabytes, Ammonites, Edomites, Zidonytes and Hethites,
1 Kings 11:2 even of nacyons of whiche the Lorde sayde vnto the chyldren of Israell, se ye come not at them, nor let them come to you: for surely they wyll turne youre hertes after theyr Goddes. Neuerthelesse to such Salomon claue and fell in loue with them.
1 Kings 11:3 And he had seuen hundred very Quenes and thre hundred concubynes whiche turned away his hert.
1 Kings 11:4 For when Salomon was olde, hys wyues turned hys herte after other Goddes: so that hys herte was not perfecte wyth the Lorde hys God, as was the herte of Dauid hys father.
1 Kings 11:5 And Salomon folowed Astaroth the God of the Zidons, & Milcom the abhominacyon of the Ammonytes.
1 Kings 11:6 And Salomon wrought wickednesse in the syght of the Lorde, & continued not after the Lorde as dyd Dauid his father.
1 Kings 11:7 After that Salomon buylt an aulter for Chamos the abhomynacyon of the Moabytes in the hyll that standeth before Ierusalem, & vnto Moloch the abhomynacyon of the chyldren of Ammon.
1 Kings 11:8 And lykewyse dyd he for all hys outlandyshe wyues which burnte cense, and offered vnto theyr Goddes.
1 Kings 11:9 Then was the Lorde angrye wyth Salomon because hys hert turned from the Lord God of Israel which appered vnto him twyse,
1 Kings 11:10 & gaue him a charge of this thinge that he shulde not folowe other Goddes. But he kept not that which the Lord commaunded hym:
1 Kings 11:11 wherevpon the Lord said to Salomon: for as muche as thys is done of the, and thou haste not kepte myne appoyntement & myne ordinaunces which I haue commaunded the, therfore I wyll rent the kyngedome from the, & wil geue it to thy seruaunt.
1 Kings 11:12 Not wythstandynge in thy dayes I wyll not do it, because of Dauid thy father: but wyl take it from thy sonne.
1 Kings 11:13 How be it I wyll not take awaye all: But wyll geue one trybe to thy sonne, because of Dauid my seruaunt and because of Ierusalem which I haue chosen.
1 Kings 11:14 And the Lord stered vp an aduersary vnto Salomon, one Hadad an Edomyte and of the kinges lignage of Edom.
1 Kings 11:15 For when Dauid was in Edom, & Ioab the captayne of the hoste was gone vp to burye them that were slayne: and had slayne all the men children in Edom.
1 Kings 11:16 For .vi. monethes dyd Ioab remayne there & al Israel, tyll he had destroyed all the men children in Edom.
1 Kings 11:17 And this Hadad fled and certen other Edomites of his fathers seruauntes with him, to go to Egypt Hadad beyng yet a lytle lad.
1 Kings 11:18 And they arose oute of Madyan and went to Pharan, and toke men wyth them out of Pharan, and came to Egypte vnto Pharao kyng thereof, whiche gave hym an house, & appointed hym vytayles. and gaue hym landes.
1 Kings 11:19 And Hadad had great fauoure in the syght of Pharao, so that he gaue hym to wyfe the syster of hys owne lyfe, the syster of Thahaphnes the Quene.
1 Kings 11:20 And the syster of Taphahnes bare hym Senubath hys sonne. And Thahaphnes wened hym in Pharaos house. And he was in Pharaos house amonge the sonnes of Pharao.
1 Kings 11:21 And when Hadad hearde saye in Egypt that Dauid was layde to slepe with hys fathers, and that Ioab the captayne of the host was dead also, he sayd to Pharao: let me departe, that I may go to myne owne countrey.
1 Kings 11:22 Then sayd Pharao vnto him: what lackest thou here wyth me, that thou woldeste go to thyne owne countreye? And he sayde, nothyng: how be it let me go.
1 Kings 11:23 And God stered vp another aduersarye, one Razon the sonne of Eliada, whiche fled from Hadadezer king of Zobah hys mayster.
1 Kings 11:24 Which Razon gathered men vnto hym, & be came captayne ouer the companye, when Dauid slue them. And they went to Damasco, and dwelt therein, & raygned in Damasco.
1 Kings 11:25 And he was an aduersary to Israel all the dayes of Salomon, with the euyll that Hadad dyd, which abhorred Israel and raygned in Syrya.
1 Kings 11:26 And Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat an Ephrathite of Zaredah (whose mother was called Zeruah & was a wydowe & he Salomons seruaunt) lyfte vp hys hand agaynst the kynge.
1 Kings 11:27 And hereof came it, that he lyft vp hys hande agaynste the kyng. Salomon built Melo and mended broken places in the cytye of Dauid hys father.
1 Kings 11:28 And thys felowe Ieroboam was an actyue man. And when Salomon sawe the younge man, that he wroughte so lustelye in the worke, he made hym ruler ouer all the charges of the house of Ioseph.
1 Kings 11:29 And it chaunged at that ceason, as Ieroboam was gone oute of Ierusalem, that the Prophet Ahiah the Sylonite met hym by the way hauyng a newe mantell on hym, and they two alone in the felde.
1 Kings 11:30 And Ahiah caught the newe mantell that was on hym, & rent it in twelue peces,
1 Kings 11:31 and sayde to Ieroboam: take the ten peces. For thys sayth the Lord God of Israel: beholde, I wyll rent the kyngedome out of the handes of Salomon, and will geue ten trybes to the,
1 Kings 11:32 and he shall haue one, for my seruaunt Dauids sake and for Ierusalem the cytye whiche I haue chosen out of al the trybes of Israel:
1 Kings 11:33 because they haue forsaken me, and haue bowed them selues vnto Astaroth the God of the Zydons, and to Camos the God of the Moabytes, and to Milcom the god of the chyldren of Ammon, and haue not walked in my wayes, to do that pleaseth me, and myne ordynaunces and customes, as dyd Dauid hys father.
1 Kings 11:34 Howe be it I wyll take none of the kyngedome out of hys hand: but wyll make him cheaffe al his lyfe long, for Dauid my seruauntes sake, which I chose: because he kept my commaundementes and ordinaunces.
1 Kings 11:35 But I wyl take the kyngedome out of his sonnes hande and wyl geue unto the ten trybes of it:
1 Kings 11:36 & wyll geue hys sonne one, that Dauid my seruaunte maye haue a lyght alwaye before me in Ierusalem, the cytye whiche I haue chosen me, to put my name there.
1 Kings 11:37 And I wyll take the, and thou shalt raygne vpon all that thy soule desyreth, and shalt be king ouer Israel.
1 Kings 11:38 And yf thou shalte herken vnto al that I commaunde the, & shalte walke in my wayes, & do that is ryght in my sight, that thou kepe myne ordynaunces & commaundementes as Dauid my seruaunt dyd: then wil I be with the & buyld the an house that shal continue, as I buylt for my seruaunt Dauid, & wil geue Israel vnto the.
1 Kings 11:39 And therwith wil I vexe the seede of Dauid, but not for euer.
1 Kings 11:40 And Salomon sought to kyll Ieroboam, wherfore Ieroboam arose & fleed into Egypt vnto Sesak kynge of Egypte & contynued there vntil the death of Salomon.
1 Kings 11:41 And the rest of the actes of Salomon & all that he dyd, and hys wysdome are writen in the boke of the actes of Salomon.
1 Kings 11:42 And the tyme that Salomon raygned in Ierusalem vpon all Israel, was fourtye yeare.
1 Kings 11:43 And then he laid him to rest with hys fathers, and was buryed in the cytye of Dauid hys father, and Rehoboam hys sonne raygned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 12

1 Kings 12:1 And Rehoboam went to Sichem for all Israel were come to Sichem to make hym kynge.
1 Kings 12:2 And when Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat hearde of it beyng yet in Egypte: for he fleed to Egypte for feare of Salomon, and dwelt in Egypte.
1 Kings 12:3 And they sent & called hym: and so Ieroboam & all the congregacyon of Israel came and spake vnto Rehoboam, sayinge:
1 Kings 12:4 thy father made oure youcke greuouse, but nowe make thou the greuouse seruyce of thy father & hys sore youcke which he put vpon vs, lyghter; and so we wyl serue the.
1 Kings 12:5 And he sayde vnto them: departe yet for the space of thre dayes, and then come agayne to me. And the people departed.
1 Kings 12:6 And kynge Rehoboam toke councell wyth the olde men that stode before Salomon hys father whyle he yet lyued, & sayd: what councell geue ye to aunswere thys people with al?
1 Kings 12:7 And they sayd vnto hym: If thou shalt be a seruaunt vnto this people this daye and serue them, & answere them, & speake kynd wordes to them: they wyll be thy seruauntes for euer.
1 Kings 12:8 But he lefte the councell that the olde men had geuen hym, & counceled with the young men that were nourished vp with him, & had waited on him.
1 Kings 12:9 And he sayd vnto them: what councel geue ye, to aunswere this people with all whiche haue communed wyth me, sayinge: make the youcke whiche thy father dyd put vpon vs, lighter?
1 Kings 12:10 And the young men that were brought vp wyth hym, aunswered hym, sayinge: thys people that haue sayde vnto the: thy father made our youcke heuye, make thou it vs lighter: thus aunswere them. My lytle fynger shalbe wayghtyer then my fathers loynes.
1 Kings 12:11 And nowe where my father put a greuouse youcke vpon you, I wyll make it heauyer. For where my father corrected you wt scourges, I wil chastyse you wt scorpions.
1 Kings 12:12 And when Ieroboam and all the people were come to Rehoboam the thyrde daye, as the kynge annoynted them, saying: come to me agayn this daye thre dayes:
1 Kings 12:13 the kynge aunswered the people churlyshlye, and lefte the aduise that olde men gaue hym:
1 Kings 12:14 and spake to them after the councell of the younge men, sayinge. My father made youre youcke greuouse, but I wyl make it greuouser. For where my father chastysed you with whyppes, I wyll chastyse you with scorpyons.
1 Kings 12:15 And so the kynge herkened not vnto the people: for the turnynge awaye was of the Lorde, to performe hys sayinge, which the Lorde sayde by Ahiah the Silonite vnto Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat.
1 Kings 12:16 And when all Israel sawe that the kynge regarded them not, the people aunswered the kynge agayne sayinge: we haue no parte in Dauid, nor enheritaunce in the sonne of Isai. To youre tentes therfor Israel, & nowe se to thyne owne house Dauid. And so Israell departed vnto theyr tentes.
1 Kings 12:17 How be it ouer the chyldren of Israel which dwelt in the cytye of Iuda, dyd Rehoboam raygne stil.
1 Kings 12:18 Then king Rehoboam sente Aduram the receyuer of the trybute. And all Israel stoned him to deathe with stones. But kyng Rehoboam made spede & gat him vp to hys charet, & fleed to Ierusalem.
1 Kings 12:19 And so Israel departed from the house of Dauid vnto thys daye.
1 Kings 12:20 And when all Israell hearde that Ieroboam was come agayn, they sent & called hym vnto the congregacyon and made him kyng ouer Israel: so there folowed the house of Dauid, but the trybe of Iuda only.
1 Kings 12:21 And when Rehoboam was come to Ierusalem, he gathered all the house of Iuda & the trybe of Beniamin an hundred and foure skore thousandes of chosen men and good warryours, to fyghte agaynst the house of Israel and to brynge the kyngdome agayne to Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon.
1 Kings 12:22 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Semeiah the man of God sayinge:
1 Kings 12:23 speake vnto Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon kynge of Iuda, and vnto all the house of Iuda and Beniamin, and the remnaunt of the people & saye.
1 Kings 12:24 Thus sayth the Lorde: go not nor yet fyght agaynste youre brethren the chyldren of Israel, but returne euery man to his house, for thys doynge is of the Lorde. And they obeyed the worde of the Lorde, and returned & departed accordynge to the word of the Lord.
1 Kings 12:25 Then Ieroboam buylte Sichem in mounte Ephraim, and dwelt therin. And went from thence and buylt Phanuel.
1 Kings 12:26 And Ieroboam thought in hys hert: now myght the kyngdome returne to the house of Dauid agayne.
1 Kings 12:27 For yf thys people shall go vp, & do sacryfyce in the house of the Lord at Ierusalem, then shall theyr hertes turne againe vnto theyr Lorde Rehoboam kynge of Iuda. And so shall they kyll me, and go agayne to Rehoboam kyng of Iuda.
1 Kings 12:28 Whervpon the kynge toke councell, and made two calues of golde and sayde vnto the people: ye shall not neade to go any more to Ierusalem. Beholde youre Goddes Israel which brought you out of the lande of Egypte.
1 Kings 12:29 And he put the one in Bethel, and the other in Dan.
1 Kings 12:30 And that doynge, was a cause of synne. And the people went before the one as farre as Dan.
1 Kings 12:31 And he made houses of hyllaulters, and made of the lowest of the people priestes whiche were not of the sonnes of Leui.
1 Kings 12:32 And Ieroboam made a feast the .xv. daye of the .viij. moneth like vnto the feast that was in Iuda, and offered on the aultare. And so dyd he in Bethell, to offer vnto the calues that he had made. And he put in Bethel the pryestes of the hyll aultares whiche he had made.
1 Kings 12:33 And he offered vpon the aulter whiche he had made in Bethell, the .xv. daye of the .viij. moneth, which he had ymagined of hys owne hert: and made a solempne feaste vnto the chyldren of Israel, and wente vp to the aultare to burne sacrifyce.

CHAPTER: 13

1 Kings 13:1 And beholde, there came a man of God out of Iuda with the worde of God, to Bethel, as Ieroboam stode by the aulter to offer,
1 Kings 13:2 and cryed agaynst the aultare at the commaundement of the Lorde, and sayde: aultare, aultare, thus sayth the Lorde. Beholde a chylde shall be borne of the house of Dauid, Iosiah by name, which vpon the shall offer the pryestes of the hyllaultares that sacrifyce vpon the, & shall burne mennes bones vpon the.
1 Kings 13:3 And he gaue them the same tyme a sygne sayinge: thys is the sygne of that the Lorde hath promysed. Beholde the aultare shal rent and the ashes that are in it, shall fall out.
1 Kings 13:4 And when the kynge hearde the saying of the man of God which he cryed agaynste the aulter in Bethel, he stretched oute hys hande from the aultare, sayinge: holde hym. And hys hande which he put forth towarde hym, dryed vp, that he coulde not pull it in agayne to hym,
1 Kings 13:5 and the aulter claue, and the ashes ran out of the aultar accordyng to the token which the man of God had geuen at the commaundemente of the Lorde.
1 Kings 13:6 And the kyng aunswered and sayd vnto the man of God: Oh pray vnto the Lorde thy God, & make intercession for me, that my hand maye be restored me agayne. And the man of God besought the Lord and hys hande came to hym agayne as well as before.
1 Kings 13:7 Then sayd the kyng vnto the man of god: come home wyth me, and refreshe thy selfe, & I wyll geue the a rewarde.
1 Kings 13:8 But the man of God aunswered the kynge: yf thou woldeste geue me halfe thyne house, I wolde not go wt the neyther wold I eat meat or dryncke water in thys place.
1 Kings 13:9 For so was it charged me, thorow the worde of God & sayde to me: eate no bread nor drincke water nor turne agayne by the same waye thou wentest.
1 Kings 13:10 And so he wente another waye and returned not by the waye he came to Bethel.
1 Kings 13:11 And there dwelt an olde Prophet in Bethel, whose sonnes came and tolde hym all the workes that the man of god had done that daye in Bethel, and the wordes which he spake vnto the kynge they told their father also.
1 Kings 13:12 And theyr father sayde to them: what waye went he? for hys sonnes had sene what waye the man of God wente which came from Iuda.
1 Kings 13:13 Then sayde he to his sonnes: sadle myne asse. And they sadled hym an asse. And he gat hym vp theron,
1 Kings 13:14 and wente after the man of God, and founde hym sittynge vnder an Ocke, and sayde vnto hym: arte thou the man of God that camest from Iuda? And he sayde, yea.
1 Kings 13:15 Then he sayde to hym: come home wyth me, and eate breade.
1 Kings 13:16 And the other sayd again I maye not returne wyth the, to go with the, neyther maye I eate breade or drynke water with the in thys place.
1 Kings 13:17 For it was sayd to me by the commaundement of the Lorde, eate no bread nor dryncke water in thys place, nor turne agayne by the waye thou wentest.
1 Kings 13:18 And the olde Prophet sayde vnto hym: I am a prophet as wel as thou, and an angel spake vnto me with the worde of the Lorde saying: bring hym agayne with the to thyne house, and let hym eate breade and drincke water, & yet lyed vnto hym.
1 Kings 13:19 And so the other went agayn wyth him & ate bread in his house & drancke water.
1 Kings 13:20 And as they sate at the table, the worde of the Lorde came vnto the prophete that brought hym agayne.
1 Kings 13:21 And he cryed vnto the man of God that came from Iuda, saying: thus sayth the Lorde: because thou hast dysobeyed the mouthe of the Lorde, and haste not kepte the commaundement which the Lorde thy God commaunded the,
1 Kings 13:22 but camest backe agayne & haste eaten breade, and droncke water in the place in whiche he bade that thou shuldeste eat no bread, nor drincke water: therfor thy carkasse shal not come vnto the sepulchre of thy fathers.
1 Kings 13:23 And when he had eaten breade & droncke, he sadled an asse for the Prophete whiche he had brought agayne.
1 Kings 13:24 And as he iorneyed a Lyon met hym by the waye, and slue hym, & his carkasse laye a longe in the waye, & the asse stode therby, & the Lyon stode by the course also.
1 Kings 13:25 And men that passed by, saw the carkasse caste a longe in the waye, and the lyon standyng therby, & went and tolde it in the toune where the olde Prophet dwelt.
1 Kings 13:26 And when the Prophete that brought hym backe agayne from the waye, hearde thereof, he sayde: it is the man of God whiche disobeyed the mouthe of the Lorde. And therfore the Lorde hath deliuered hym vnto the Lyon whiche hath rente hym, and slayne hym, accordyng to the word of the Lorde, whiche he sayde to hym.
1 Kings 13:27 And he sayde to hys sonne: sadle me an asse: & so they dyd.
1 Kings 13:28 And he wente and founde the bodye cast alonge in the waye, and the asse and the lyon standynge therbye. And the lyon had not eaten the carkasse nor hurte the asse.
1 Kings 13:29 And he toke vp the bodye of the man of God, and put it vpon the asse, and brought it agayne, & came to the cytye of the olde Prophete to lament him, and to burye hym.
1 Kings 13:30 And he layde hys bodye in hys owne graue, and lamented ouer hym, Oh my brother.
1 Kings 13:31 And when he had buryed hym, he spake to hys sonnes sayinge: when I am dead, se that ye burye me in the sepulchre wherein the man of GOD is buryed and laye my bones by hys.
1 Kings 13:32 For the sayinge which he cryed at the byddynge of the Lorde agaynste the aultare in Bethell, and agaynste all the houses of hylaultares which are in the cytyes of Samarye, shall come to passe.
1 Kings 13:33 How be it for all that, Ieroboam turned not from his wicked waye: but turned awaye & made of the lowest of the people priestes of the hyll aultares. Whosoeuer wold, he fylled theyr handes, and they became pryestes of the hylaultares.
1 Kings 13:34 And thys doynge was synne vnto the house of Ieroboam, euen to destroye it, & to put it away from of the face of the earth.

CHAPTER: 14

1 Kings 14:1 At that tyme Abiah the sonne of Ieroboam fell sicke.
1 Kings 14:2 And Ieroboam sayde vnto his wyfe: vp a feloweshyppe, & chaunge thyne apparel that thou be not knowen to be the wyfe of Ieroboam, and get the to Siloh. For there is Ahiah the Prophete whiche tolde me that I shulde be kyng ouer this people.
1 Kings 14:3 And take wyth the ten loues, and cracknelles and a cruse of honye, and go to hym: for he wyll tell the what shall come of the lad.
1 Kings 14:4 And Ieroboams wyfe dyd so: she arose and went to Siloh, and came to the house of Ahiah. But Ahiah coulde not se, for hys eyes were waxen dymme for age.
1 Kings 14:5 And the Lorde sayde vnto Ahiah: beholde, the wyfe of Ieroboam commeth, to questyon wyth the aboute her sonne whiche is sycke. Thys wyse and thys wyse aunswere her. And when she came, she feyned her selfe to be another woman.
1 Kings 14:6 But when Ahiah hearde the sounde of her fete as she come to the dore, he sayde: come in thou wyfe of Ieroboam, why feynest thou thy selfe to be another? I am sent to the a cruell messenger.
1 Kings 14:7 Go and tell Ieroboam, thus sayth the Lorde God of Israell: for as muche as I exalted the from amonge the comen people and made the prince ouer my people Israel,
1 Kings 14:8 and dyd rent the kyngdome awaye from the house of Dauid, and gaue it the: and thou haste not bene as was my seruaunte Dauid, whiche kept my commaundementes and folowed me wyth all hys herte, to do that onlye whiche semeth ryght in myne eyes:
1 Kings 14:9 but haste done euyll aboue all that were before the, and haste gone and made the other Gods and ymages of metal, to prouoke me, and hast caste me behynde thy backe:
1 Kings 14:10 therfore beholde I wil bring euyll vpon the house of Ieroboam, and wyll stryke from Ieroboam al that pysseth against the wall, and whatsoeuer is in preson or forsaken in Israel, and wyll take awaye the remnaunt of the house of Ieroboam, as men take awaye a dong hyll, tyll it be consumed.
1 Kings 14:11 And whosoeuer of Ieroboams house dye in the toune, hym shall the dogges eate, and hym that dyeth in the felde, shall the foules of the ayre eate: for the Lorde hath sayde it,
1 Kings 14:12 vp and get the to thyne house, and as sone as thy fote entereth the cytye, the lad shall dye.
1 Kings 14:13 Howe be it al Israell shall mourne hym, and burye hym, for thys onely of all Ieroboam shall come to the sepulchre, because in hym there is founde goodnesse towarde the Lorde God of Israell in the house of Ieroboam.
1 Kings 14:14 Moreouer the Lorde shall stere hym vp a kynge ouer Israell whiche shall destroye the house of Ieroboam in that daye. And what is that that is now in hande?
1 Kings 14:15 And the Lorde shal smyte Israel, as a rede that groweth in the water, is shaken, and wyl wede Israell oute of thys good lande which he gaue to theyr fathers, and wyll skatter them beyounde Euphrates, because they haue made them groues to angre the Lorde.
1 Kings 14:16 And he wyll geue Israell vp, because of the synne of Ieroboam wherewith he dyd synne and made Israell synne therto.
1 Kings 14:17 And Ieroboams wyfe arose, and departed, and went to Therzah, & be that she was come to the tresholde of the dore, the lad was dead.
1 Kings 14:18 And all Israel buryed hym, and lamented hym, accordyng to the worde of the Lorde which he spake by the hande of hys seruaunt Ahiah the Prophete.
1 Kings 14:19 And the rest of the deades of Ieroboam, how he warred, and howe, he raygned, are wrytten in the boke of the storyes of the kynges of Israell.
1 Kings 14:20 And the dayes whiche Ieroboam raygned, were .xxij. yeare. And then he rested wyth hys fathers, and Nadab hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
1 Kings 14:21 And Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon raygned in Iuda, and was .xli. yeare old when he beganne to raygne and raygned .xvij. year in Ierusalem the cytye whiche the Lorde had chosen oute of all the trybes of Israell, to put hys name there. Hys mothers name was Naamah an Ammonyte.
1 Kings 14:22 And Iuda wroughte wyckednesse in the syght of the Lord, and angred hym aboue all that theyr fathers dyd, wt theyr synne whiche they synned.
1 Kings 14:23 For they also made them hyll aulters & Images & groues on euerye hye hyl, and vnder euery grene tre.
1 Kings 14:24 And therto there was a stues of male chyldren in the lande, and they dyd according to all the abhomynacyons of the nacions whiche the Lorde cast out before the chyldren of Israel.
1 Kings 14:25 And the fyfte yeare of kynge Rehoboam came Sesack kynge of Egypte vp to Ierusalem
1 Kings 14:26 & toke awaye the treasure of the house of the Lorde, and the treasure of the kynges house & all that was to be had. And he toke away the shyldes of goulde which Salomon made.
1 Kings 14:27 In whose steade kynge Rehoboam made brasen shyldes, & put them in the kepynge of the captaynes of the garde which wayted at the dore of the kynges house.
1 Kings 14:28 And as ofte as the kynge wente into the house of the Lorde, they of his garde bare them, & euer brought them againe into the garde chambre.
1 Kings 14:29 The reste of the Actes of kynge Rehoboam and all he dyd, are wrytten in the boke of the Actes of the kynges of Iuda.
1 Kings 14:30 And there was warre betwene Rehoboam and Ieroboam al theyr lyues.
1 Kings 14:31 And Rehoboam layd hym to rest wyth hys fathers, & was buryed with hys fathers in the cyty of Dauid. And hys mothers name was Naamah an Ammonyte. And Abiam hys sonne raygned in hys Rome.

CHAPTER: 15

1 Kings 15:1 The .xviij. yeare of Kyng Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, raigned king Abiam ouer Iuda,
1 Kings 15:2 and ruled thre yeare in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Maacah the doughter of Abesalom.
1 Kings 15:3 And he walked in all the synnes of hys father which he dyd before hym, and hys herte was not whole with the Lorde hys God, as the herte of Dauid hys father.
1 Kings 15:4 Neuerthelesse for Dauids sake dyd the Lorde hys God geue hym a lyght in Ierusalem, that he set vp hys sonne after hym, to continue Ierusalem.
1 Kings 15:5 Because that Dauid dyd that which pleased the Lord, & turned from nothing that he commaunded hym al the dayes of his lyfe, saue onely in the matter of Vrias the Hethite.
1 Kings 15:6 And there was warre betwene Rehoboam and Ieroboam as longe as he lyued.
1 Kings 15:7 And the rest of the deades of Abiam and all that he dyd, are wrytten in the boke of the dedes that were done in the dayes of the kynges of Iuda. And there was warre betwene Abiam and Ieroboam.
1 Kings 15:8 And Abiam rested with his fathers, & they buryed him in the cytie of Dauid. And Asa hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
1 Kings 15:9 The .xx. yeare of Ieroboam kynge of Israel beganne Asa to raigne ouer Iuda,
1 Kings 15:10 and ruled in Ierusalem .xli. yeare. And his mothers name was Maacah the doughter of Abesalom.
1 Kings 15:11 And Asa dyd that semed ryght in the eyes of the Lorde, lyke Dauid hys father.
1 Kings 15:12 And he made the stues of males departe the lande, and put awaye al the Idoles that his fathers had made.
1 Kings 15:13 And therto he put doune Maacah hys mother from bearing rule, because she had made an Idole in a groue. And Asa destroyed her Idole and burnt it by the broke Cedron.
1 Kings 15:14 But he put not doune the hyllaulters. Neuerthelesse Asas herte was whole with the Lorde al hys dayes.
1 Kings 15:15 And he brought in that hys father had dedicate, and the thynges dedicate vnto the house of the Lorde, syluer, golde, and Iewelles.
1 Kings 15:16 And there was warre betwene Asa and Baasa kynge of Israell al their dayes.
1 Kings 15:17 And Baasa king of Israel went vp against Iuda & buylt Ramah, because that he woulde let none of Asas people kynge of Iuda go in or out.
1 Kings 15:18 Then Asa toke all the syluer and goulde that was lefte in the treasure of the house of the Lorde, and al the treasure of the kynges house and delyuered it vnto his seruauntes, and sent them to Benhadad the sonne of Tabremon the sonne of Hezion kynge of Siria, that dwelt at Damasco, saying:
1 Kings 15:19 there is a bounde betwene the and me as was betwene thy father and myne. Therfore I sende the bothe golde and syluer for a gyfte, that thou go, & breake the appointment betwene the. And Baasa kinge of Israel, that he maye departe from me.
1 Kings 15:20 And Benhadad herkened vnto kynge Asa, and sent the captaynes of the hostes whiche he had against the cities of Israel and smote Ahian, Dan, Abel called Beth Maacah and all Cerenoth with all the lande of Nephthali.
1 Kings 15:21 And when Baasa hearde that he lefte buyldinge of Ramah and dwelt in Therzah.
1 Kings 15:22 Then kyng Asa made a proclamacyon thorowout all Iuda, that none shoulde be excused. And they toke the stones of Ramah, & the tymber wherwyth Baasa had buylt, & kynge Asa buylt therwyth Gabaah in Beniamin and Mazphah.
1 Kings 15:23 And the remnaunt of al the deades of Asa and of al his myght and of al that he did, and the cities whyche he buylt, are wrytten in the chronicles of the actes done in the daies of the kynges of Iuda. Neuerthelater in hys olde age he was diseased in his fete.
1 Kings 15:24 And Asa laid him to rest with his fathers, and was buryed with his fathers in the cytye of Dauid his father. And Iehosophat hys sonne raygned in his roume.
1 Kings 15:25 And Nadab the sonne of Ieroboam beganne to raygne vpon Israel the seconde yeare of Asa kyng of Iuda, and raygned vpon Israel two yeare.
1 Kings 15:26 And he dyd euyll in the syght of the Lorde and walked in the waye of hys father & in hys sinne wherwith he made Israel sinne.
1 Kings 15:27 But Baasa the sonne of Ahiah of the house of Isacar conspired agaynst him, & slue him at Gebethon a citie of the Philistines for Nadab and all Israel laye at seage before Gebethon.
1 Kings 15:28 And it was the third yeare of Asa kinge of Iuda, when Baasa slue him, and raygned in his steade.
1 Kings 15:29 And as sone as he was kynge, he slue all the house of Ieroboam and lefte hym naught that brethed, vntyll he had put him cleane out, agreyng vnto the sayinge of the Lorde whiche he spake by hys seruaunt Ahiah the Silonite,
1 Kings 15:30 for the synne of Ieroboam wherwith he synned and made Israel synne, and for his angeringe wherwyth he angred the Lorde God of Israel.
1 Kings 15:31 The reste of the deades of Nadab, and all he dyd, are written in the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.
1 Kings 15:32 And there was warre betwene Asa and Baasa kynge of Israell all theyr dayes.
1 Kings 15:33 In the thirde yeare of Isa kynge of Iuda, Baasa the sonne of Ahiah beganne to raygne ouer all Israel in Therzah, and contynued .xxiiij. year.
1 Kings 15:34 And he did that which displeaseth the Lorde, for he walked in the waye of Ieroboam and in hys synne wherwith he made Israel synne.

CHAPTER: 16

1 Kings 16:1 Then came the worde of the Lorde to Iehu the sonne of Hanani agaynst Baasa sayinge:
1 Kings 16:2 for as muche as I exalted the out of the dust & made the captayne ouer my people Israel, and thou hast walked in the waye of Ieroboam, and hast made my people Israell synne, to angre me wyth their synne:
1 Kings 16:3 therfore I wyl make cleane ryddance of Baasa and of al his house, and wil make his house like the house of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat.
1 Kings 16:4 And he that dieth of Baasa in the citie, hym shall dogges eate, and him that dieth in the feldes, shall the foules of the ayre eate.
1 Kings 16:5 The reste of the deades of Baasa, & what he dyd, and his power, are wrytten in the boke of the historyes of the kynges of Israel.
1 Kings 16:6 And Baasa fell on slepe wyth hys fathers & was buryed in Therzah. And Elah hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
1 Kings 16:7 And therto thorow the Prophete Iehu the sonne of Hanani, the word of the lorde came against Baasa & agaynste hys house, because of al the wyckednesse that he did in the sight of the lorde in angerynge hym wyth the workes of his handes, that he shoulde be lyke the house of Ieroboam, because he had kylled Nabat.
1 Kings 16:8 The .xxvi. year of Asa king of Iuda beganne Elah the sonne of Baasa to raygne ouer Israell in Therzah, and contynued two year.
1 Kings 16:9 And hys seruaunt Zamri captayn of halfe his charettes, conspyred against him, as he was in Therzah drinkynge of strouge dryncke, in the house of Arza stuard of his house in Therzah.
1 Kings 16:10 And Zamri came and smote hym and killed him the .xxvij. yeare of Asa kyng of Iuda, and raygned in his steade.
1 Kings 16:11 And as sone as he was kyng, and sat on hys seate, he slue al the house of Baasa and lefte not a pysser agaynste a wall. And therto he slue all hys kynne and frendes,
1 Kings 16:12 and so Zamri destroyed all the house of Baasa, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde whyche he spake to Baasa thorowe Iehu the Prophet,
1 Kings 16:13 for all the synnes of Baasa and synnes of Elah his sonne, wherwyth they sinned & made Israell synne, to angre the Lorde of Israel with their vanities.
1 Kings 16:14 The rest of the deades of Elah and al he dyd, are wrytten in the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.
1 Kings 16:15 The .xxvij. yeare of Asa Kynge of Iuda, Zamry raygned .vij. dayes in Therzah, the people besegynge Gebethon a citie of the Philistines.
1 Kings 16:16 And when the people that laye in the seage, hearde saie how Zamri had conspired, and how he had slayne the kinge also: then all Israell made Amri the captaine of the men of warre kynge that same daie ouer Israel euen in the hoste.
1 Kings 16:17 And Amri departed from Gebethon and al Israel wyth him, and beseged Therzah.
1 Kings 16:18 And when Zamri sawe that the cytye muste nedes be taken, he went into the pallayse of the kinges house, and set the kynges house a fire vpon him selfe, and there dyed,
1 Kings 16:19 for hys synnes whiche he synned in doynge wyckednesse in the syght of the Lorde, and for walkynge in the waye of Ieroboam and in hys synnes whyche he dyd and made Israel synne.
1 Kings 16:20 The rest of the Actes of Zamri and the treason that he wrought, are wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kinges of Israel.
1 Kings 16:21 Moreouer that same ceason was Israel deuyded in twayn, for halfe the people folowed Thebni the sonne of Gineth, to make hym kynge. And the other halfe folowed Amri.
1 Kings 16:22 But the people that folowed Amri, preuayled against them that folowed Thebni the sonne of Gineth. And so Thebny dyed and Amri raygned.
1 Kings 16:23 The .xxxi. yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, beganne Amri to raygne ouer Israel .xij. yeare, and he ruled .vi. yeare in Therzah.
1 Kings 16:24 And he bought the hyl of Samaria of one Semar for two hundred talentes of syluer, and buylt in the hyl, & called the name of the cyty which he had built Samaria after the name of Semar the Lorde of the hyll.
1 Kings 16:25 And thys Amri wrought wyckednesse in the eyes of the Lord worsse then all that were before him,
1 Kings 16:26 and walked in all the wayes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, and in hys synne wherwith he made Israell synne, to angre the Lorde God of Israel wyth their vanities.
1 Kings 16:27 The rest of the actes of Amri which he did, and his power that he vsed, are wrytten in the chronicles of the kynges of of Israel.
1 Kings 16:28 And Amri layde hym to rest with hys fathers, and was buryed in Samaria, & Ahab hys sonne raygned in his steade.
1 Kings 16:29 The .xxxviij. yeare of Asa kynge of Iuda, beganne Ahab the sonne of Amri to raygne ouer Israel, and raygned in Samaria .xxij. yeare.
1 Kings 16:30 And he displeased the Lord aboue all that were before him.
1 Kings 16:31 For it semed him a light thinge to walke in the synne of Ieroboam. But toke Iezabel the doughter of Ethbaal, kinge of the Sidonites to wyfe, and went & serued Baal and bowed vnto him.
1 Kings 16:32 And he rered an aultare to Baal in the house of Baal, whyche he had made in Samaria.
1 Kings 16:33 And Ahab made a groue, and proceded ferther in angerynge the Lorde God of Israell, then all the kynges of Israel that were before him.
1 Kings 16:34 In hys daies Hiel of Bethel buylt Iericho. And it coste him Amram his eldest sonne when he layde the foundacyon, and hys youngest sonne when he set vp the gates, agreyng vnto the worde of the Lorde whyche he spake by Iosua the sonne of Nun.

CHAPTER: 17

1 Kings 17:1 And Eliah the Thesbite whyche was of the enhabiters of Galaad saide vnto Ahab: as truly as the Lorde God of Israel lyueth, before whome I stande, there shal be neyther dewe nor rayne these yeares, saue as I appoynt it.
1 Kings 17:2 And the word of God came to him saying:
1 Kings 17:3 get the hence and turne the eastwarde, & hyde thy selfe in the broke Karith, that lyeth before Iordan,
1 Kings 17:4 dryncke of the ryuer for I haue commaunded the rauens to fede the herte.
1 Kings 17:5 And he went and dyd accordynge vnto the worde of the Lorde: he went and dwelt by the broke Karith that lyeth before Iordan.
1 Kings 17:6 And the rauens brought hym breade and fleshe euery mornyng and euery euenynge, and he drancke of the broke.
1 Kings 17:7 And it chaunced after a whyle that the broke dried vp, because there fell no rayne vpon the earth.
1 Kings 17:8 Then came the worde of the Lord vnto him sayinge:
1 Kings 17:9 vp, and get the to Sarephtha a citie of Sidon, and dwell there. Behold I haue commaunded a wydow there to sustayne the.
1 Kings 17:10 And he arose and went to Sarephtha. And when he came to the gate of the cytie, there was a wydowe there gatheringe stickes. And he called to her and sayd: fet me I pray the, a litle water in a dyshe that I may drincke.
1 Kings 17:11 And as she went to fet it, he cryed to her and sayde: bringe me I praie the, a morsel of bread in thyne hande.
1 Kings 17:12 And she answered: as surely as the lorde thy God lyueth, I haue no breade, but euen an handfull of mele in a pytcher, and a lytle oyle in a cruse. And se, I haue gathered a few styckes for to go & bake it for my and my sonne, that we maye eate it, and then dye.
1 Kings 17:13 And Eliah sayde vnto her: feare not, but go and do as thou hast sayde: but make me therof a lytle cake fyrst of all, and brynge it out to me: and afterwarde make for the and thy sonne.
1 Kings 17:14 For thus sayeth the God of Israel: the pitcher of mele shal not be wasted neither shall thy oyle cruse be withoute oyle, vntil the Lorde haue sent rayne vpon the earthe.
1 Kings 17:15 And she went and dyd as Eliah bad. And she and he and her house dyd eate a good space,
1 Kings 17:16 & the pitcher of mele wasted not, neyther was the oyle cruse withoute oyle accordynge to the worde of the Lorde whyche he spake thorowe Eliah.
1 Kings 17:17 And after these thinges, it happened that the sonne of the wyfe of the house fell sycke. And his sicknesse was so sore, that there was no breath left in him.
1 Kings 17:18 Then saide she vnto Eliah: what haue I done with the, O thou man of God? arte thou come vnto me, that my sinne shoulde be tought on & my sonne slayne?
1 Kings 17:19 And Eliah sayd vnto her: geue me thy sonne. And he toke hym out of her lappe and caryed him vp into a lofte where he laye, and layde him vpon hys owne bed,
1 Kings 17:20 and called vnto the Lorde and sayde: O Lord my God, hast thou bene so euyl vnto the wedowe wyth whome I soiourne, that thou hast slayne her sonne?
1 Kings 17:21 And he stretched him selfe vpon the lad thre tymes, and called vnto the Lorde and sayde: O Lorde my God, let the laddes soule come vnto hym agayne.
1 Kings 17:22 And the Lorde hearde the voyce of Eliah, and the soule of the lad came into hym agayne, and he reuiued.
1 Kings 17:23 And Eliah toke the boye and brought him doune oute of the chambre into the house and delyuered him vnto hys mother and sayde: se, thy sonne lyueth.
1 Kings 17:24 Then the wyfe sayde to Eliah: nowe I knowe that thou art a Gods man, and that the worde of the Lorde in thy mouth, is truthe.

CHAPTER: 18

1 Kings 18:1 And at the last the worde of the Lorde came to Eliah the thyrde yeare sayinge: go, shewe thy self vnto Ahab, that I may sende raine vpon the earthe.
1 Kings 18:2 And Eliah went to shew him self vnto Ahab for there was a great famishement in Samaria.
1 Kings 18:3 Wherfore Ahab called Abdiah the gouerner of hys house: whyche Abdiah feared God greatlye:
1 Kings 18:4 in so muche that when Iezabel destroyed the Prophetes of the Lorde, he toke an hundred of the Prophetes and hyd them, fyftye in one caue, and fyftye in another, and prouyded breade and water for them.
1 Kings 18:5 And Ahab sayde vnto Abdiah: walke thorow the lande, vnto al fountaynes of water and vnto all brokes, to se whether any grasse maye be founde, that we maye saue the horses and the Mules, that we destroye not the beastes.
1 Kings 18:6 And they deuyded the lande betwene them to walke thorow it. Ahab went one way by hym selfe, and Abdiah went another by hym selfe.
1 Kings 18:7 And it chaunced as Abdiah went in the waye that Eliah met him. And Abdiah knew hym and fell on his face and sayde: arte not thou my Lorde Eliah.
1 Kings 18:8 And he said vnto him: I am he. Go, and tel Ahab that Eliah is here.
1 Kings 18:9 And the other answered: what haue I synned that thou wouldest delyuer me into the hande of Ahab, to sley me?
1 Kings 18:10 As surely as the Lorde thy God lyueth, there is no nacyon or kyngedome, whether my Lord hath not sent, to seke the. And when they saide thou wast not there he toke an othe of the kyngedome & nacyon, because he founde the not.
1 Kings 18:11 And now thou sayest: go and tell, thy Lord Eliah is here.
1 Kings 18:12 And as sone as I am gone from the, the spyryte of the Lorde shal cary the away, whether I shall not knowe, and then I haue gone and tolde Ahab, and then he can not fynde the, he shall sley me. And yet I thy seruaunt haue feared the Lorde from my younge age.
1 Kings 18:13 Was it not tolde my Lorde, what I dyd, when Iezabel slue the Prophetes of the Lorde how I hydde an hundred of the Lordes Prophetes, fyfty in one caue and as many in another, & prouyded them of breade and water?
1 Kings 18:14 And yet now thou sayest, go shewe thy Lorde, that Eliah is here, that he shoulde sley me.
1 Kings 18:15 Then Eliah sayde: as truly as the Lorde of Hostes lyueth, before whom I stande: I wil shewe my selfe vnto hym thys day.
1 Kings 18:16 And thervpon Abdiah went to Ahab and told him. And Ahab went agaynst Eliah.
1 Kings 18:17 And when Ahab sawe Eliah, he sayd vnto hym: art thou he that troubleth Israel?
1 Kings 18:18 And he sayde: it is not I that trouble Israel, but thou and thy fathers house, in that ye haue forsaken the commaundementes of the Lord, and hast folowed Baal.
1 Kings 18:19 But now sende and gather to me all Israel vnto mount Carmel and the Prophetes of Baal foure hundred and fyfty, and the Prophetes of the groues four hundred, which eate of Iezabels table.
1 Kings 18:20 And Ahab sent for all the children of Israel and gathered the prophetes vnto mount Carmel.
1 Kings 18:21 And Eliah came vnto all the people and sayde: why halte ye betwene two opinions? Yf the Lorde be very God, folowe him: or yf Baal be he, then folowe hym. And the people answered him not one worde.
1 Kings 18:22 Then sayde Eliah vnto the people: I only remayne of the Lordes Prophetes, & Baals Prophetes are foure hundred and fyftye.
1 Kings 18:23 Let two oxen be geuen vs, and let them chose the one and cutte hym in peces and lay him on wood, and put no fyre vnder. And I wyll dresse the other & put him on wood, and wil put no fyre vnder.
1 Kings 18:24 And call ye on the name of youre God, and I wil cal on the name of the Lorde. And then the God that answereth by fyre, he is the very God. And al the people sayde: it is wel spoken.
1 Kings 18:25 Then sayde Eliah vnto the Prophetes of Baal: chose you an oxe and dresse him fyrst (for ye are many) and call on the name of youre God, but put no fyre vnder.
1 Kings 18:26 And they toke the oxe that was geuen them and dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from mournynge to none sayinge: O Baal heare vs. But there was no voyce nor answere. And they lepte aboute the aulter that they had made.
1 Kings 18:27 And at none Eliah mocked them and sayd: call loud, (for he is a God: but he is talking or occupied or in the waye, or happely he slepeth) that he may awake.
1 Kings 18:28 And they cryed loud, and cut them selues, as their maner was, wyth knyues & launcers, tyl the bloude folowed on them.
1 Kings 18:29 And when midday was passed, they prophesyed vntil it was time to offer. But there was neyther voyce nor answere nor any that regarded them.
1 Kings 18:30 Then Eliah sayde to all the folke: come to me. And all the people came to hym. And he mended the aulter of the Lorde that was broken.
1 Kings 18:31 And he toke .xij. stones accordynge to the nombre of the .xij. trybes of the sonnes of Iacob, vnto whom the word of the lord came sayinge: Israel shalbe thy name.
1 Kings 18:32 And wyth the stones he made an aultare in the name of the Lord. And he made a gutter round about the aulter, able to receyue two peckes of corne.
1 Kings 18:33 And he put the wood in order, and hewed the oxe in peces, and put hym on the wood, and sayde: fyl foure pytchers with water, and powre it on the sacrifice and on the wood.
1 Kings 18:34 And he said: do so againe. And they dyd so againe. Then he sayde: do it the thyrde tyme. And they dyd so the thirde tyme.
1 Kings 18:35 And the water ranne round about the aultare, and the gutter was full of water also.
1 Kings 18:36 And when offeringe time was come, Eliah the prophete went to and sayde: Lord God of Abraham, Isaac and of Israel, let it be knowen thys daye, that thou art the God in Israel, and that I am thy seruaunt, and that I do al these thinges at thy commaundement.
1 Kings 18:37 Heare me O lorde, heare me, that this people may know, that thou lord, art the God, and that thou hast turned their hertes backward.
1 Kings 18:38 And there fell fire from the Lorde, and consumed the sacryfice & the wood and the stones & the dust, & lycked vp the water that was in the gutter.
1 Kings 18:39 And when all the people sawe that, they fel on theyr faces & sayde: the Lorde he is God, the lord he is God.
1 Kings 18:40 Then sayd Eliah vnto them: lay handes on the Prophetes of Baal, let not one of them escape. And when they had taken them, Eliah brought them doune vnto the broke of Kison, and slue them there.
1 Kings 18:41 Then Eliah sayde vnto Ahab, get the vp, and eate and dryncke, for ther is a sound of muche rayne.
1 Kings 18:42 And when Ahab went vp to eate & to dryncke, Eliah went vp to the toppe of mount Carmel. And bowed hym selfe to the earthe, & put hys face betwene hys knees,
1 Kings 18:43 and sayd to hys seruaunt: go vp and loke towarde the sea. And he went vp and loked, and saide: here is nothing. And he sayd: go agayn .vij. tymes.
1 Kings 18:44 And the seuenth time he sayde: beholde, there aryseth a lytle cloude out of the sea, lyke the palme of a mannes hande. Then he sayde: go and saye to Ahab, put the horsses in the charet, and get the doune that the rayne stoppe the not.
1 Kings 18:45 And within a lytle whyle, heauen was blacke wyth cloudes and winde, and there was a great rayne. And Ahab rode and went to Iezrahel.
1 Kings 18:46 And the hande of the Lorde was on Eliah, and he gyrdled vp hys loynes and ranne before Ahab, tyl they came to Iezrahel.

CHAPTER: 19

1 Kings 19:1 And Ahab tolde Iezabel, all that Eliah had done, and al together how he had slayne the Prophetes with the swerde.
1 Kings 19:2 Then Iezabel sent a messenger vnto Eliah sayinge: so do God to me and so therto, except I make thy soule lyke one of theirs, by to morow this tyme:
1 Kings 19:3 when he sawe that, he arose and went for his lyfe, and came to Bersabe in Iuda, and left hys lad there.
1 Kings 19:4 And he went a dayes iourney into the wildernesse, and when he was come sat doune vnder a Ginaper tree, and desyred for his soule, that he myght dye, and saide, it is nowe ynough O Lorde, take my soule, for I am no better then my fathers.
1 Kings 19:5 And as he laye and slepte vnder the Ginaper tree: beholde, there came an Aungell and touched him, and sayd vnto him: vp and eate.
1 Kings 19:6 And he loked aboute him: and se, there was a loffe of broyled breade and a cruse of water at hys heade. And he ate and drancke & layde hym doune agayne to slepe.
1 Kings 19:7 And the Aungell of the Lorde came agayne the seconde tyme, and touched him, and sayde: vp and eate, for thou hast a longe iourney to go.
1 Kings 19:8 And he arose & dyd eate and drincke and went in the strength of that meate fourtye dayes and fourtye nyghtes, vnto Horeb the mount of God,
1 Kings 19:9 & entred there into a caue & lodged there al night. And then the word of the lord came to him and sayde: what doest thou here, Eliah?
1 Kings 19:10 And he answered: I haue bene thorow angry for the Lorde God of hostes sake. For the children of Israel haue forsake thy couenaunt, & haue broken doune thyne aultars and slayne the Prophetes with the swerde, and I onlye am lefte, and they seke my soule to haue it to.
1 Kings 19:11 And he sayde: come out and stande before the Lorde. And beholde, the lorde went by and a myghty stronge wynde that rent the mountaynes, and brake the rockes before him. But the Lorde was not in the wynde. And after the wynde came an earthquake. But the lorde was not in the earthquake.
1 Kings 19:12 And after the earthquake, came fyre: but the Lord was not in the fyre. And after the fyre, came a smal stil voice.
1 Kings 19:13 And when Eliah hearde it, he couered hys face wyth hys mantle, and went out an stode in the mouth of the caue. And se, there came a voyce vnto him, and sayde: what doest thou here Eliah?
1 Kings 19:14 And he answered: I was gelouse for the Lorde God of hostes sake: because the children of Israel haue forsaken thine appointment and haue cast doune thyne aultars and slayne thy Prophetes with the swerde, and I only am lefte, and they seke my soule to haue it.
1 Kings 19:15 Then the Lorde sayde vnto hym: go and turne thy waye to the wyldernesse of Damasco, and go and annoynte Hazael to be kynge of Siria.
1 Kings 19:16 And Iehu the sonne of Namsi, annoynte to be kinge ouer Israel. And Elizeus the sonne of Saphat of Abel Mehulah annoynt to be Prophete in thy roume.
1 Kings 19:17 And who so eskapeth the swerde of Hazael, hym shall Iehu slaye: and yf any man scape the swerde of Iehu, hym shall Elizeus slaye.
1 Kings 19:18 And therto I haue lefte me seuen thousande in Israel, of whyche neuer man bowed his knees vnto Baal, nor kissed him with his mouthe.
1 Kings 19:19 And he departed thence, and founde Elizeus the sonne of Saphat plowinge wyth twelue yocke of oxen before him, and he with the twelue. And Eliah went to hym and cast his mantel vpon him.
1 Kings 19:20 And he lefte the oxen & ranne after Eliah and sayd: let me I pray the kisse my father and my mother, and then I will folow the. And he saide to him: go backe againe, for what haue I done to the?
1 Kings 19:21 And he went backe againe from after him, and toke a yocke of oxen and slue them, and dressed the fleshe with the instrumentes of the oxen and gaue it the people, and they did eate. And then he arose and went after Eliah and ministred vnto him.

CHAPTER: 20

1 Kings 20:1 And Benhadad kynge of Siria gathered al his hoste together, and .xxxij. kinges wyth hym, with horse and charet, and went vp and beseged Samaria, and warred agaynst it.
1 Kings 20:2 And he sent messengers to Ahab kinge of Israel into the citie, and sayde vnto him: thus sayth Benhadad:
1 Kings 20:3 Thy siluer & goulde is myne, and the best of thy wyues, and the best of thy children be myne.
1 Kings 20:4 And the kinge of Israel answered and saide: my lorde kinge accordinge to thy sayinge: I am thyne with all I haue.
1 Kings 20:5 And the messengers came agayne to Ahab and sayde: thus saith Benhadad: I haue therfore sent vnto the, sayinge: delyuer then thy syluer and thy goulde, and thy wiues, and thy children.
1 Kings 20:6 Or else I wil sende my seruauntes vnto the by to morow this tyme: & they shal cherse thyne house, and the houses of thy seruauntes, whiche shall take all that is glorious in thyne eyes, and brynge it awaye wt them.
1 Kings 20:7 Then the kynge of Israel sent for the elders of the lande and sayed: take hede I pray you, and se, howe this felowe goeth aboute myscheue. For he sent vnto me, for my wiues and my children, & my siluer and my goulde, and I denyed him nothinge of it.
1 Kings 20:8 And all the elders of Israel and all the people sayde: herken not to him, nor consent.
1 Kings 20:9 Whervpon he sayde vnto the messengers of Benhadad: tell my Lorde the kinge, al that he sent for the fyrst tyme, that I wyll do: but this request I maye not do. And the messengers departed and brought hym worde.
1 Kings 20:10 Then Benhadad sent vnto him and said: thus do the Gods to me and so therto, yf the dust of Samaria be ynough for al the people that folow me, that euery man maye haue an handfull.
1 Kings 20:11 And the kynge of Israel answered and sayd: tell hym, let not him that putteth on hys harnesse bost him self, as he that putteth it of.
1 Kings 20:12 And when Benhadad hearde that tidinges, as he and the kinges were drinckinge in the pauilions, he sayde vnto his seruauntes: put ye in araye. And they put them selues in araye against the cytye.
1 Kings 20:13 And beholde there came a Prophet vnto Ahab kynge of Israel, and saide to him: thus sayth the Lorde: Seyst thou all this greate multitude? beholde, I will delyuer them into thyne hande this daye, that thou mayest knowe that I am the Lorde.
1 Kings 20:14 And Ahab sayde: by whome? And he sayd: thus sayeth the Lorde: euen by the men of the gouernoures of the shires And Ahab sayde: who shall ioyne batayle? And he sayde: thou.
1 Kings 20:15 Then he nombred the men of the gouerners of the shires: and they were two hundred and .xxxij. And after them he nombred al the people, and al the children of Israel were seuen thousand.
1 Kings 20:16 And they went out at none when Benhadad was drinckynge stronge dryncke in the pauilions with the two and thyrtye kynges that holpe hym.
1 Kings 20:17 And the men of the shrifes of the shires went out fyrste. And Benhadad sent out, and they shewed him saying: there came men out e Samaria.
1 Kings 20:18 And he sayd: yf they come out of for peace, take them aliue. And also yf they come for warre take them yet alyue.
1 Kings 20:19 And when those men of the shrifes of the shires were come out of the citie and the host after them, they slue euery one of them his man.
1 Kings 20:20 And the Siriens fled, and Israel folowed after them. And Benhadad the kinge of Siria scaped on a horsse with hys horsemen.
1 Kings 20:21 And the kinge of Israel went out and smote horsse and charet, & slue a great slaughter of the Sirians.
1 Kings 20:22 Then there came a Prophete to the kinge of Israel, and sayde to him: go forth and play the man, be wyse & take hede what thou doest for when the yeare is about, the kinge of Siria will come against the agayne.
1 Kings 20:23 Then saide the seruauntes of the kinges of Siria to him: the Gods of the hylles are their Gods, and therfore they had the better of vs. But let vs fight with them in the playne, and for what ye will, we shall haue the better of them.
1 Kings 20:24 And this do: take the kinges awaye euery man out of his place, and put dukes in their roumes.
1 Kings 20:25 And thou nombre the an hoste, lyke the hoste that thou hast loste, and horse for horse, and charet for charet, and let vs fyght wyth them in the plaine, and for a wager, we get the better of them. And the king herkened vnto their voyce and dyd euen so.
1 Kings 20:26 And as sone as the yeare was aboute, Benhadad nombred the Siriens and went vp to Aphek to warre wyth Israel.
1 Kings 20:27 And the children of Israel were nombred and prouided of vytayle, and went against them, and pitched before them lyke two lytle flockes of kiddes: but the Sirians fylled the countrey.
1 Kings 20:28 Then there came a man of God and sayde vnto the kyng of Israel: thus sayeth the Lorde? Because the Siriens saye, the Lorde is but a God of the hylles, and not God of the valeys to: therfore wyl I delyuer all thys great multytude into thyne hande that ye may know that I am the Lorde.
1 Kings 20:29 And they pitched one ouer agaynst the other .vij. dayes, and the seuenth day ioyned batayle. And the chyldren of Israell slue of the Sirians an hundred thousande fote men in one daye.
1 Kings 20:30 And the reste fled to Aphek into the cytye. And there fel a walle vpon .xxvij. thousande of them that were lefte. And Benhadad fled and went into the cytye, from chambre to chambre.
1 Kings 20:31 Then sayde hys seruauntes vnto hym: beholde, we haue hearde saye, that the kynges of the house of Israel are mercifull kynges. Let vs put sacke cloth aboute our Loines and ropes about oure heades, and go out to the kynge of Israel: happlye he wil saue thy lyfe.
1 Kings 20:32 And they gyrded sacke clothe aboute theyr loynes, and put ropes about their heades, and went oute to the kynge of Israel, and sayde: thy seruaunt Benhadad sayth: I pray the, let me lyue. And he sayde: is he yet alyue? what he is my brother.
1 Kings 20:33 And they toke that word for good lucke and hastely caught it out of hys mouth and sayde? ye thy brother Benhadad. Then he sayde: go and brynge hym. And Benhadad came out to hym, and the other toke him vp into the charet.
1 Kings 20:34 And Benhadad saide: the cytyes whiche my father toke from thy father, I wyll restore agayne. And thou shalt make streates for the in Damasco, as my father dyd in Samaria. And I wyll make an appointment with the and sent the away. And so made an appoyntment with him and sent hym awaye.
1 Kings 20:35 Then a certaine man of the children of the Prophetes said vnto his felow with the word of the Lorde, smyte me I pray the. And the man woulde not smyte him.
1 Kings 20:36 And he sayde, because thou hast not obeyed the voyce of the Lorde: beholde, as sone as thou arte departed from me, a lyon shal slaye the. And as sone as he was departed from him, a lyon found him and slue him.
1 Kings 20:37 Then he founde another man & sayd to him: smyte me I pray the. And the man gaue him a good stripe and wounded him.
1 Kings 20:38 And the Prophete wente forth & wayted for the kynge by the waye, and put ashes vpon his eyes, and put him selfe out of knowledge.
1 Kings 20:39 And when the kinge came by, he cryed vnto hym and sayde: thy seruaunt went out in the myddes in the battel. And se, there was one beganne to flee. And there came a man to me and sayde: kepe this man. And yf he be missed thy lyfe shall go for hys, or else thou shalte paye a talent of syluer.
1 Kings 20:40 And as thy seruaunt had here and there to do, he was gone. And the kynge of Israel sayde vnto hym: euen so shall the iudgement be as thou hast defyned it thy selfe.
1 Kings 20:41 And he hasted and toke the ashes away from his eyes, and the kinge of Israel knewe hym, that he was of the Prophetes.
1 Kings 20:42 And he sayde vnto the kinge: thus sayeth the Lorde: because thou hast let go a man, that ought to haue dyed, thy lyfe shal go for his lyfe, and thy people for hys.
1 Kings 20:43 And the kynge of Israell went to hys house waywarde and heauy, and entred into Samaria.

CHAPTER: 21

1 Kings 21:1 After these thynges were done, it chaunced that Naboth the Iezrahelite had a vyneyard in Iezrahel harde by the palace of Ahab kynge of Samaria.
1 Kings 21:2 And Ahab spake vnto Naboth sayinge: let me haue thy vineyard, to make me a garden of yerbes therof, because it lieth so nye my house: and I will geue the a better vineyarde for it: or yf it playse the, I wyll geue the the worth of it in syluer.
1 Kings 21:3 But Naboth sayde to Ahab: the lord forbyd that from me, that I shoulde geue the enheritaunce of my fathers vnto the.
1 Kings 21:4 Then went Ahab vnto his house wayward and euyl apaide, because of the wordes which Naboth the Iezrahelite had spoken to hym saying. I will not geue to the the enheritaunce of my fathers. And he layde him doune vpon hys bed and turned awaye his face, & woulde eate no meate.
1 Kings 21:5 And then Iezabel his wyfe came to him, and said vnto him: why art thou so frowarde, that thou eatest no meate.
1 Kings 21:6 And he sayde vnto her: I spake vnto Naboth the Iezrahelite, and sayde vnto him: geue me thy vineyarde for syluer, or else yf thou wilt, I will geue the another vyneyarde for it. And he sayde: I will not geue the my vyneyarde.
1 Kings 21:7 Then sayde Iezabel hys wyfe vnto hym: what a goodly kingedome were thou able to make in Israel? vp and eate meate and sette thyne herte a rest, for I wyll geue the, the vineyarde of Naboth the Iezrahelite.
1 Kings 21:8 And she wrote a letter in Ahabs name and sealed it wt hys seale, and sent it vnto the elders and chefe men of his cytie that dwelt where Naboth dwelt.
1 Kings 21:9 And she wrote in the letter sayinge: proclayme fastyng and set Naboth on hye among the people,
1 Kings 21:10 and set two vnthriftes before him: and let them testifye agaynst hym sayinge: thou dyddest curse bothe God and the king: & vpon that carie him out & stone hym to death.
1 Kings 21:11 And the elders and nobles of the cities, whiche dwelt in hys citie, did as Iezabell had sent vnto them, and as it was written in the letter, whiche she had sent vnto them.
1 Kings 21:12 They proclamed fastynge, and set Naboth an hye amonge the people,
1 Kings 21:13 and there came in two vnthriftye persones and sate before him. And the two vnthriftye persones wytnesseth agaynst Naboth before the people sayinge: Naboth dyd curse God and the kinge. And vpon the they caryed him out of the cytye and stoned him wyth stones to death.
1 Kings 21:14 And then they sent to Iezabel saying: Naboth is stoned to death.
1 Kings 21:15 And when Iezabel hearde that Naboth was stoned to deathe, she said to Ahab: vp and take possession of the vyneiarde of Naboth, the Iezrahelite, whyche he denyed to geue the for syluer, for Naboth is not a liue, but dead.
1 Kings 21:16 And when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead. He stode vp to go doune to the vineyarde of Naboth the Iezrahelyte, to take possession of it.
1 Kings 21:17 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto Eliah the Thesbite saying,
1 Kings 21:18 vp and go doune to mete Ahab kynge of Israel whiche is in Samaria. Behold, he is in the vineiard of Naboth: for he is gone doune thither, to take possession of it.
1 Kings 21:19 And saye vnto him: thus saith the Lorde, thou hast killed & therto gotten possession. And saie moreouer vnto him, thus sayth the lord: in the place where dogges lapped the bloude of Naboth, shall dogges lappe euen thy bloude also.
1 Kings 21:20 And Ahab sayd to Eliah: hast thou founde me thine enemy at any time? and he saide: ye, because thou art vtterly geuen to worcke wyckednesse in the syghte of the lord.
1 Kings 21:21 Beholde, I will brynge euyl vpon the, & wyl make cleane ryddance of the, and wil destroy vnto Ahab all that pysseth agaynste the wal, and yf ought be presoned or forsaken in Israell:
1 Kings 21:22 and will make thyne house, lyke the house of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, and lyke the house of Baasa the sonne of Ahiah, for the angerynge wherwith thou hast angered, and made Israel synne.
1 Kings 21:23 And therto against Iezabel came the word of the lorde sayinge: dogges shall eate Iezabell, vnder the walles of Iezrael.
1 Kings 21:24 And he that dyeth of Ahab in the towne, hym shal dogges eate: and he that dyeth in the feldes, him shall the foules of the ayre eate.
1 Kings 21:25 For there was none at all lyke Ahab, that was so vtterly geuen to worcke wickednesse in the sight of the Lorde, and that because Iezabel his wyfe prycked hym forwarde.
1 Kings 21:26 And therfore he dyd exceding abhomynable, in folowynge Idoles, in all thynges lyke as dyd the Ammorites whyche the Lord cast oute before the chyldren of Israel.
1 Kings 21:27 When Ahab hearde those wordes, he rent his clothes and put sackecloth about his flesh, and fasted, and laye in sack, and went confortlesse.
1 Kings 21:28 And the word of the lorde came to Eliah the Thesbite sayinge:
1 Kings 21:29 seyst thou howe Ahab humbleth hym selfe before me? because he so submytteth hym selfe before me, I wil bryng that euil in hys daies: but in his sonnes daies I wyll brynge euyll vpon his house.

CHAPTER: 22

1 Kings 22:1 And they contynued thre yeare wythout warre betwene Siria and Israel.
1 Kings 22:2 And the thyrd yeare Iehosaphat kynge of Iuda, came to the kyng of Israel.
1 Kings 22:3 Then sayd the king of Israel vnto his seruauntes: know ye not that Ramoth in Galaad is oures, and we syt stylle and take it not out of the handes of the kinge of Siria?
1 Kings 22:4 And he sayde vnto Iehosaphat: wylt thou go with me to batayle, to Ramoth in Galaad? And Iehosaphat sayde vnto the kynge of Israel: I will be as thou art, and my people shall be as thyne, and my horsses as thyne.
1 Kings 22:5 And Iehosaphat sayde vnto the kynge of Israel, aske counsel I pray the of the Lorde to daye.
1 Kings 22:6 And then the kynge of Israell gathered of the Prophetes together, vpon a foure hundred men, and sayde vnto them: shall I go to Ramoth in Galaad to battayle, or be stylle? And they saide: go, for the Lorde shall delyuer it into the handes of the kynge.
1 Kings 22:7 And Iehosaphat sayde: is there neuer a Prophet of the Lordes here more, that we myght enquyre of him?
1 Kings 22:8 And the kynge of Israell sayde to Iehosaphat: there is yet one, by whome we maye aske counsel of the Lorde, one Micheah the sonne of Iemlah. But I hate hym: for he neuer prophesyeth good vnto me, but euyl. And Iehosaphat sayde: let not the kinge saye so.
1 Kings 22:9 Then the kynge of Israel called vnto one of his chamberlaynes and sayde: fet Micheah the sonne of Iemlah hyther attonce.
1 Kings 22:10 And the kynge of Israell and Iehosaphat the kinge of Iuda sat eyther in his seate and their apparell on them, in a voyde place besyde the entrynge of the gate of Samaria, & all the Prophetes prophesyinge before them.
1 Kings 22:11 And Zedekiah the sonne of Canaanah made hornes of yron and sayde, thus sayth the lord: with these hornes thou shalt wynowe the Sirians vntyll thou haue made an ende of them.
1 Kings 22:12 And all the Prophetes prophesyed euen so sayinge: go to Ramoth in Galaad & prosper, for the Lorde shall delyuer it into the handes of the kinge.
1 Kings 22:13 And the messenger that was gone to call Micheah, said vnto him: se, the wordes of the Prophetes speake good vnto the kynge with one voyce: let thy wordes I praie the, be lyke the wordes of one of them, and speake that is good.
1 Kings 22:14 And Mycheah sayde: as surely as the Lorde lyueth, what the Lorde putteth in my mouthe, that wil I speake.
1 Kings 22:15 And when he was come to the kynge, the kynge sayde to hym: Micheah, shall we go to Ramoth in Galaad to batayle, or shall we be still? And he sayde vnto him: go and prosper, the Lorde deliuer it into the handes of the kinge.
1 Kings 22:16 And the kynge saide vnto him, how often shall I adiure the, that thou tel me nothinge but truthe, in the name of the Lorde.
1 Kings 22:17 Then he sayde: I sawe all Israell scattered vpon the hylles, as shepe that haue no shepardes. And the Lorde sayde: those haue no mayster, let them returne, euery man to hys house in peace.
1 Kings 22:18 Then sayde the kynge of Israel to Iehosaphat: dyd I not tell the, that he woulde prophesye no good vnto me, but euil?
1 Kings 22:19 And Micheah saide: heare therfore the worde of the Lorde. I sawe the Lorde sytte on hys seate and al the company of heauen standinge aboute him, on his right hand and on his left.
1 Kings 22:20 And the Lorde sayd: who shal deceiue Ahab that he maye go and be slaine at Ramoth in Galaad, and one sayde on this maner and another on that.
1 Kings 22:21 Then came forthe a spyryte & stode before the Lorde and sayde: I wyll deceyue him.
1 Kings 22:22 And the Lorde saide: wherwyth? And he saide: I wil go out and be a false spirit in the mouthes of all his Prophetes. And the Lord sayde: thou shalt deceyue hym, and also preuayle, go forth and do euen so.
1 Kings 22:23 Now therfore beholde, the Lord hath put a lyinge spirit in the mouth of all these thy Prophetes: when in very deade the Lorde hath spoken euyll towarde the.
1 Kings 22:24 Then Zedechiah the sonne of Canaanah went to and smote Micheah on the cheke, and said: how is the spyryte of the Lorde gone from me, to speake in the?
1 Kings 22:25 And Micheah sayd: behold thou shalt se in that daye, when thou shalt go from chambre to chambre to hyde the.
1 Kings 22:26 And the kynge of Israel sayde: take Micheah, and carie him backe agayne vnto Amon the gouerner of the citie, and vnto Ioab the kynges sonne,
1 Kings 22:27 and saye: thus sayth the kinge. Put ye this felow in the preson house, and fede hym with breade and water straytlye, vntill I returne in peace.
1 Kings 22:28 Then Micheah sayde: yf thou come safe agayne, the Lorde hath not spoken in me. And he sayde moreouer, herken to ye people euery one of you.
1 Kings 22:29 And so the kynge of Israel and Iehosaphat the kinge of Iuda went vp to Ramoth in Galaad.
1 Kings 22:30 And the kinge of Israel sayde to Iehosaphat: chaunce the and get the to warre: but put on thyne own apparel. And the kyng of Israel chaunged hym selfe, and went to battel also.
1 Kings 22:31 But the Kynge of Siria had commaunded the capitaynes of hys charettes of whych he had .xxxij. sayinge: fight neyther with smal nor greate, saue wyth the kinge of Israel onlye.
1 Kings 22:32 And when the captaynes of the charettes sawe Iehosaphat, they thought he had bene the kinge of Israel, and therfore turned to him to fyght. But Iehosaphat cryed out.
1 Kings 22:33 And when the captaines of the charettes sawe that he was not the kinge of Israel, they turned backe from him.
1 Kings 22:34 And a certayne man drew a bow ignorantly and smote the kinge of Israel betwene the ribbes of his harnesse. Wherfore the kinge sayde vnto the dryuer of his charet, turne thy hande and carye me out of the host, for I am hurte.
1 Kings 22:35 And the battel encreased that daye, and the kynge continued in hys charet before the Sirians and dyed at euen. And the bloude ranne out of the wounde into the botome of the charet.
1 Kings 22:36 And there went a proclamacyon thorowe oute the Hoste, after the sunne was doune sayinge: euery man to his cytye and to hys own countreye.
1 Kings 22:37 And when the kynge of Israel was dead, they came to Samaria and buryed hym there.
1 Kings 22:38 And whyle they wasshed the charet in the pole of Samaria, the dogges licked vp hys bloude, and harlottes wasshed him accordynge vnto the worde of the Lorde whych he spake.
1 Kings 22:39 The rest of the deades of Ahab, and all he dyd, and the yuorye house whyche he made, and the cyties that he buylt, are written in the boke of the chronicles of the kinges of Israel.
1 Kings 22:40 And when Ahab was sayde to rest with hys fathers, Ohoziah hys soune raygned in hys steade.
1 Kings 22:41 Iehosaphat the sonne of Asa beganne to raygne vpon Iuda, the fourth yeare of Ahab kyng of Israel,
1 Kings 22:42 and was .xxxv. yeare old when he beganne to raygne, and raygned .xxv. year in Ierusalem. And his mothers name was Azubah the doughter of Salahi.
1 Kings 22:43 And he walked in all the wayes of Asa hys father & bowed not therfrom. But dyd that was right in the eyes of the Lorde. Onlye he dyd not put the hilaulters out of the waye: for the people offered, and burnt their sacryfices yet in the hylaulters.
1 Kings 22:44 And he had peace wyth the kynge of Israel.
1 Kings 22:45 And the rest of the deades of Iehosaphat, and the myght that he vsed, and how he warred, are wrytten in the boke of the chronicles of the kinges of Iuda.
1 Kings 22:46 And the remnaunt of the stues of the males, whyche remayned in the dayes of his father, he put cleane oute of the lande.
1 Kings 22:47 There was then no kynge in Edom, the kynge was but a debite.
1 Kings 22:48 And Iehosaphat made shyppes in the sea, to go to Ophir for gould, but they went not: for the shippes brake at Azion Gaber.
1 Kings 22:49 Then sayde Ohoziah the sonne of Ahab vnto Iehosaphat: let my seruauntes go with thine in the shyppes. But Iehosaphat woulde not.
1 Kings 22:50 And Iehosaphat layde him to slepe with hys fathers and was buryed with his fathers in the citie of Dauid his father. And Iehoram hys sonne raygned in hys roume.
1 Kings 22:51 (2
1 Kings 22:52 ) Ohoziah the sonne of Ahab beganne to raygne vpon Israel in Samaria, the .xvij. yeare of Iehosaphat king of Iuda, & was king ouer Israell two yeare,
1 Kings 22:53 (2Ki

BOOK: 2 Kings

CHAPTER: 1

2 Kings 1:1 And the Moabites rebelled agaynst Israel after the death of Ahab.
2 Kings 1:2 And Ohoziah fell thorowe a lattese wyndowe out of an vpper chambre that he had in Samaria, & fell sycke. Then he sent messengers sayinge vnto them: go & enquyre of Beelzebub the God of Akaron, whether I shal recouer of this disease.
2 Kings 1:3 But the Aungell of the Lorde spake vnto Eliah the Thesbite: vp and go agaynst the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say vnto them: Is it because there is no God in Israel, that ye go to aske thorow Beelzebub the God of Akaron.
2 Kings 1:4 Therfore thus sayth the Lorde: thou shalt not come doune from the bedde on which thou art gone vp, but shalt dye. And Eliah departed.
2 Kings 1:5 And the messengers turned backe agayne vnto him. And he sayde vnto them: why are ye thus come agayne?
2 Kings 1:6 And they sayde vnto him: there came a man against vs & sayde vnto vs: go and turne agayne vnto the kynge that sent you, & saye vnto him. Thus sayth the lord: It is because there is no God in Israel, that thou sendest to enquyre thorowe Beelzebub the God of Akaron? Therfore thou shalt not come doune from the bed on which thou art gone vp, but shalt surelye dye.
2 Kings 1:7 And he sayde to them: what maner a man was that whiche met you, and tolde you these wordes?
2 Kings 1:8 And they sayde vnto hym: it was an hearry man and gyrde with a gyrdle of a skinne aboute hys loynes. And he said vnto them: it is Eliah the Thesbite.
2 Kings 1:9 Then the kynge sent vnto him a capitayne, ouer fyfty with his fyftye. And when the captayne was come to him: beholde, he sat on the toppe of an hyl. And the captayne sayde vnto him: man of God, the kinge biddeth the come doune.
2 Kings 1:10 And Eliah answered and sayde to the captain ouer the fyfty: yf I be a man of God, fyre come doune from heauen and consume the and thy fifty. And there came fyre doune from heauen, & deuoured him & his fifty.
2 Kings 1:11 And the kinge went againe and sent to hym another captayn ouer fyfty with his fyfty, which answered & sayde vnto him: O man of God, thus sayth the kyng, make hast & come doune.
2 Kings 1:12 And Eliah auswered and saide vnto them: yf I be a man of God, then let fyre come doune from heauen & consume the & thy fifty. And there came fire doune from heauen, and consumed hym, and hys fyftye. And the kinge sent agayne the thyrd capitayne ouer fyfty.
2 Kings 1:13 And when the third captaine ouer fyfty was come vp to him, he fel on hys knees before Eliah and besought hym & sayde vnto him: Oh man of God, let my lyfe & thy lyfe of these fyfty thy seruauntes be preciouse in thy sight.
2 Kings 1:14 Beholde, there came fyre doune from heauen & burnt vp the two fore captaynes ouer fifty with their fyfties. But let my lyfe nowe be preciouse in thy syghte.
2 Kings 1:15 Then sayde the Aungel of the Lorde vnto Eliah: go doune with him, and be not afrayd of him. And he went doune with him vnto the kinge.
2 Kings 1:16 And he sayde vnto the kinge, thus sayth the Lorde: for as muche as thou sentest messengers to aske thorowe Beelzebub the God of Akaron, as though there had bene no God in Israel to aske thorow this worde? therfore thou shalt not come of the bed on whiche thou art ascended, but shalt surely dye.
2 Kings 1:17 And so he dyed according to the worde of the lord which Eliah spake, and Iehoram was made king in his stede, the second yeare of Iehoram sonne of Iehosaphat kynge of Iuda, because he had no sonne.
2 Kings 1:18 The rest of the deades of Ohoziah whiche he did, are written in the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.

CHAPTER: 2

2 Kings 2:1 And it chaunced when the lorde woulde take vp Eliah to heauen in a whorle winde, that Eliah & Elizeus were goynge from Galgal.
2 Kings 2:2 And Eliah said to Elizeus: tary here I pray the, for the Lorde hath sent me to Bethel. But Elizeus sayde: as surely as the Lorde lyueth, and as thy soule lyueth, I wyl not leaue the. And when they came to Bethel,
2 Kings 2:3 the children of the prophetes that were at Bethel, came out to Elizeus, & sayd to him: knowest thou not how that the Lord wil take away thy maister from the this day? And he said: I know it to: holde youre peace.
2 Kings 2:4 Then sayde Eliah to Elizeus: tary here a felowship, for the Lorde hath sent me to Iericho. And he sayde: as surely as the Lorde lyueth, and as surely as thy soule lyueth, I will not leaue the, and so they went to Iericho.
2 Kings 2:5 And the chyldren of the prophetes that were at Iericho came to Eliseus, and sayd vnto him: art thou not ware, that the Lorde will take away thy mayster from the this day? And he answered: I know it also, holde your peace.
2 Kings 2:6 And Eliah sayd to him: tary I pray the here, for the lord hath sent me to Iordan But he sayde: as surely as the Lord liueth, and as thy soule lyueth, I will not leaue the. And so they went bothe of them together.
2 Kings 2:7 And fyfty men of the sonnes of the Prophetes went and stode in sight a farre of, as they two stode by Iordan.
2 Kings 2:8 And then Eliah toke hys mantell & wrapte it together and smote the water, and it deuided it selfe, parte the one waye and parte the other, and they two went ouer on the drie land.
2 Kings 2:9 And as sone as they were ouer, Eliah sayde to Elizeus, aske what I shall do for the yeare I be taken away from the. And Elizeus said: let me I pray the, haue thy spirite double in me.
2 Kings 2:10 And he sayde: thou hast asked an harde thynge. Neuerthelesse yf thou se me when I am taken away from the, thou shalt haue it so, yf thou do not, it shal not be.
2 Kings 2:11 And as they went walkynge and talkynge: beholde, there came a charet of fyre and horsses of fyre, and put them a sondre. And Eliah went vp in the whorlewynde to heauen.
2 Kings 2:12 And Elizeus sawe and cryed: O my father, O my father, the charet of Israel and the horsmen therof, & saw him no more: and therefore toke his owne clothes and rent them in two peces.
2 Kings 2:13 And then he toke vp the mantel of Eliah that fel from him, and went backe agayn and stode by Iordans syde,
2 Kings 2:14 and toke the mantel of Eliah, that fel from him, and smote the water and sayde: where is the Lorde God of Eliah, where is he? And when he had smyten the water, it deuyded parte this waye and parte that waye. And Elizeus went ouer.
2 Kings 2:15 And the chyldren of the Prophetes of Iericho, which saw him from a farre, sayde: the spyryte of Eliah doeth rest on Elizeus, and went against him, and bowed to the earth vnto him.
2 Kings 2:16 And they saide vnto him: se, there be amonge thy seruauntes fyftie lustie men: let them go and seke thy mayster: happlye the spirit of the Lorde hathe taken him vp & cast him vpon some mountain or in some valeye. And he saide: sende not.
2 Kings 2:17 Neuerthelesse yet they laye vpon him, til he was ashamed, and saide: sende, and they sent fyfty men, whiche sought him thre daies and thre nyghtes, but founde him not.
2 Kings 2:18 And they came againe to him, for he taryed at Iericho. And he sayde to them, dyd I saye vnto you, that ye shoulde not go.
2 Kings 2:19 Then the men of Iericho sayd to Elizeus: beholde, the citie standeth pleasauntly as my Lorde seyth, but the water is naught and the grounde bared.
2 Kings 2:20 And he sayde: brynge me a newe cruse and put salt therin. And they brought it to him.
2 Kings 2:21 And he went vnto the spring of the water, and cast the shalt in thither, and sayde: thus saith the Lorde: I heale thys water, there shal not come henceforth ether death or barennesse.
2 Kings 2:22 And the water was helthsome euer after accordyng to the saying of Elizeus whyche he spake.
2 Kings 2:23 And he went from thence vp to Bethel. And he was goynge vp in the waye, there came lytle laddes out of the citie and mocked him, and sayde to him: go vp thou bald head, go vp thou bald heade.
2 Kings 2:24 And he turned backe and loked on them and cursed them in the name of the Lorde. And there came two Beares out of that wood, & tare .xlij. of the boies.
2 Kings 2:25 And he went from thence to mount Carmel, & from thence went agayne to Samaria.

CHAPTER: 3

2 Kings 3:1 Iehoram the sonne of Ahab beganne to raygne vpon Israell in Samaria the .xviij. yeare of Iehosaphat kyng of Iuda, and continued twelue yeare.
2 Kings 3:2 And wrought that was euyll in the syghte of the Lorde: but not lyke his father or his mother, for he put away the Image of Baal that hys father had made:
2 Kings 3:3 Neuerthelesse he contynewed in the synne of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat whyche made Israel synne, and shronke not there from.
2 Kings 3:4 And Mesa kynge of Moab whiche was riche of shepe (and was wont to render vnto the kinge of Israel an hundred thousand lambes, and as many ramnes wyth the wolle)
2 Kings 3:5 rebelled agaynst the kinge of Israel after the death of Ahab.
2 Kings 3:6 And kinge Iehoram went out of Samaria the same ceason, and nombred all Israel.
2 Kings 3:7 And then went and sent to Iehosaphat kynge of Iuda sayinge: the kinge of Moab hath rebelled agaynst me, wylt thou go with me against the Moabites to battel? And he sayde: I wil go, and wylbe as thou, & my people shalbe as thyne, and my horsses as thyne.
2 Kings 3:8 And he sayde: what waye shall we go? And the other answered: the way thorow the wildernesse of Edom.
2 Kings 3:9 And the kynge of Israel toke his iourneye with the kinge of Iuda and the kinge of Edom. And when they had compased the way seuen dayes, there was no water for the host nor for the cattel that they hath with them.
2 Kings 3:10 Then said the kynge of Israel: Alasse, the Lorde hath called together these thre kynges to delyuer them into the handes of the Moabites.
2 Kings 3:11 But Iehosaphat sayde: is there here no prophete of the Lordes, that we may enquyre of the Lorde by him? And one of the kynge of Israels seruauntes answered and sayde: here is Elizeus the sonne of Saphat, whiche powred water on the handes of Eliah.
2 Kings 3:12 And Iehosaphat sayde: the worde of the Lorde is wyth hym. And so the kinge of Israel, and Iehosaphat and the kynge of Edom went doune to him.
2 Kings 3:13 And Elizeus sayde to the kynge of Israel: what haue I to do with the? Get the to the prophetes of thy father and of thy mother. And the kyng of Israel sayd vnto hym: Oh naye, but hath the lord called these thre kynges to delyuer them into the handes of the Moabites?
2 Kings 3:14 And Elizeus sayde, as sure as the Lorde of Hostes lyueth (in whose syght I stande) and it were not that I regarde the presence of Iehosaphat the kynge of Iuda, I woulde not loke toward the, nor yet se the.
2 Kings 3:15 But now bryng my a mynstrel. And as the mynstrel played, the hand of the Lord was vpon him.
2 Kings 3:16 And he said: thus biddeth the lorde: make thys broke full of dyches.
2 Kings 3:17 For thus sayth the Lorde: ye shall se nether wynde nor rayne, and yet this broke shalbe fylled with water, that ye maye drinck and youre beastes and youre cattel also.
2 Kings 3:18 And thys is yet but a small thinge, in the syght of the lorde. But he will geue the Moabites into youre handes also.
2 Kings 3:19 And ye shall destroye all stronge townes and all goodly cytyes, and shall fal al pleasaunt trees and stoppe all the welles of water, & marre al good plattes of grounde with stones.
2 Kings 3:20 And in the mornynge about offeryng time: there came suche a water the waye from Edom, that the countrey was filled with water.
2 Kings 3:21 And when all the Moabites heard that the kinges were come to fight against them, they gathered together, from the youngest that was able to put an harnesse and so vpwarde, and wayted in the borders.
2 Kings 3:22 And they beynge vp erly in the morning, the sonne arose and shone vpon the water. And when the Moabites sawe the water a farre of, as red as bloud,
2 Kings 3:23 they said: it is bloud: the kinges haue fought together & one slaine another. Now therfore ye Moabites get you to the spoyle.
2 Kings 3:24 And when they came to the host of Israel, the Iesraelites stode vp, and layde on the Moabites, that they fleed before them. And so they entred the land and destroyed the Moabites.
2 Kings 3:25 And they ouerthrewe the cytyes, & on euery good parcel of lande, cast euery man his stone and ouercouered it, and stopte al the welles of water, and felde all the good trees. And as longe as the stones thereof dyd remayne in the walles of Brycke the slyngers went vpon it and bette it.
2 Kings 3:26 And when the kynge of Moab sawe, that the battel was to stronge for hym, he toke wt him seuen hundred men that drewe the swerd to haue broken vp vnto the kynge of Edom. But they coulde not.
2 Kings 3:27 And then he toke his eldest sonne that should haue raigned in his stead, and offered him for a burntofferynge vpon the walles. And there came so greate wrathe vpon Israel, that they departed from hym & returned to their owne lande.

CHAPTER: 4

2 Kings 4:1 And there cryed a certayn woman of the wyues of the chyldren of the Prophetes, vnto Elizeus saying: thy seruaunt my husband is deade, and thou knowest that thy seruaunt dyd feare the Lorde. And the creditor is come to fet my two sonnes, to be his bondemen.
2 Kings 4:2 And Elizeus said to her: What shal I do for the? Tel me, what hast thou in thyne house. And she sayd: thyne handmayd hath nothynge at all in her house, saue a pytcher wyth oyle.
2 Kings 4:3 And he saide: Go and borowe the in other places, of al thy neyghboures emptie vesselles, and that not a fewe.
2 Kings 4:4 And then go and shut the dore to the and to thy sonnes, and poure out into the all those vesselles, and put the ful alway al syde.
2 Kings 4:5 And she went from hym, and shut the dore to her and to her sonnes. And they brought to her, and se powred out.
2 Kings 4:6 And when the vesselles were full, she sayde to her sonne: bryng yet a vessel. And he sayde: there is no mo. And then the oyle ceased.
2 Kings 4:7 Then she came and tolde the man of God. And he sayd: go and sell the oyle and paye thy creditor. And lyue thou and thy chyldren of the reste.
2 Kings 4:8 And it fell on a daye, that Elizeus came to Sunam, where was a riche woman that toke him in for to eate breade. And as ofte as he came that waye, he turned in thither to eate breade.
2 Kings 4:9 And she sayd vnto her husbande: se, I perceyue that the man of God is perfecte, and cometh alwaye by vs.
2 Kings 4:10 Let vs make hym a lyttel chambre with a littel walle, and let vs set him there a bed, a table, a stole and a candelstycke that he maye turne in thither, when he cometh to vs.
2 Kings 4:11 And it fortuned on a time that he came thyther and turned into the chambre & lay there.
2 Kings 4:12 Then he sayde to Gihezi his seruaunt: cal this Sunamite. And he called her, and she came before him.
2 Kings 4:13 And Elizeus sayd to him: saye to her I pray the: se, thou hast made al this prouision for vs, what shall I do for the wouldest thou be spoken for to the kinge or to the captayne of the Hoste? And she sayde: I dwel amonge myne owne people.
2 Kings 4:14 Then he sayde: what is to be done for her? And Gihezi sayd: Verely she hath no childe, and her husbande is olde.
2 Kings 4:15 And he sayde: call her. And he called her. And she came and stode at the dore.
2 Kings 4:16 Then he sayde: by suche a tyme, as sone as the frute can lyue, thou shalt embrace a sonne, and she sayde: Oh naye my Lorde thou man of God, do not lye vnto thyne handmayde.
2 Kings 4:17 And the wyfe conceyued and bare a sonne that same ceason that Elizeus had said vnto her, as sone as the frute coulde haue lyfe.
2 Kings 4:18 And when the lad was greate, it fell on a day, that he went out to his father, to the haruestmen.
2 Kings 4:19 And there he complayned to his father: my head, my head. And hys father sayd to a lad: carye him to his mother.
2 Kings 4:20 And he toke him & brought him to his mother. And he sat on her knees tyl none, and then dyed.
2 Kings 4:21 And the caryed him vp and layde him on the bedde of the man of God, and shut the dore to him, and went out
2 Kings 4:22 and came to her husbande & sayde: sende me one of the younge men and an Asse, that I may runne to the man of God.
2 Kings 4:23 And he saide: wherfore wilt thou go to hym to daye, whyle it is nether new mone nor Saboth day. And she sayde: be content.
2 Kings 4:24 Then she sadelled an Asse & saide to the lad: leade away & make me not cease ridinge, vntill I byd the.
2 Kings 4:25 And so she went and came vnto the man of God to mount Carmel. And when the man of God sawe her a farre, he sayde to Gihezi his seruaunt: se, where oure seruaunt cometh.
2 Kings 4:26 Now runne against her, and aske her, whether it be all well with her, and with her husbande and with the lad. And she sayde: all is well.
2 Kings 4:27 Then she went to the man of God vp to the hyll and caught him by the fete. And Gihezi went to her, to thrust her away. But the man of God sayde: let her alone, for her soule is vexed, and the Lorde hath hid it from me, and hath not tolde it me.
2 Kings 4:28 Then she sayde: dyd I desyre a sonne of my Lorde? dyd I not say, that thou shouldest not brynge me in a foles Paradyse.
2 Kings 4:29 Then he saide to Gihezi: gyrde vp thy loines, and take my staffe in thyne hande and away. Yf any man mete the, salute hym not: and yf any salute the, answere him not again. And put my staffe vpon the boye.
2 Kings 4:30 Not withstandynge the mother of the chylde sayde, as sure as the Lorde lyueth, and as thy soule lyueth, I wil not leaue the. And then he arose and folowed her.
2 Kings 4:31 Gihezi went before them & put the staffe vpon the lad. But there was neyther voyce nor attendinge. And then he went againe agaynst his mayster and told hym sayinge: it hath not awaked the lad.
2 Kings 4:32 When Elizeus was come to the house: Beholde, the lad was dead and layd vpon his bed.
2 Kings 4:33 And he went in and shut the dore to the lad & him, and praied vnto the Lord.
2 Kings 4:34 And he went vp and laye vpon the lad, and put his mouth on hys mouth, and hys eyes on hys eyes and the palme of his handes on the palme of hys handes, and sprede him selfe vpon the lad that the fleshe of the child waxed warme.
2 Kings 4:35 And went againe & walked once vp & doune in the house & then went vp and spred him selfe vpon him. And then the lad nesed seuen tymes & opened his eyes.
2 Kings 4:36 And he called Gihezi and sayd: Call for this Sunamite. And he called her. And when she was come to him, he said: take thy sonne.
2 Kings 4:37 Then she went & fel at his fete & bowed her self to the ground, & toke vp her sonne & went oute.
2 Kings 4:38 When Elizeus was come to Galgal agayne, there was a darth in the lande, & the chyldren of the prophetes dwelt with him. Then he sayde to his seruaunt, put on a great pot, and make pottage for the chyldren of the prophetes.
2 Kings 4:39 And one went oute into the felde, to gather herbes, & found as it were a wylde vyne, and gathered therof Coloquintidaes his lap ful, & came & shred them into the potte of potage, they vnwetynge.
2 Kings 4:40 And they powred out for the men to eate. And when they had tasted of the pottage, they cryed out and said: there is death in the pot thou man of God, & coulde not eate therof.
2 Kings 4:41 Then he sayde: brynge meale. And he cast it into the pot and sayde: fyll for the people that they maye eate, and there was no harme in the pot.
2 Kings 4:42 There came a man from Baalsalisa, and brought the man of God breade of fyrste frutes, euen twenty loues of barley, & new corne in a clothe he had. And Eliseus bade put it before the people that they myght eate.
2 Kings 4:43 Then hys mynyster sayde: what shoulde I set thys before an hundred men? And he sayde: set it before the people and let them eate. For thus sayth the Lorde: they shall eate and leaue.
2 Kings 4:44 And he set it before them, and they ate and lefte, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 5

2 Kings 5:1 Naaman capitaine of the hoste to the kynge of Siria, was greate wyth his mayster and wel taken: for thorow him the Lorde saued Siria. And he was an actiue man & yet a leper.
2 Kings 5:2 And ther had gone a companye of Soudioures oute of Siria a runnyng, and hath brought oute of the countrey of Israell a lytle mayd, which was with Naamans wife.
2 Kings 5:3 And the Damosell sayde vnto her ladye: I woulde my mayster were with a Prophet that is in Samaria, he woulde delyuer hym of his leprosye.
2 Kings 5:4 And she went and tolde her husbande sayinge: thus and thus sayth the maide that is out of the lande of Israel.
2 Kings 5:5 And the king of Siria sayde: go thy waye, and I will sende a letter vnto the kinge of Israel. And he went and toke with hym ten talentes of syluer, and .vi. thousand peces of gould, and then chaunge of raymentes.
2 Kings 5:6 And he brought the letter to the king of Israel contayninge this tenour. Now when thys letter is come vp to the: Beholde, I haue sent Naaman my seruaunte to the, that thou shouldest rydde him out of hys leprosye.
2 Kings 5:7 And when the kinge of Israell had reade the letter, he rent hys clothes & sayed: am I God to sley and to make aliue? that he should sende to me, for to delyuer a man from his leprosye. But consyder I praye you and se, howe he piked quarels with me.
2 Kings 5:8 And when Elizeus the man of God, had hearde howe that the kinge of Israell had rent hys clothes, he sent to the kinge sayinge: Wherfore hast thou rent thy clothes? let him come to me, that he may know that there is a prophet in Israel.
2 Kings 5:9 And Naaman came with his horsses and his charet, and stode at the dore of Elizeus.
2 Kings 5:10 Then Elizeus sent a menssenger sayinge: go & washe the in Iordan seuen tymes, and thy fleshe shal come agayne to the as before, and thou shalt be cleane.
2 Kings 5:11 And Naaman was wroth and went away, & sayde: Beholde, I thought in my self, he would haue come out, & stand & cal on the name of the Lorde hys God, and put hys hande on the place of the disease, and so take awaye the leprosye.
2 Kings 5:12 Are not Abanah and Pharphar, ryuers of Damasco, better then all the waters of Israell? Myght it not rather washe in them and be cleane? And so he turned and departed in an angre.
2 Kings 5:13 Then came his seruauntes and communed with him, and sayde: Father yf the prophete had byd the done some great thinge, oughtest thou not to haue done it? How much rather then shouldest thou do it, whyle he sayth to the only, washe and be cleane.
2 Kings 5:14 Then he went doune & washed seuen tymes in Iordan, as the man of God bade, & his flesh chaunced, lyke vnto the flesh of a lyttel boye, and he was cleane.
2 Kings 5:15 Then he turned agayn to the man of God and al hys company with him, and came and stode before him and sayde. Behold, I know that there is no God in all the worlde, but in Israel. And now I praye the take a blessynge of thy seruaunt.
2 Kings 5:16 But he sayde: as surely as the Lord lyueth, before whome I stand, I wil receyue none. And the other would haue constrayned him to receyue: but he woulde not do it.
2 Kings 5:17 And Naaman sayd, yf thou wilt not: yet I praye the, maye there not be geuen to thy seruaunt the burthen of two mules of earthe. For thy seruaunte will henceforth offer neyther burnt sacryfice nor offerynge vnto any other God, then to the Lorde.
2 Kings 5:18 But herin the Lorde be mercifull to thy seruaunt, for when my mayster goeth into the house of Remon to worshyppe there, he leaneth on myne hand & I must worshyppe in the house of Remon, let the Lorde I pray the be mercyful vnto thy seruaunt in hys case.
2 Kings 5:19 And he sayde to hym: Go in peace. And when he was departed from hym a furlonge of grounde,
2 Kings 5:20 Gihezi the seruaunt of Elizeus the man of God, sayd: se, my mayster hath kepte of, thys Syryen Naaman that he wolde not receyue of hys hand that he offered. As surely as the Lorde lyueth I wyl runne after hym, and take somewhat.
2 Kings 5:21 And so Gihezi went after Naaman. And when Naaman sawe hym come runnynge after hym, he came doune of the charet agaynst hym & said: is all well?
2 Kings 5:22 And he sayde: yea. But my mayster hath sente me, sayinge: se there be two younge men come to me oute of Ephraim of the chyldren of the Prophetes: geue them I praye the, one talent of syluer, & a couple of good garmentes.
2 Kings 5:23 And Naaman sayde: auenture and take two talentes of syluer in two bagges, with two goodlye garmentes, & delyuered them vnto two of hys seruauntes, to beare it before hym.
2 Kings 5:24 And he went in the darcke, and toke it of theyr handes and bestowed it in the house, and let the men go, & they departed.
2 Kings 5:25 Then he went & stode before hys mayster. And Elizeus sayde to hym: whence commeth Gihezi? And he sayde: thy seruaunt wente no whether.
2 Kings 5:26 And he sayde: wente not myne herte with the, when the man turned & came of hys charet agaynste the? Is it a tyme to receyue syluer & to receyue garmentes, olyue trees, vineyardes, oxen, shepe menseruauntes & maid seruauntes?
2 Kings 5:27 The leprosye therfore of Naaman claue vnto the, & vnto thy seede for euer. And he went out from hym a leper as whit as snowe.

CHAPTER: 6

2 Kings 6:1 Then sayde the chyldren of the prophetes vnto Helizeus: se, the place where we dwelle with the, is to lytle for vs.
2 Kings 6:2 Let vs there take euery man a beame, & build vs a place there, to dwell in. And he sayde: go ye.
2 Kings 6:3 And one sayde: begynne I praye the, & go wyth thy seruauntes. And he sayde: I wyll,
2 Kings 6:4 and so went wyth them. And when they came to Iordan, they cut doune woode.
2 Kings 6:5 And as one was hewynge of a beame, the axe head fel into the water. And he cryed oute & sayde: Alasse mayster, for it was lent me.
2 Kings 6:6 And the man of God sayde: Where fell it? And he shewed hym the place. And he cut an helue, and cast it in thyther, and made the axe head swimme.
2 Kings 6:7 And he said: take it vp to the. And the other stretched hys hande and caught it.
2 Kings 6:8 And the kynge of Syrya fought agaynste Israel, & toke councell with hys seruauntes, saying: In soche a place and in soche a place wyll I pytche.
2 Kings 6:9 And the man of God sent vnto the kynge of Israel, sayinge: Beware thou go not by suche a place, for there are the Syryans gone doune.
2 Kings 6:10 And the kynge of Israel sent to the place which the man of God tolde him and warned hym of, and saued hym self there more then once or twyse.
2 Kings 6:11 And the hert of the kynge of Syrya was troubled therwyth, that he sent for his seruauntes, and sayde to them: wyl ye not shew me which of vs telleth the kynge of Israel.
2 Kings 6:12 And one of hys seruauntes sayde: naye my Lorde kyng. Elizeus the Prophet that is in Israell, he telleth the kynge of Israel the wordes that thou speakest in thy slepynge chambre.
2 Kings 6:13 Then he sayde: go and spye where he is, that I may sende and fet him. And one tolde the kyng, sayinge: se, he is in Dothan.
2 Kings 6:14 And he sent thyther horse and charettes & a great Hoste. And they came thyther by nyghte, & compased the toune aboute.
2 Kings 6:15 And when the seruaunt of the men of God rose vp erly, and was gone out: Behold, there was an hoste rounde aboute the toune wyth horses and charettes. Then sayde hys lad to hym: Alasse mayster, what shall we do?
2 Kings 6:16 And he sayde: feare not: there are mo with vs then with them.
2 Kings 6:17 And Eliseus prayed & sayde: Lord open the eyes of the younge man, & he sawe. And beholde, the mountayne was ful of horses and charettes of fyre rounde aboute Elizeus.
2 Kings 6:18 And when the soudyars came doune to him: Elizeus prayed vnto the Lorde & sayde. Smyte thys people wyth blyndnesse. And he smote them wyth blyndnes accordyng to the desyre of Elizeus.
2 Kings 6:19 Then Elizeus said vnto them this is not the waye, nor thys is not the toune: But folowe me, and I wyll bryng you to the man ye seke. And he led them to Samaria.
2 Kings 6:20 When they were come to Samaria, Elyzeus sayde: Lorde, open theyr eyes & let them se. And the Lorde opened theyr eyes that they sawe. And behold they were in the myddes of Samaria
2 Kings 6:21 And then sayde the kynge of Israel vnto Eliseus when he sawe them: shall I smyte them, shall I smyte them father:
2 Kings 6:22 And he sayde: smyte them not. But smyte them thou takest wyth thyne owne swerde, & with thyne owne bowe. But set bread and water before them, and let them eate and drincke, and go to theyr mayster.
2 Kings 6:23 And he made great ordinaunce before them. And when they had eaten and droncke, sent them awaye, and they wente to theyr mayster. And so the soudyours of Syrya came no more into the lande of Israel.
2 Kings 6:24 After this Benhadad kyng of Syrya gathered al the hoste, and went & beseged Samaria.
2 Kings 6:25 And there arose great darthe in Samaria: for they had beseged it, vntyll an asses head was worth foure skore sycles of syluer, and the fourth part of a Cab of doues dong worth fyue sycles.
2 Kings 6:26 And as the kyng of Israell walked vpon the walles there cryed a woman to hym, saying: helpe, my Lord Kyng.
2 Kings 6:27 And he sayde: Naye, the Lorde helpe the. But wherewyth shulde I helpe the, with corne or wyne?
2 Kings 6:28 Then sayde the kyng to her: what ayleth the? And she aunswered: thys woman here sayde to me, brynge thy sonne, and let vs eate hym to daye, and we wyll eate myne to morowe?
2 Kings 6:29 And so we dressed my sonne, and dyd eate hym. And I sayde to her another day, brynge thy sonne that we maye eate hym. But she had hyd her sonne.
2 Kings 6:30 When the kyng heard the wordes of the women, he rent hys clothes euen as he was walkyng on the walles. And when the people loked vpon him: se, he was clothed in sacke vnder.
2 Kings 6:31 Then he sayd: God do so and so to me, yf the head of Elizeus the sonne of Saphat tarye on hym thys daye.
2 Kings 6:32 And as Elizeus satte in hys house, and the elders wt hym, the kynge sente one from hym. But yer the messenger came at hym, he sayd to the elders: se you not howe the sonne of thys murtherer hath sent, to take of myne head? be circumspecte therfore when the messenger cometh, & shutte the dore, and thrust hym backe therwyth: for the sound of hys maysters fete foloweth him.
2 Kings 6:33 And whyle he yet talked wyth them. Beholde the messenger was come vnto hym. And he sayd: behold thys euyll is of the Lorde, what more shall we loke for of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 7

2 Kings 7:1 Then Heliseus sayde: heare the worde of the Lorde, for thus sayth the Lorde: to morowe this tyme a boushell of fyne floure shalbe solde for a sycle, & two boushelles of Barley for another in the gates of Samaria.
2 Kings 7:2 Then a great Lorde on whose hande the kyng leaned, aunswered the man of God and sayde, though the Lorde woulde make wyndowes in heauen, yet wolde not thys be. And he sayde agayne: Behold, thou shalt se it with thyne eyes and shalte not eate thereof.
2 Kings 7:3 And there were foure lepers set withoute the Gate of Samaria. And they sayde eche to hys companyon, what syt we here vntyll we dye?
2 Kings 7:4 though we thoughte that we myghte come into the cytye, yet is the darth so greate in the cytye, that we shall there dye. And yf we tarye here, we are but dead also Now therfor come and let vs flee to the hoste of the Siryans: If they save oure lyues, we shall lyue: And yf they kyll vs, then are we dead.
2 Kings 7:5 And so they arose in the darcke to go to the hoste of the Syryans. And when they were come to the syde of the hoste of Syrya: se, there was no man there.
2 Kings 7:6 For the Lord had made the hoste of the Syryans heare a noyse of charettes & a noyse of horsses, and the noyse of a great hoste. In so muche that they sayde one to another: se, the kynge of Israell hath hyred agaynste vs, the kynges of the Hethites & the kynges of Egypte, to come vpon vs.
2 Kings 7:7 And vpon that they arose, and fled in the darcke, & left theyr tentes, theyr horsses, theyr asses and the feld they had pytched euen as it was, and fled for theyr lyues.
2 Kings 7:8 And when these lepers came to the edge of the hoste, they wente into a tente, and dyd eate and dryncke, and caryed thence syluer, goulde and raymente, and wente and hydde it, and came agayne, and entred into another, & caryed thence also, and wente, and hyde it.
2 Kings 7:9 Then they sayde one to another: it is not wel that we do, for thys day is a day to bring tydynges And yf we holde oure peace, & tary tyll it be day lyght, we shal find a myscheue. Now therfore come, let vs go and tell the kinges housholde.
2 Kings 7:10 And so they went and called to the porter of the cytye and tolde them sayinge: we came to the pauylyons of the Syrians and se, there was no man there, neyther voyce of man, but horsses and asses tyed, & the tentes euen as they were.
2 Kings 7:11 Then the porters called & tolde the kynges house wythin.
2 Kings 7:12 And the kynge arose in the night and sayde to hys seruauntes: I wyll shewe you, howe the Syryans haue serued vs. They knowe that we are oppressed wyth hungre & therfore are gone oute of theyr pauylyons to hyde them selues in the felde, sayinge: They wyll come out of the cytye, and then we shall catche them alyue and get into the cytye.
2 Kings 7:13 And one of hys seruauntes aunswered, and sayde: Let men take fyue of the horsses that remayne and are lefte in the cytye. Beholde they are as good, as all the multitude that are lefte in the cytye: and as good as all the multytude of the cytye that are consumed, and let vs sende and se.
2 Kings 7:14 And they toke two charettes of horses, and the kynge sente after the hoste of the Syryans saying: go and se.
2 Kings 7:15 And they folowed after them euen vnto Iordan: and se, all the way was ful of clothes and vesselles which the Syryans had cast from them for haste. And the messengers returned and tolde the kynge.
2 Kings 7:16 And then the people wente oute & robbed the tentes of the Syryans. And so a busshel of floure was solde for a sycle, and .ij. busshelles of barley for a sycle, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
2 Kings 7:17 And the kynge set the Lorde on whose hande he leaned, to kepe the gate. And the people troade hym in the gate, that he dyed, accordynge to the sayinge of the man of God whiche he sayde, when the kyng came doune to him.
2 Kings 7:18 And it came to passe accordyng to the word of the man of God to the king sayinge: two bushelles of barleye for a sycle & a bushell of barleye for another shalbe to morowe this time in the gates of Samaria.
2 Kings 7:19 And the Lorde aunswered the man of God & sayd: though the Lorde made wyndowes in heauen, yet wolde thys not be. And the other sayde: Beholde, thou shalt se it with thyne eyes, and shalt not eate thereof.
2 Kings 7:20 And so it chaunged: for the people troade hym vnder fete in the gate, that he dyed.

CHAPTER: 8

2 Kings 8:1 Then spake Elizeus vnto the woman whose sonne he had restored to lyfe agayne, sayinge: vp & go both thou and thyne house & soiourne where thou thinkeste best, for the Lorde wyll call a darthe whiche shall come on the lande seuen yeare.
2 Kings 8:2 And the woman arose and dyd after the saying of the man of God, & went both she & her houshold & soiourned in the lande of the Philistines seuen yeare.
2 Kings 8:3 And at the seuen yeares end, when the woman was come agayne oute of the land of the Philistines she wente oute to speake to the kynge for her house, and for her land.
2 Kings 8:4 And the kynge was talkynge with Gihezi the seruaunte of the man of God, sayinge, tell me I praye the, all the greate dedes which Elizeus dyd.
2 Kings 8:5 And it chaunsed as he was tellynge the kynge howe he restored a dead bodye to lyfe agayne that the woman whose sonne he reuiued, cryed to the kynge for her house & lande. Then sayde Gihezi: My Lorde kynge, this is the woman and thys is her sonne whiche Elizeus broughte to lyfe agayne.
2 Kings 8:6 And the kynge asked the woman, and she tolde him. And so the kynge sente with her one of his chamberlaynes sayinge: restore all that pertayneth to her, wyth all the frutes of the felde, sence the daye she lefte the lande, vnto thys tyme.
2 Kings 8:7 After that Elizeus went to Damasco, Benhadad the kinge of Syrya beynge sycke. And one tolde the kynge, sayinge: The man of God is come hyther.
2 Kings 8:8 Then sayde the kynge to Hazael: take a present wyth the and go againste the man of God, and aske the Lorde by hym whether I shal recouer of thys my dysease or no.
2 Kings 8:9 And Hazael went to mete hym, & toke presentes wyth hym, euen of al the good thinges of Damasco, as muche as fourtye Cameles coulde beare, and came and presented himselfe before hym and sayde: thy sonne Benhadad Kynge of Syrya hath sent me to the, sayinge: shall I recouer of thys my dysease.
2 Kings 8:10 And Elizeus sayde to hym: go, and saye to hym: thou shalte recouer, howe be it the Lord hath shewed me that he shall surelye dye.
2 Kings 8:11 And the man of God beganne to loke earnestlye, in so muche that he was ashamed: and the man of God wept.
2 Kings 8:12 And Hazael sayd: why wepeth my Lorde: And he aunswered: for I knowe that thou shalte do euyll vnto the chyldren of Israel: theyr stronge cytyes thou shalte set on fyre & theyr younge men thou shalte sleye with the swerde, and shalte dashe oute the braynes of theyr suckynge chyldren, and all to teare their wemen wyth chylde.
2 Kings 8:13 And Hazael sayde: what is thy seruaunte which am but a dogge, that I shulde do thys great thyng? And Elizeus sayde: for the Lord hath shewed me, that thou shalte be kynge of Syrya.
2 Kings 8:14 And so he departed from Elizeus and came to hys mayster, whiche sayde to hym. What sayde Elizeus to the? And he sayd: he tolde me that thou shuldest recouer.
2 Kings 8:15 And on the morowe he toke a rough clothe and dypte it in the water and sprede it on hys face, & he dyed, and Hazael raygned in hys steade.
2 Kings 8:16 The fyfte yeare of Iehoram sonne of Ahab kynge of Israel, Iehosaphat beynge yet king of Iuda, Iehoram the sonne of Iehosaphat, kynge of Iuda,
2 Kings 8:17 beganne to raygne .xxxij. yere olde was he when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned .viij. yeare in Ierusalem.
2 Kings 8:18 And he walked in the waye of the kynges of Israell, as dyd the house of Ahab for the doughter of Ahab was hys wyfe, and he dyd that dyspleased the Lorde.
2 Kings 8:19 Neuerthelather the Lorde wold not destroye Iuda because of Dauid his seruaunt, as he promysed hym to geue hym a lyght in hys chyldren alwaye.
2 Kings 8:20 And in hys dayes Edom fell awaye from vnder the hande of Iuda, & made them a king of theyr owne.
2 Kings 8:21 And Iehoram wente to Seyr, & all hys charettes wyth hym. And he rose by nyght, & layde on the Edomytes, which compased hym in, & the captaynes of hys charet & the people fleed into theyr tentes.
2 Kings 8:22 And so the Edomites slipte awaye from vnder the hand of Iuda vnto thys daye. And then Lobnah slipte awaye to, euen that same tyme.
2 Kings 8:23 The rest of the dedes of Iehoram and al he dyd, are written in the chronicles of the kinges of Iuda.
2 Kings 8:24 And Iehoram rested with hys fathers & was buryed wyth hys fathers in the citie of Dauid. And Ohoziah hys sonne raygned in his steade.
2 Kings 8:25 The .xij. yeare of Iehoram sonne of Ahab, king of Israel, dyd Ohoziah the sonne of Iehoram kyng of Iuda begynne to raigne.
2 Kings 8:26 Two and twentye yeare old was Ohoziah when he beganne to raygne, and raigned one yeare in Ierusalem, hys mothers name was Athaliah doughter of Amri kynge of Israel.
2 Kings 8:27 And he walked in the waye of the house of Ahab:
2 Kings 8:28 for he was a sonne in lawe to the house of Ahab. And Iehoram the sonne of Ahab wente to warre wyth Hazael kynge of Syrya, at Ramoth in Galaad, and the Syryans wounded hym.
2 Kings 8:29 Wherfore kynge Iehoram wente backe agayne, to be healed in Iesrahel of the woundes whiche the Syryans had geven hym at Ramoth, when he foughte wyth Hazael king of Syrya. And Ohoziah the sonne of Iehoram kynge of Iuda wente doune to se Iehoram sonne of Ahab in Iezrahell because he was sycke.

CHAPTER: 9

2 Kings 9:1 And Elizeus the prophete called vnto one of the children of the prophetes, & sayde to him: gyrd vp thy loynes & take this boxe of oyle in thyne hande, and get the to Ramoth in Galaad.
2 Kings 9:2 And when tho comest thyther, thou shalt there se Iehu the sonne of Iehosaphat the sonne of Namsi, and go to hym, and make hym aryse vp from amonge hys brethren, and carye hym to a secret chambre.
2 Kings 9:3 And take the boxe of oyle, and poure it on hys head, and saye: thus sayth the Lorde: I haue annoynted the to be kyng ouer Israel. And then open the dore & flee, and tary not.
2 Kings 9:4 And the seruaunt of the Prophet get him to Ramoth in Galaad,
2 Kings 9:5 & when he came, the captaynes of the Host were syttyng together. And he saide: I haue an errande to the Syr captayne. And Iehu sayde, vnto which of all vs? And he sayd: to the O captayne.
2 Kings 9:6 And he arose and went into the house. And the other poured the oyle on hys head and sayde to hym, thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: I haue annoynted the to be kynge ouer Israel the people of the Lorde,
2 Kings 9:7 that thou sleye the housholde of Ahab thy mayster. For I (sayth the Lorde) wyll aduenge the bloud of my seruauntes the Prophetes, and the bloud of all the seruauntes of the Lorde, of the hand of Iezabel
2 Kings 9:8 (for the whole house of Ahab shalbe destroyed) and I wyll destroye vnto Ahab what pysseth agaynste the wall, and so muche as the presoned or that is forsaken in Israel,
2 Kings 9:9 & wyll make the house of Ahab lyke the house of Ieroboam sonne of Nabat, and lyke the house of Baasa the sonne of Ahiah.
2 Kings 9:10 And as for Iezabel the dogges shall eate her in the feld of Iesrahel, and none shall burye her. And he opened the dore and fled.
2 Kings 9:11 And when Iehu was come out to the seruauntes of hys Lord, they sayde to hym is al peace? Wherfore came this mad felowe to the? And he sayde to hym: ye know the person and hys communicacyon.
2 Kings 9:12 And they sayde: it is not so. But tell vs a felowshyppe. And he sayde: thus and thus spake he to me, sayinge. Thus sayth the Lorde: I haue annoynted the to be kynge ouer Israel.
2 Kings 9:13 And they hasted and toke euery man hys mantell, & put vnder hym on an hye benche at the toppe of steppes, & blew a trompet, and sayde: Iehu is kynge.
2 Kings 9:14 And so Iehu the sonne of Iehosaphat the sonne of Namsi conspyred agaynst Iehoram. And Iehoram had bene waytynge at Ramoth Galaad, and all Israell wyth hym, for feare of Hazael king of Syrya,
2 Kings 9:15 and was returned to be healed in Iesrahel, of the woundes which the Syryans had geuen hym as he foughte wyth Hazaell kynge of Syrya. Then sayde Iehu: If it be youre myndes, then let no man escape oute of the cytye, to go and tell in Iesrahell.
2 Kings 9:16 And Iesu rode & went to Iesrahell: for Iehoram laye there, & Ohoziah kyng of Iuda was come to Iehoram.
2 Kings 9:17 And the watcheman that stode on the toure in Iesrahel, spyed the company of Iehu, as he came and sayde: I se a company. And Iehoram sayd: take an horsman and sende agaynst them, and let hym aske whether it be peace.
2 Kings 9:18 And there wente one on horsbacke agaynste hym and sayde: thus sayeth the kynge: is it peace? And Iehu aunswered: what hast thou to do wt peace? turne & come after me. And the watchman tolde, sayinge: the messenger came to them but he cometh not agayne.
2 Kings 9:19 Then he sent oute another on horsbacke, which came to them & sayde, thus sayth the kyng: is it peace? And Iehu aunswered, what hast thou to do with peace? turne and come after me.
2 Kings 9:20 And the watcheman tolde, sayinge: he came to them, but he cometh not agayne, and the dryuynge is lyke the dryuynge of Iehu the sonne of Namsi, for he dryueth as he were madde.
2 Kings 9:21 Then sayde Iehoram, make readye. And they made ready his charet. And Iehoram king of Israel, & Ohoziah kyng of Iuda went out eyther in hys charet agaynst Iehu, and mette hym in the furlonge of Naboth the Iezrahelite.
2 Kings 9:22 And when Iehoram sawe Iehu, he sayde: is it peace Iehu? And he sayde, what peace shulde there be, so longe as the whoredomes of thy mother Iezabel, and her witchcraftes are so great?
2 Kings 9:23 And Iehoram turned hys hande & fled, & sayde to Ohoziah: there is falshed Ohoziah.
2 Kings 9:24 And Iehu toke a bowe in hys hande, & smote Iehoram betwene the shoulders, that the arowe came out at hys breast. And he fell doune thre folde in hys charet.
2 Kings 9:25 Then he sayde to Badakar a lorde of hys, take and cast hym in the plat of grounde of Naboth the Iezrahelyte. For I remembre as I & thou roade together after Ahab his father, how the Lord spake these wordes agaynste hym:
2 Kings 9:26 I haue sene yesterdaye the bloude of Naboth and of hys sonnes, sayde the Lord, and I wyl quyte him in thys grounde, saythe the Lorde. Now therfore take and cast hym in the plat of grounde accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
2 Kings 9:27 And when Ohoziah the kynge of Iuda sawe that he fled the waye to the garden house. And Iehu folowed after hym, and sayde: smite him also. And they smote hym in hys charet at the goynge vp to Sur by Ieblaam, & he fleed to Magedo, and there dyed.
2 Kings 9:28 And hys seruauntes caryed him to Ierusalem, and buryed him in hys sepulchre with hys fathers in the cytye of Dauid.
2 Kings 9:29 And in the .xi. yeare of Iehoram sonne of Ahab, beganne Ohoziah to raygne ouer Iuda.
2 Kings 9:30 And when Iehu was come to Iesrahel, Iezabell hearde of it, and starched her eyes, & tyred her head, & loked oute at a wyndowe.
2 Kings 9:31 And as Iehu entred at the gate, she said had Zamri peace whiche slewe his mayster.
2 Kings 9:32 And he lyfte vp hys eyes to the wyndowe & sayde: who is of my syde who? And there loked oute to hym two or thre lordes that were chamberlaynes.
2 Kings 9:33 And he sayde. Throw her doune. And they threw her doune. And he sprinkled of her bloude vpon the walles & on the horses, and troade her vnder fote.
2 Kings 9:34 And then when he was come in, & had eaten and droncke, he sayde: go & vyset I praye you, yonder cursed creature, & burye her, for she is a kynges doughter.
2 Kings 9:35 And when they came to burye her, they founde no more of her, then the skulle & the two fete and the two handes.
2 Kings 9:36 And they came agayne, and told hym. And he said: it is the worde of the Lorde whiche he spake by the hande of hys seruaunte Eliah the Thesbite, sayinge: in the felde of Iezrahel shall dogges eate the fleshe of Iezabel,
2 Kings 9:37 and the carkas of Iezabel shalbe donge vpon the earthe, in the felde of Iesrahell, the men shall not say thys is Iezabel.

CHAPTER: 10

2 Kings 10:1 Ahab had .lxx. sonnes in Samaria. And Iehu wrote letters, and sente to Samaria vnto the elders that were Lordes of Iesrahel, & to them that noursed vp Ahabs chyldren sayinge:
2 Kings 10:2 nowe at the coming of these letters to you, ye haue with you youre maysters sonnes, and ye haue wyth you charettes & horses, & a strong citye & harnesse.
2 Kings 10:3 Therfore chose the beste, & him that most pleaseth you of youre maysters sonnes, & put him on hys fathers seate, & fyght for youre lordes house.
2 Kings 10:4 And they were excedinglye afrayde, & sayde: se, two kynges were not able to stande before hym, how shall we then stande?
2 Kings 10:5 And the gouerner of the kynges house & of the cytie and of the elders, and the nourses sente to Iehu, sayinge: we are thy seruauntes & wyll do all that thou shalte byd vs: we wyll make no man king, but do thou what semeth good in thyne eyes.
2 Kings 10:6 Then he wrote another letter to them sayinge: If ye be myne, & wil obey my voyce, then take the heades of youre maysters sonnes and come to me to Iezrahell, by to morowe thys tyme. And the kynges sonnes were .lxx. personnes wyth the great men of the cytye whiche nouryshed them.
2 Kings 10:7 And when the letter came to them, they toke the kynges chyldren and slue them in nombre .lxx. persones, & put theyr heades in cophines, and sente them to hym to Iezrahell.
2 Kings 10:8 And there came a messenger, & tolde hym, sayinge: they haue broughte the heades of the kynges sonnes. And he said: let them put them on two heapes in the entring of the gate, tyll it be daye.
2 Kings 10:9 And in the mornyng he wente oute & stode & sayd to all the folke, ye be rightuous: for se, I conspyred agaynst my mayster & slue him: But who slue these?
2 Kings 10:10 consydre now how there is nothynge of the Lordes worde fallen to the earthe, whiche he spake agaynste the house of Ahab: for the Lorde hath done that he spake to hys seruaunt Eliah.
2 Kings 10:11 And so Iehu slue all that remayned of the house of Ahab, in Iezrahel, & all that were greate wyth hym, & hys companyons & hys priestes, vntyll he had left hym naught remayne.
2 Kings 10:12 And he arose, and departed & went to Samaria. And as Iehu was come euen to the house where the shepeherdes bind theyr shepe by the hye waye syde,
2 Kings 10:13 he met wyth the brethren of Ohoziah kinge of Iuda, and sayde: what are ye? & they sayde: the brethren of Ohoziah are we, and go to salute the chyldren of the kynge, and of the quene.
2 Kings 10:14 And he sayde: take them alyue. And they toke them alyue, & slue them at the well besyde the house where the shepardes bynde theyr shepe, in nombre .xlij. personnes, that he lefte none of them:
2 Kings 10:15 And when he was departed thence, he met with Iehonadab the sonne of Rechab coming agaynst hym. And Iehu saluted him & sayde to hym: is thyne herte ryghte, as myne hert is with thyne. And Iehonadab sayd: yea that it is. If it be, then geue me thyne hande. And he gaue hys hande, & the other toke hym vp to hym into the charet
2 Kings 10:16 & said: go with me & se the zeale I haue to the Lorde, & made hym ryde with him in his charet.
2 Kings 10:17 And when he came to Samaria, he slue all that remayned vnto Ahab in Samaria, tyll he had wypte him oute, accordyng to the sayinge of the Lorde whiche he spake to Eliah.
2 Kings 10:18 After that Iehu gathered all the people together, & sayde to them: Ahab seued Baal a lytle: But Iehu shall serue hym a good.
2 Kings 10:19 Now therfore call vnto me all the Prophetes of Baal and all his seruauntes & al his priestes, that none be lackynge. For I haue a great sacrifice to do to Baal: & yf any be myssed, he shall not lyue. But Iehu dyd it for a suttelty, to destroy the seruauntes of Baal.
2 Kings 10:20 Wherfore Iehu said: Appoynte a solempne feaste for Baal, & they proclamed it.
2 Kings 10:21 Then Iehu sent thorowe out all Israell. And all the seruauntes of Baal came, that there was not a man left behynde that came not. And when they were come in to the temple of Baal, the temple was ful from one end to another.
2 Kings 10:22 Then he sayde to the keper of the vestrye, brynge forth garmentes for the seruauntes of Baal. And he brought them oute garmentes.
2 Kings 10:23 And Iehu went wt Iehonadab sonne of Rechab into the house of Baal, and sayd to the seruauntes of Baal: searche, & loke that there be none here with you of the seruauntes of the Lorde, but the seruauntes of Baal onelye.
2 Kings 10:24 And they went in, to offer sacrifyce and burnteofferynges. But Iehu appoynted him foure skore men wythoute, and sayd: Yf anye of the men whiche I shall brynge vnto youre handes escape, he that letteth hym go, shall dye for hym.
2 Kings 10:25 And as sone as he had made an ende of offeryng of burntsacrifyce, he sayde to them of the garde & to the Lordes, go in and sley them, let none come oute. And they smote them with the edge of the swerde. And the garde and the Lordes caste them oute, and went vnto the cytye of the house of Baal,
2 Kings 10:26 and fet oute the Image oute of the house of Baal, and burnte it.
2 Kings 10:27 And they brake the Image of Baal, & brake the house of Baal, and made a sege of it euer after.
2 Kings 10:28 And so Iehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.
2 Kings 10:29 But from the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat whiche made Israel synne with the goulden calues in Bethel and Dan, Iehu departed not.
2 Kings 10:30 Then the Lorde sayde to Iehu, because thou hast lustely done that pleaseth me, and haste done to the house of Ahab all that was in myne herte, therfore shall thy chyldren in the fourthe generacyon sit on the seate of Israel.
2 Kings 10:31 But Iehu cared not to walcke in the lawe of the Lorde God of Israel wyth all hys hert for he departed not from the synnes of Ieroboam whiche made Israel synne.
2 Kings 10:32 In those dayes the Lorde beganne to cut Israel shorte, for Hazael slue them in all the coastes of Israell,
2 Kings 10:33 from Iordan Eastwarde: euen al the lande of Galaad, the Gadites, the Rubenites and the Manassites, from Aroer vpon the ryuer of Arnon, with Galaad and Basan.
2 Kings 10:34 The rest of the actes of Iehu, and all he dyd, and all hys poure are wrytten in the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.
2 Kings 10:35 And when Iehu was layd to rest wyth hys fathers, they buryed hym in Samaria, and Iehoahaz hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
2 Kings 10:36 And that tyme that Iehu raygned vpon Israel in Samaria, was .xxviij. yeare.

CHAPTER: 11

2 Kings 11:1 And Athaliah the mother of Ohoziah, when she saw that her sonne was dead, she arose, and slew all the seede of the kingedome.
2 Kings 11:2 But Iehosaba the doughter of kynge Iehoram and syster of Ohoziah, toke Iehoas the sonne of Ohoziah, and stale hym from among the kynges sonnes that were slayne, and hys nourse with him, out of a slepyng chambre, and hyd hym from Athaliah, that he was not slayne.
2 Kings 11:3 And he was with her, hyd in the house of the Lorde .vi. yeare. And Athaliah dyd raygne ouer the lande.
2 Kings 11:4 And the seuenth yeare Iehoiada sent & fet the rulars ouer hundredes with the captaines & them of the garde, and toke them into hym into the house of the Lorde, and made a bonde with them, & toke an othe of them in the house of the Lorde, & shewed them the kynges sonne,
2 Kings 11:5 And he commaunded them, sayinge: thys is that ye must do: one thyrde parte of you shall come on the Saboth daye, and kepe the watch of the kynges house:
2 Kings 11:6 And another thyrd part shalbe at the gate Sur: and another thyrde parte shalbe at the gate behynde the gard chambre, and so shall ye kepe the watche of the house of Mesah,
2 Kings 11:7 & two porcions of you: that is, all that go oute the Saboth daye, shall kepe the watche of the house of the Lorde aboute the kynge,
2 Kings 11:8 and shal compase the kynge round aboute, euery man wyth his wepen in his hand. And whosoeuer cometh within the ranges shal dye for it. And se that ye be with the kinge as he goeth oute and in.
2 Kings 11:9 And the captaynes ouer the hundredes did all thynges as Iehoiada the prieste commaunded, and toke euery man hys men, that is, them that came in the Saboth daye wyth them that went out the Saboth day, & wente to Iehoiada the prieste.
2 Kings 11:10 And the prieste gaue to the captaynes ouer hundredes the speares & shyldes that were kynge Dauids, & had remayned in the temple.
2 Kings 11:11 And the garde stode euery man with hys wepon in hys hand rounde about the king from the ryght corner of the temple to the left alonge by the aultare & the temple.
2 Kings 11:12 And he broughte oute the sonne of the kynge, & put the croune vpon hym, & delyuered hym the wytnesse, and made hym kynge, and annoynted hym. And they clapte theyr handes and sayd: God saue the kynge.
2 Kings 11:13 And when Athaliah hearde the noyse of the runnynge of the people, she came to the people into the house of the Lorde.
2 Kings 11:14 And when she sawe the kynge stande by a pyler (as the maner was) & the syngers & the trompettes by the kynge, and all the people of the lande reioysynge, and the blowing of the trompettes, she rente her clothes, and cryed: treason, treason.
2 Kings 11:15 And Iehoiada the priest commaunded the captaynes of the hundredes that had the rule of the hoste, and sayde to them: haue her oute wtoute the ranges, and yf anye folowe her, let hym dye with the swerde: for the prieste sayd: she maye not be slayne in the house of the Lord.
2 Kings 11:16 And they layde handes on her, & she went the waye that the horses of the kynges went oute & was slayne there.
2 Kings 11:17 And Iehoiada made a bonde both betwene the Lorde and the kynge, & betwene the people and the Lorde, that they shulde be the Lordes people: & also betwene the kynge and the people.
2 Kings 11:18 Then all the people of the land wente into the house of Baal, and destroyed hys aultares, and brake doune hys Images lustely, & slue Nathan the prieste of Baal before the aultare And the prieste set watche men in the house of the Lorde,
2 Kings 11:19 & toke the rulars ouer hundredes and the captaynes, and the garde and all the people of the lande: And they brought the kinge from the house of the Lord, and went the way of the gate of the garde of the kynges house. And he sat hym doune on the seate of the kynges.
2 Kings 11:20 And all the people of the Lorde reioysed, and the cytye was in quyete. And they slue Athaliah with the swerde in the house of the kynge.
2 Kings 11:21 Iehoas was seven yeare olde when he was made kyng.

CHAPTER: 12

2 Kings 12:1 And he beganne to raygne the seuenth yeare of Iehu, & raygned fourtye yeare in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Zebiah Bersabe.
2 Kings 12:2 And he dyd that pleased the Lorde, as longe as Iehoiada the Prieste enformed hym.
2 Kings 12:3 But they toke not awaye the hyllaultares, for the people slue & offered styll in the hyllaultares.
2 Kings 12:4 And Iehoas sayde to the prieste: all the syluer that is dedicate & brought to the house of the Lorde in curraunt money, that is to saye, the money that euerye man is set at, with all the moneye that euerye mannes herte geueth hym to brynge into the house of the Lord,
2 Kings 12:5 let the priestes take it to them, euery man of hys acquayntaunce, and let them repayre the broken places of the temple in all places where ought is founde decayed.
2 Kings 12:6 Neuerthelater the priestes had not mended vnto the .xxiij. yeare of Iehoas, that was decayed in the temple.
2 Kings 12:7 Then kynge Iehoas called for Iehoiada the priest, & for the other priestes also, and sayde to them: why repayre ye not the broken places of the temple? Now therfore se that ye receyue no more money of your aquayntaunce, but delyuer it to repayre the temple wythall.
2 Kings 12:8 And the priestes consented to receyue no more moneye of the people: But that it shulde go to the mendynge of the temple.
2 Kings 12:9 Then Iehoiada the priest toke a cofer and bored an hoale in the lyd of it, & put it besyde the aultare on the ryght syde as a man cometh into the house of the Lorde. And into that dyd the priestes that kepte the dores, put all the money that was brought into the house of the lord.
2 Kings 12:10 And when they sawe that there was muche money in the cofer the kinges scribe, & the hye prieste came, and knyt vp the moneye that was founde in the house of the Lorde, after they had tolde it.
2 Kings 12:11 And they gaue the moneye by sommes into the handes of the worcke men that had the ouersyght of the house of the Lord: & they brought it oute to the carpenters & buylders that wrought vpon the house of the Lorde,
2 Kings 12:12 & to masons and hewers of stone, to bye tymbre & fre stone, to repayre the decaye in the house of the Lorde, & all that that neaded repayrynge in the house:
2 Kings 12:13 howe be it there was not made in the house of the Lorde, booles of syluer, shredyng knyues, basens trompettes or any other instrumentes of goulde or syluer, of that money that was brought for the house of the Lorde.
2 Kings 12:14 For they gaue that to the worckemen, to repayre therewyth the house of the Lorde.
2 Kings 12:15 Moreouer they rekened not with the men, into whose handes they delyuered the money to be bestowed on worckemen: But they dyd it euen of fidelitye.
2 Kings 12:16 How be it trespace moneye and synne money myght not be broughte into the house of the Lorde, for it was the priestes.
2 Kings 12:17 Then came Hazael kynge of Syrya, and fought agaynste Geth, and toke it, & apointed hym selfe to go vp to Ierusalem.
2 Kings 12:18 But Iehoas kyng of Iuda toke all the dedicate thynges that Iehosaphat Iehoram & Ohoziah his fathers kynges of Iuda, had dedicate, & that he hym self had dedicated, & al the gould that coulde be found in the treasure of the house of the Lorde & of the kinges house, & sent it to Hazael Kynge of Syrya: and so he departed from Ierusalem.
2 Kings 12:19 The remnaunt of the actes of Iehoas & al he dyd, are writen in the chronicles of the kinges of Iuda.
2 Kings 12:20 And his owne seruauntes arose and wroughte treason, and slue Iehoas in the house Melo, in the way doune to Sela.
2 Kings 12:21 Iozabar the sonne of Semaath and Iehozabad the sonne of Somer hys seruauntes, smote hym, that he dyed. And they buryed hym wyth his fathers in the cytye of Dauid. And Amaziah hys sonne raygned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 13

2 Kings 13:1 In the .xxiij. yeare of Iehoas sonne of Ohoziah king of Iuda. Iehoahaz the sonne of Iehu was made kyng ouer Israel in Samaria, & continued .xvij. year
2 Kings 13:2 And he wrought wickednesse in the syghte of the Lorde: for he folowed the synne of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat whiche made Israell synne, & departed not there from.
2 Kings 13:3 Wherfore the Lorde was angrye with Israel, and delyuered them into the hande of Hazael kynge of Syrya, and into the hande of Benhadad the sonne of Hazael all theyr dayes.
2 Kings 13:4 But Iehoahaz besought the Lorde, and the Lorde heard hym. For he had sene the oppressyon of Israel, how the kynge of Siria oppressed them.
2 Kings 13:5 And therfore the Lorde gaue Israel a delyuerer, & they went oute from vnder the handes of the Syryans. And the chyldren of Israel dwelt in their tentes as before time.
2 Kings 13:6 Neuerthelesse they departed not from the synne of the house of Ieroboam which made Israel sinne but walked therein. And there remayned a groue also in Samaria styll:
2 Kings 13:7 But there were left of the people to Iehoahaz, but fyfty horsmen and ten charettes, & ten thousand fotemen, for the kynge of Syrya had destroyed them and made them lyke threshed chaffe.
2 Kings 13:8 The rest of the actes of Iehoahaz, & al he dyd & his powre are wrytten in the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.
2 Kings 13:9 And Iehoahaz rested wyth hys fathers, & they buryed hym in Samaria, & Ioas hys sonne raygned in hys steade.
2 Kings 13:10 In the .xxxvij. yeare of Iehoas kynge of Iuda, began Ioas the sonne of Iehoahaz to raygne ouer Israell in Samaria, & continued .xvi. yeare,
2 Kings 13:11 & dyd vnhappelye in the syghte of the Lorde, & departed in nothynge from the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat that made Israell synne, but walcked therein.
2 Kings 13:12 The remnaunt of the actes of Ioas & al he dyd, and his power, how he fought wt Amaziah Kynge of Iuda, are wrytten in the chronicle boke of the kynges of Israel.
2 Kings 13:13 And when Ioas was layde to rest with his fathers, Ieroboam sat vpon his seate. And Ioas was buryed in Samaria amonge the Kynges of Israel.
2 Kings 13:14 When Eliseus was fallen sicke of the sicknesse whereof he dyed, Ioas kynge of Israell came to him, and wepte to him, & sayde: O father father the charet of Israel & the horsmen of the same.
2 Kings 13:15 And Eliseus sayde vnto him, brynge bowe and arowes.
2 Kings 13:16 And he brought to hym bowe & arowes. And he sayd to the king of Israel: put thyne hande vpon the bowe, & when he had put hys hande vpon the bowe, Elizeus put hys handes vpon the kinges handes.
2 Kings 13:17 Then he sayde: open a wyndowe Eastwarde, & he opened. And Eliseus sayde: shote & he shote. And he sayde: the arowe of helpe of the Lorde, and the arowe of helpe agaynst the Syryans, for thou shalt bete the Syryans in Aphek tyll thou haue consumed them.
2 Kings 13:18 Then he sayde: take arowes: and he toke Then he sayde to the kyng of Israel: smyte the grounde, and he smote thryse & ceased.
2 Kings 13:19 And the man of God was angrye with him, and sayde: thou shuldest haue smyten fyue or syxe tymes, and then thou haddest smytten the Syryans tyl thou haddest consumed them: wher now thou shalt bete them but thryse.
2 Kings 13:20 When Eliseus was dead, and buryed, the soudyars of the Moabites came into the lande, the yeare folowyng.
2 Kings 13:21 And it chaunged as they were buryeng a man, that they spyed the soudyars, and therfore caste the man into the sepulchre of Elizeus. And as sone as the man came, and touched the bones of Elizeus, he reuyued, and stode vp on hys fete.
2 Kings 13:22 And Hazael oppressed Israel, all the dayes of Iehoahaz.
2 Kings 13:23 But the Lorde had mercye on them & pytyed them, & turned to them, because of hys appoyntment made with Abraham, Isaac & Iacob, & wolde not destroye them, ether caste them from hym as yet.
2 Kings 13:24 And when Hazael king of Syrya was dead, Benhadad his sonne raigned in hys steade.
2 Kings 13:25 And then Ioas the sonne of Iehoahaz went agayne, & toke oute of the hand of Benhadad sonne of Hazael, the cytyes which he had taken awaye oute of the handes of Iehoahaz hys father, with warre. And thre tymes dyd Ioas beate hym, and brought the cytyes of Israel agayne.

CHAPTER: 14

2 Kings 14:1 The seconde yeare of Ioas sonne of Iehoahaz kynge of Israell raygned Amaziah the sonne of Iehoas kynge of Iuda:
2 Kings 14:2 he was .xxv. yeare olde when he began, and raygned .xxix. yeare in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Iehoadan, & was of Ierusalem,
2 Kings 14:3 And he dyd that pleased the Lorde, yet not lyke Dauid hys father: but dyd in al thinges as Ioas hys father dyd.
2 Kings 14:4 Nether toke they awaye the hyll aulters. But the people slue, & offered styll in the hylaulters.
2 Kings 14:5 And as sone as the kyngedome was setteled in hys hande, he slue hys seruauntes that kylled the kyng hys father.
2 Kings 14:6 But the chyldren of those murtherars he slue not, as it is written in the boke of the lawe of Moses, where the Lorde commaunded sayinge: the fathers shall not dye for the childrens cause, nor the chyldren for the deades of theyr fathers: But euerye man shalbe slayne for hys owne synne.
2 Kings 14:7 And he slue of the Edomites in the salt valeye ten thousande, and toke the toune Sela wt strength of battell, and called the name of it Iektheel euer after.
2 Kings 14:8 After that Amaziah sent messengers to Ioas the sonne of Iehoahaz sonne of Iehu king of Israel sayinge: come, let vs se eche other.
2 Kings 14:9 But Ioas kyng of Israel sente agayne to Amaziah kyng of Iuda, sayinge. A thistel in Libanon sent to a cypresse tree in Lybanon, sayinge: geue thy doughter to my sonne to wyfe. But the wylde beastes in Lybanon went and troade doune the thistel.
2 Kings 14:10 Because thou hast beaten the Edomytes, therfore thyne hert ryseth. Be gloryouse: but tarye at home. For what neadest thou to prouoke to myscheue, that thou shuldest be ouerthrowen and Iuda with the.
2 Kings 14:11 But Amaziah wolde not heare. And so Ioas kyng of Israel went vp, and he and Amaziah kynge of Iuda sawe eyther other at Bethsames in Iuda.
2 Kings 14:12 And Iuda was put to the worse before Israel, & they fled euerye man to hys tent.
2 Kings 14:13 And Ioas kyng of Israel toke Amaziah kynge of Iuda. sonne of Iehoas, sonne of Ohoziah, at Bethsames. And then he went to Ierusalem, and brake doune of the walle of Ierusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, foure hundred cubytes.
2 Kings 14:14 And he toke all the goulde and siluer & al the vesseles that were founde in the house of the Lorde, & in the treasure of the kynges house, and hostages thereto: and then returned to Samaria agayne.
2 Kings 14:15 The rest of the actes of Ioas which he did and hys powre, & how he fought with Amasiah kyng of Iuda, are writen in the chronicles of the kynges of Israel:
2 Kings 14:16 & Ioas layde hym to rest wyth hys fathers, and was buryed at Samaria among the kynges of Israel: & Ieroboam hys sonne raigned in hys roume.
2 Kings 14:17 Amaziah the sonne of Iehoas kyng of Iuda, lyued after the death of Ioas sonne of Iehoahaz kyng of Israel, fyftene year.
2 Kings 14:18 And the remanaunt of the deades of Amaziah, are writen in the chronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
2 Kings 14:19 And they conspyred greate treason agaynste him in Ierusalem, & he fled to Lachis. And they wente after hym to Lachis, & slue hym there.
2 Kings 14:20 And they brought hym on an horse & he was buryed at Ierusalem with his fathers in the cytye of Dauid.
2 Kings 14:21 And al the people of Iuda toke Azariah, which was .xvi. yeare old, & made hym kyng for his father Amaziah.
2 Kings 14:22 And he buylte Ailate, and broughte it agayne to Iuda, after that the kynge was layde to reste wyth hys fathers.
2 Kings 14:23 The .xv. yeare of Amaziah sonne of Iehoas kynge of Iuda, was Ieroboam sonne of Ioas made kynge ouer Israel in Samaria, & raygned .xli. yeare,
2 Kings 14:24 and wroughte wyckednesse in the sight of the Lorde: for he turned in nothyng from the sinne of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat which made Israel synne.
2 Kings 14:25 He restored the coastes of Israel from the enterynge of Hemath vnto the sea, in the wylde feldes, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde God of Israell whiche he spake thorow hys seruaunt Ionah the sonne of Amithai the Prophete, which was of Geth Opher.
2 Kings 14:26 For the Lorde had sene howe that the affliccion of Israell was excedynge bytter, in so much that the presoned & the forsaken were at an ende. And there was no helper vnto Israel.
2 Kings 14:27 And the Lorde had not yet sayde that men shulde put out the name of Israel from vnder heauen. And therfore he holpe them by the hand of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas.
2 Kings 14:28 The rest of the deedes of Ieroboam, and all he dyd, & his powre how he fought, & how he restored Damasco and Hemath to Iuda in Israel are written in the boke of the chronicles of the kinges of Israel.
2 Kings 14:29 And Ieroboam layde hym to rest with his fathers and wyth the kynges of Israel, and Zachariah hys sonne raigned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 15

2 Kings 15:1 The .xxvij. yeare of Ieroboam king of Israel, Azariah sonne of Amaziah kynge of Iuda beganne to raygne.
2 Kings 15:2 Sixtene yeare olde was he when he was made kynge, & he raygned .lij. yeare in Ierusalem, hys mothers name was Iecheliah, & was of Ierusalem.
2 Kings 15:3 And he dyd that pleased the Lorde in all thynges as dyd hys father Amaziah:
2 Kings 15:4 saue that they put not the hyllaulters awaye: for the people offered & burned fat styll in the hylaultares.
2 Kings 15:5 And the Lorde smote the kynge, that he was a leper vnto the daye of hys death, and dwelte in an house at lybertye, and Iotham the kynges sonne gouerned the house and iudged the people of the lande.
2 Kings 15:6 The reste of the deades of Azariah & all he dyd, are wrytten in the chronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
2 Kings 15:7 And Azariah layde hym to slepe with his fathers, and they buryed hym with his fathers in the cytie of Dauid, & Iotham his sonne raygned in his steade.
2 Kings 15:8 In the .xxxviij. yeare of Azariah kynge of Iuda, was Zachariah the sonne of Ieroboam made kynge vpon Israel in Samaria, & raygned syxe monethes,
2 Kings 15:9 and dyd that displeaseth the Lorde, as dyd hys fathers, and turned not from the synnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat which made Israel synne.
2 Kings 15:10 And Zelum the sonne of Iabes conspyred agaynste hym, and smote hym before the people, & kylled hym, & raygned in hys steade.
2 Kings 15:11 The rest of the deades of Zachariah are written in the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.
2 Kings 15:12 This is the sayinge that the Lord spake vnto Iehu, sayinge: thy sonnes shall syt on the seate of Israell in the fourth generacyon. And it came so to passe.
2 Kings 15:13 Selum the sonne of Iabes beganne to raygne the .xxxix. yeare of Azariah kynge of Iuda, and he raygned a moneth in Samaria.
2 Kings 15:14 For Manahem the sonne of Gadi came vp from Therzah, and went to Samaria & smote Selum the sonne of Iabes in Samaria, & slue hym, and raygned in hys steade.
2 Kings 15:15 The reste of the deades of Selum & the treason, whiche he conspyred, are wrytten in the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.
2 Kings 15:16 The same tyme Manahem destroyed Thaphsah and all that were therin & the coastes thereof from Therzah (because they opened not to hym) he smote and rent all the wemen with chylde.
2 Kings 15:17 The .xxxix. yeare of Azariah kynge of Iuda, beganne Manahem the sonne of Gadi to raygne vpon Israel, & contynued ten yeare in Samaria.
2 Kings 15:18 And he dyd euyll in the sighte of the Lorde, and turned not all hys dayes from the synne of Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat which made Israel synne.
2 Kings 15:19 And Phul kynge of Assiria came vpon the lande. And Manahem gaue Phul a thousand talentes of syluer, to helpe hym to stablyshe hys kyngdome.
2 Kings 15:20 And Manahem raysed the money in Israel, vpon al men of substaunce, for to geue the kynge of Assiria fyftye sycles of syluer a pece. And the kynge of Assyrya turned backe agayne, & taryed not there in the lande.
2 Kings 15:21 The rest of the deades of Manahem & all he dyd, are wrytten in the chronicles of the kynges of Israel.
2 Kings 15:22 And when Manahem was layde to reste with his fathers Phakeyah his sonne raygned in hys steade.
2 Kings 15:23 The fyftieth yeare of Azariah kyng of Iuda, beganne Phakeiah the sonne of Manahem to raygne ouer Israell in Samaria, and continued two yeare,
2 Kings 15:24 & wrought wickedlye in the syghte of the Lorde, and lefte not of from the synnes of Heroboam sonne of Nabat whiche made Israel synne.
2 Kings 15:25 And Phakeh the sonne of Romeliah a Lorde of hys conspyred agaynste hym, and slue hym in the palayse of the Kynges house, wyth Argob and Ariah and fyftie men wyth hym that were Galaadites: and when he had kylled him, raygned in his roume.
2 Kings 15:26 The rest of Phakeyah and all he dyd are wrytten in the chronicles of the kynges of Israell.
2 Kings 15:27 And the .lij. yeare of Azariah king of Iuda beganne Phakeh the sonne of Romeliah to raygne ouer Israel in Samaria and continued .xx. yeare,
2 Kings 15:28 and dyd euyll in the syght of the Lorde, and turned not from the synnes of Ieroboam sonne of Nabat that made Israel sinne.
2 Kings 15:29 In the dayes of Phakeh kyng of Israel, came Teglath Phalasar kyng of Assyrya, and toke Aron, Abel, Beth, Maacah, Ianoah, Kades, Hazor, Galaad, Galile, and all the lande of Nephtali, and caryed them away to Assyrya.
2 Kings 15:30 And Hosea the sonne of Elah conspyred treason agaynst Phakeh the sonne of Romeliah, and smote hym, and slue hym, & raigned in hys steade, the .xx. yeare of Iotham the sonne of Oziah.
2 Kings 15:31 The rest of the actes of Phakeh, & all he dyd, are wrytten in the storyes of the kynges of Israel.
2 Kings 15:32 The seconde yeare of Phakeh sonne of Romeliah kynge of Israel, beganne Iotham the sonne of Oziah kynge of Iuda to raygne.
2 Kings 15:33 Fyue and twentie yeare olde was he when he beganne to raygne, and he raigned .xvi. yeare in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Ierusalem the doughter of Zadok.
2 Kings 15:34 And he did that was ryght in the sight of the Lorde: euen in al thynge as dyd hys father Oziah, dyd he.
2 Kings 15:35 But they put not awaye the hyllaultares: for the people offered & burnt incense styll in the hyllaulters, he buylt the hyghest dore in the house of the Lorde.
2 Kings 15:36 The reast of the dedes of Iotham and al he dyd, are written in the cronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
2 Kings 15:37 In those dayes the Lorde beganne to sende agaynst Iuda, Razin the king of Syrya and Phakeh the sonne of Romeliah.
2 Kings 15:38 And Iotham rested wyth hys fathers & was buryed wyth hys fathers in the cytye of Dauid hys father, & Ahaz hys sonne raygned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 16

2 Kings 16:1 The .xvij. yeare of Phakeh sonne of Romeliah kynge of Israell, Ahaz sonne of Iotham king of Iuda, beganne to raygne
2 Kings 16:2 .xx. yeare old was he, when he was made kynge: & raygned .xvi. yeare in Ierusalem, and dyd not that was ryghte in the eyes of the Lord hys God, lyke Dauid hys father.
2 Kings 16:3 But went in the waye of the kynges of Israell, and therto he offered hys sonne in fyre, after the abhomynacyon of the hethen which the Lorde caste oute before the chyldren of Israel.
2 Kings 16:4 And he offered and burnt the fat in the hilaulters and on the hylles and vnder euery grene tree.
2 Kings 16:5 Then Razin kyng of Syrya & Phakeh sonne of Romeliah Kynge of Israel came vp to Ierusalem to fyghte. And they beseged Ahaz, but coulde not ouercome hym.
2 Kings 16:6 At the same tyme Razin Kynge of Syrya broughte Ailath agayne to Syrya, & ryd the Iewes thence. And the Syryans went to Ailath, and dwelte therein vnto thys daye.
2 Kings 16:7 Then Ahaz sente messengers to Teglath Phalasar Kyng of Assyrya, saying: I am thy seruaunte and thy sonne, come & delyuer me oute of the hande of the kynge of Syrya, and out of the hande of the kynge of Israel which are rysen agaynst me.
2 Kings 16:8 And Ahaz toke the syluer and the goulde that was founde in the house of the LORDE and in the treasure of the kynges house, and sent it for a rewarde to the Kynge of Assyria.
2 Kings 16:9 And the king of Assyrya herkened to hym, and went to Damasco, and toke it, and caried the people away to Kir, and slue Razin.
2 Kings 16:10 And King Ahaz wente agaynste Teglath Phalasar Kyng of Assyrya to Damasco. And when he sawe a certen aulter that was at Damasco, he sente to Vriah the Priest the patern of the aulter and the fashyon of all the workmanship thereof.
2 Kings 16:11 And Vriah the Priest made an aulter in all poyntes lyke to the paterne whiche kynge Ahaz had sent from Damasco, and had fynyshed it by the kynges comming from Damasco.
2 Kings 16:12 And when the kynge was come from Damasco, & sawe the aulter, he went to it, & offered thereon.
2 Kings 16:13 And he burnt his burntofferyng, and sprinkeled the bloude of the peace offerynge, and powred hys drinckeofferynge & sprynkled the bloud of his peaceofferynges vpon the sayde aulter.
2 Kings 16:14 And the brasen aultare that was before the Lord, he fet from before the house, from betwene the aulter & the house of the Lorde, and put it on the northsyde of the sayde aulter.
2 Kings 16:15 And the Kinge commaunded Vriah the Priest saying: vpon the great aulter set on fyre, in the mornynge burntofferynges, & in the euen meate offerynges, & the kynges burnte sacrifice & his meateofferyng, & the burntofferynges of all the people of the lande & theyr meateofferynges & theyr drynckofferynges, & powre thereon all the bloude of al maner offeringes. But the brasen aulter shalbe for me, to enquyre with.
2 Kings 16:16 And Vriah the priest dyd all thynges as king Ahaz commaunded hym,
2 Kings 16:17 And kyng Ahaz brake the sydes of the bottomes & toke the lauers from of them, & toke doune the sea from of the brasen oxen that were vnder it, & put it vpon a pauement of stone.
2 Kings 16:18 And therto the pulpyte for the Saboth that they had made in the house, and the kynges entrye wythout turned he to the house of the Lord, for feare of the kynge of Assyrya.
2 Kings 16:19 The reste of the dedes of Ahaz which he dyd, are wrytten in the Chronicles of the kynges of Iuda.
2 Kings 16:20 And Ahaz layde hym to reste with his fathers, and was buryed wyth hys fathers in the cytye of Dauid: & Hezekyah hys sonne raygned in his roume.

CHAPTER: 17

2 Kings 17:1 In the .xij. yeare of Ahaz kynge of Iuda, Hosea sonne of Elah beganne to raigne in Samaria, vpon Israel, & continued .ix. year
2 Kings 17:2 & dyd that displeased the Lord, but not so euyll as dyd the kynges of Israel that were before hym.
2 Kings 17:3 And Salmanasar kynge of Assyrya came vpon him, & Hosea became hys seruaunte, and gaue hym presentes.
2 Kings 17:4 And the kynge of Assyrya founde treason in Hosea, because he had sente messengers to Sua kynge of Egypte, and sente no presentes vnto the kynge of Assyrya, as he was yerely wonte to do. Therfore the kynge of Assyrya beseged hym, and put hym in pryson.
2 Kings 17:5 And then the kyng of Assyrya came thorououte all the londe, & came to Samaria & beseged it thre yeare.
2 Kings 17:6 And in the nynthe yeare of Hosea, the kynge of Assyrya toke Samaria & caryed Israel away vnto Assyrya, & put them in Hala, in Habor on the riuer of Gozan, & in the cytyes of the Medes.
2 Kings 17:7 For the chyldren of Israel had synned agaynst the Lorde theyr God whiche brought them oute of the lande of Egypt, from vnder the hande of Pharao kyng of Egypt, and feared other Goddes.
2 Kings 17:8 And they walked in the ordinaunce of the hethen which the Lorde caste oute before the children of Israel, and in the thynges which the kynges of Israell had made.
2 Kings 17:9 And the chyldren of Israel wrapt them selues in thynges that were not well toward the Lorde their God. And they buylte them hylaulters in al theyr cytyes, bothe in the toures where they kepte watche, and also in the strong tounes.
2 Kings 17:10 And they made them Images & groues on euerye hye hyll, & vnder euerye grene tree.
2 Kings 17:11 And there they sacrifyced in the hylaulters, as dyd the hethen which the Lorde caried awaye at theyr commynge, & wrought weked dedes, to angre the Lord wyth al.
2 Kings 17:12 And they serued Idoles, wherof the Lord had said to them: ye shall not do so.
2 Kings 17:13 And the Lorde testifyed to Israel & to Iuda, by all the Prophetes & by al the sears sayinge: Turne from youre wicked wayes & kepe my commaundementes & myne ordinaunces accordynge to all the lawes which I commaunded youre fathers, & as I sente to you by my seruauntes the prophetes.
2 Kings 17:14 Notwithstanding they wolde not heare, but hardened their neckes, lyke to the neckes of their fathers that dyd not beleue the Lorde theyr God.
2 Kings 17:15 And they refused his ordinaunce & his appoyntemente that he had made wyth theyr fathers, and the wytnesse which he had witnessed to them, and folowed vanitie and became vayne, lyke to the hethen that were rounde aboute them, of whiche the Lorde had charged them, that they shuld not do lyke them.
2 Kings 17:16 But they lefte the commaundementes of the Lorde their God, and made them Images of metall, euen .ij. calues: & made groues, and bowed them selues vnto all the host of heauen, & serued Baal,
2 Kings 17:17 And they sacrificed their sonnes & their doughters in fyre, & vsed witchcraft & enchauntementes, & were solde to worcke wickednes in the sight of the Lorde for to angre hym.
2 Kings 17:18 Wherfore the Lorde was excedyng wrothe with Israel & put them oute of hys sighte, that there was lefte but the trybe of Iuda onelye,
2 Kings 17:19 and therto Iuda kept not the commaundementes of the Lorde theyr God, but walked in the ordinaunces of Israel whiche they had made.
2 Kings 17:20 Therfore the Lorde caste vp all the seed of Israell, and vexed them and delyuered them into the handes of spoylers, vntyll he had cast them oute of his syght.
2 Kings 17:21 And Israel deuyded them selues from the house of Dauid, and made Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat kynge. Which Ieroboam thruste Israel awaye from the Lorde, and made them synne a great synne.
2 Kings 17:22 And so the children of Israel walcked in al the synne of Ieroboam which he had set vp, and departed not therefrom,
2 Kings 17:23 vntyll the Lorde had put Israel awaye oute of hys sighte, as he sayde by al his seruauntes the prophetes. And so he translated Israel oute of theyr lande to Assyrya, euen vnto this daye.
2 Kings 17:24 And the kynge of Assyrya brought from Babylon & from Cutha, & from Aua & from Hemath and from Sepharuaim, and put them in the cyties of Samaria in steade of the chyldren of Israel. And they possessed Samaria & dwelte in the cytyes thereof.
2 Kings 17:25 But at the begynnynge of theyr dwellynge, they feared not the Lord. Wherfore the Lorde sente lyons vpon them which slue them.
2 Kings 17:26 Then the men tolde the king of Assyrya, sayinge: The nacyons which thou hast translated, & put in the cytyes of Samaria, knowe not the maner of the God of the lande, and therfore he hath sente lyons vpon them, whiche slaye them, because they knowe not the maner of the God of the lande.
2 Kings 17:27 Then the kynge of Assyrya commaunded saying: cary thyther one of the priestes which ye brought thence, & let him go, & dwell there, & teache them the fashyon howe to serue the God of the countreye.
2 Kings 17:28 And then one of the priestes which they had caried thence, went & dwelte in Bethel, & taught them howe they shulde feare the Lorde.
2 Kings 17:29 How be it, euerye nacyon made theyr owne Goddes, & put them in the houses of the Hiaulters whiche the Samaritans had made, euerye nacion in theyr cytyes where they dwelte.
2 Kings 17:30 The men of Babilon made Socoth, Benoth. The men of Cuth made Nergell. They of Hemath made Asima.
2 Kings 17:31 The Euites made Nebahaz, and Tharthak. And the Sepharuaites burnt theyr chyldren in fyre vnto Adramelech and Anamelech, the Goddes of the Sepharuaites.
2 Kings 17:32 And though they feared the Lorde, yet they made them priestes of the loweste of the people, for the hyllaultars, whiche sacrifyced for them in the houses of the hyll aulters.
2 Kings 17:33 And so they feared the Lorde, and yet serued theyr owne Goddes after the maner of the people from whence they were brought.
2 Kings 17:34 Vnto thys daye they do after the olde maner: they neyther feare the Lorde, neyther do after theyr owne ordynaunces and customes, and after the lawe & commaundement whiche the Lord commaunded the chyldren of Iacob whose name he called Israel,
2 Kings 17:35 and made an appoyntmente with them and charged them saying: feare not any other Goddes, nor bow your selues to them nor serue them, nor sacrifice to them:
2 Kings 17:36 but to the Lorde whych brought you oute of the lande of Egypte wyth greate powre & a stretched out arme: hym feare & to him bowe & to him do sacrifice.
2 Kings 17:37 And the ordinaunces, customes, law & commaundement which I wrote for you, se that ye be diligente to do for euermore, & feare not any other Goddes.
2 Kings 17:38 And the appoyntement that I haue made wyth you, se ye forget not, and that you feare none other Goddes:
2 Kings 17:39 but the Lorde youre God ye shall feare, & he shall delyuer you out of the handes of all youre enemies.
2 Kings 17:40 How be it they hearde not, but dyd after the olde maner.
2 Kings 17:41 And euen so dyd these nacions feare the Lorde & serue theyr ymages therto: & so dyd their children & theyr chyldrens children to. Euen as dyd theyr fathers, so do they vnto this daye.

CHAPTER: 18

2 Kings 18:1 The thyrde yeare of Hosea sonne of Ela, kynge of Israell raigned Hezekiah sonne of Ahaz kyng of Iuda.
2 Kings 18:2 Twentye and fyue yeare olde was he, when he beganne to raygne, & raygned .xxix. yeare in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Abi the doughter of Zachariah,
2 Kings 18:3 & he dyd that pleased the Lorde in all thynge, lyke to Dauid hys father.
2 Kings 18:4 He put awaye the hyllaultares & brake the Images, & cut doune the groues, & all to brake the brasen serpente that Moses made. For vnto those dayes the chyldren of Israell dyd burne sacryfyce to it, and called it Nehustan.
2 Kings 18:5 He trusted in the Lorde God of Israel, so that after hym came none lyke hym amonge al the kynges of Iuda, neyther amonge them that went before hym.
2 Kings 18:6 He claue to the Lorde, & departed not from hym, but kept hys commaundementes whiche the Lorde commaunded Moses.
2 Kings 18:7 And the Lorde was wyth hym. And whatsoeuer he toke in hande, he dyd it wysely. And he rebelled agaynste the kynge of Assyrya, & serued hym not.
2 Kings 18:8 He bet the Philistines euen vnto Azah and the coastes thereof, bothe in castels of garysons and stronge cytyes to.
2 Kings 18:9 And the fourthe yeare of kynge Hezekiah, whiche was the seuenthe yeare of Hosea sonne of Ela kynge of Israel, came Salmanasar kynge of Assyrya vpon Samaria, & beseged it.
2 Kings 18:10 And they toke it at the ende of thre yeare, which was the sixte of Hezekiah: that is to say the nynthe yeare of Hosea kynge of Israell, was Samaria wonne.
2 Kings 18:11 And the kynge of Assyrya dyd carye awaye Israel vnto Assyrya, & put them in Halah & in Habor on the ryuer of Gozan, & in the cytyes of Medes:
2 Kings 18:12 because they wolde not herken vnto the voyce of the Lorde theyr God. But transgressed hys appoyntemente, and all that Moses the seruaunt of the Lord commaunded, and wolde neyther heare nor do.
2 Kings 18:13 The .xiiij. yeare of Kynge Hezekiah came Sennaherib kynge of Assyrya agaynste all the stronge cytyes of Iuda, and toke them.
2 Kings 18:14 Whervpon Hezekiah kyng of Iuda sent to the kyng of Assyria to Lachis saying: I haue offended. But depart from me, and what thou putteste on me that wyll I beare. And the kynge of Assyria appoynted vnto Hezekiah kynge of Iuda thre hundred talentes of syluer, and thyrtye talentes of golde.
2 Kings 18:15 And Hezekiah gaue hym all the syluer that was founde in the house of the Lorde, and also in the treasure of the kynges house.
2 Kings 18:16 And the sayde ceason Hezekiah rente of the dores of the temple of the Lorde and the pyllers whiche the sayde Hezekiah kynge of Iuda couered ouer, & gaue them to the kynge of Assyrya.
2 Kings 18:17 And the kinge of Assyrya sent Tarthan & Rabsaris & Rabsakeh from Lachis to kynge Hezekiah with a greate Host to Ierusalem. And they went vp & came to Ierusalem, & wente & stode by the conduyte of the vppermoste pole which is in the waye to the fullers felde,
2 Kings 18:18 and called to the kynge. And there came out to them Eliakim the sonne of Belkiah stuard of housholde & Sobnah the scrybe, & Ioah the sonne of Asaph, the recorder.
2 Kings 18:19 And then Rabsakeh sayde to them. Tell ye Hezekiah I praye you: thus sayth the greate kynge the kyng of Assyria. What confidence is this that thou haste?
2 Kings 18:20 thou wylt haplye speake a lyghte worde, that thou hast councell & powre to make warre. On whome then doest thou truste, that thou rebellest agaynst me?
2 Kings 18:21 doeste thou truste to the staffe of this broken rede Egypte, on which yf a man lene, it wyll runne into hys hande & perce it. For euen so is Pharao kynge of Egypt vnto all that truste on hym.
2 Kings 18:22 If ye saye vnto me we trust in the Lorde oure God. Is not that he whose hyllaulters and other aulters to, Hezekiah hath put doune, & hath sayde to Iuda and Ierusalem, bow youre selues before thys aulter here in Ierusalem.
2 Kings 18:23 And now ioyne thy self to my Lord the king of Assyrya, & I wyll delyuer the two thousande horses, yf thou be able to set ryders vpon them:
2 Kings 18:24 (and yf thou be not) how then arte thou able to resist one of the leste Dukes of my maisters seruauntes? or trustest thou to Egypte for charettes and horsmen?
2 Kings 18:25 Moreouer thinkest thou, that I am come wythoute the byddynge of the Lorde to this place to destroye it? naye: the lord sayde to me, go vp to this lande & destroye it.
2 Kings 18:26 Then sayd Eliakim the sonne of Helkiah and Sobnah & Ioah, to Rabsakeh: speake we pray the to thy seruaunts in the Syryans language for we vnderstande it: & talke not wyth vs in the Iewes tonge, in the eares of the people that are on the walles.
2 Kings 18:27 And Rabsakeh sayde vnto them: hath my mayster sente me onely to thy mayster and to the, to speake these wordes, or rather to the men that kepe the walles, that they shall eate theyr owne dyrte and dryncke their owne pysse with you.
2 Kings 18:28 And so Rabsakeh stode and cryed wyth a loude voyce in the Iewes language, and spake sayinge: heare the sayinge of the great kynge the kyng of Assyrya.
2 Kings 18:29 Thus sayth the king: let not Hezekiah begyle you, for he is not able to delyuer you out of myne hand:
2 Kings 18:30 neyther let Hezekiah make you truste to the Lorde sayinge: the Lorde shall surely ryd vs, and thys cytye shall not be deliuered into the handes of the kyng of Assyrya.
2 Kings 18:31 Herken not vnto Hezekiah, for thus sayth the kynge of Assyrya. Deale kyndely with me, & come out to me. And then eate euery man of hys owne vyne, & of hys owne fygge tree, & drincke euery man of the water of hys owne welle,
2 Kings 18:32 tyll I come, and fet you to as good a lande as youres is: a lande of corne and wyne, a lande of breade & vyneyardes, a lande of olyue trees, of oyle & of hony. And ye shal lyue and not dye. And herken not vnto Hezekiah for he wyll begyle you, sayinge: the Lorde shall delyuer vs.
2 Kings 18:33 For haue the Gods of the nacyons delyuered any God hys lande, out of the hande of the kyng of Assiria?
2 Kings 18:34 where are the Gods of Hemath & of Arphad? where are the Gods of Sepharuaim, of Ana, and Aphah? dyd they delyuer Samaria out of myne handes?
2 Kings 18:35 what God of any land hath deliuered his lande out of mine hand, that the lorde shoulde delyuer Ierusalem out of myne hande.
2 Kings 18:36 But the people helde their peace and answered not hym a worde: for the kynge had commaunded sayinge: answere him not.
2 Kings 18:37 Then Eliakim the stuard of the houshold and Sobnah the scrybe, and Ioah the sonne of Asaph the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothes rent, and tolde hym the wordes of Rabsakeh.

CHAPTER: 19

2 Kings 19:1 When Kynge Hezekiah hearde that he rent his clothes, and put on sacke, and wente to the house of the Lorde.
2 Kings 19:2 Forthermore he sent Eliakim stuard of houshold and Sobnah the scribe, and the elders of the priestes clothed in sack, to Isaiah the Prophet the sonne of Amos.
2 Kings 19:3 And they sayde to hym: thus sayth Hezekiah: thys daye is a daye of trybulacyon, rebukinge and raylynge. Euen as when the chyldren are readye to be borne and the mothers haue no power to be delyuered.
2 Kings 19:4 Oh that the Lorde thy God would heare al the wordes of Rabsakeh whom the kynge of Assiria hys mayster hathe sent to rayle on the lyuynge God, and to rebuke hym wyth wordes which the Lord thy God hath heard. Wherfore lyfte vp thy prayer for the remnaunt that are lefte.
2 Kings 19:5 When the seruauntes of kynge Hezekiah were come to Isaiah,
2 Kings 19:6 Isaiah sayde to them. So shall ye saye to youre mayster. Thus sayth the Lorde: be not afrayde of the wordes thou heardest, with whyche the young men of the kyng of Assiria haue railed on me.
2 Kings 19:7 For I wil sende him a blast that he shal heare tydynges, and so returne to hys owne lande. And I will ouerthrow him with the swerde, euen in hys owne lande.
2 Kings 19:8 And Rabsakeh went backe agayne and founde the kynge of Assiria fightyng agaynst Lobnah: for he had hearde, how thac he was departed from Lachis.
2 Kings 19:9 And he hearde tydynges of Therhakah king of the blacke Mores, how that he was come out to fyght agaynst him.
2 Kings 19:10 And thervpon he departed and sent messengers vnto Hezekiah saying: Thus saye to Hezekiah king of Iuda: let not thy God carie the out of the waye, in whom thou so trustest sayinge: Ierusalem shal not be delyuered into the hand of the kinge of Assiria.
2 Kings 19:11 Beholde, thou hast hearde, what the Kynges of Assiria haue done to all landes, how they haue vtterly destroyed them. And how then shouldest thou escape?
2 Kings 19:12 hathe the Goddes of the Heathen delyuered them whiche myne aunsetries haue destroyed: as Gosan, Haran, Rezeph, and the chyldren of Eden, whiche were in Telazar?
2 Kings 19:13 where is the kinge of Hemath, the kynge of Arphath, the Kynge of the cytye of Sepharuaim, and the kynge of Ana and the kynge of Auah.
2 Kings 19:14 When Hezekiah had receyued the letter of the hand of the messengers & had read it, he went into the house of the Lord and layd it abroade before the Lorde.
2 Kings 19:15 And Hezekiah prayed before the Lorde and sayde: Lorde God of Israell, whych dwellest betwene the Cherubes, thou art God alone ouer all the kyngedomes of the earthe, and thou hast made bothe heauen and earthe.
2 Kings 19:16 Lord bowe thine eares and heare: Open Lorde thyne eyes and se: and heare the wordes of Sennaherib, which had sent to raile on the lyuynge God.
2 Kings 19:17 But of a truthe Lorde, the kynges of Assiria haue destroyed nacyons and their landes,
2 Kings 19:18 and haue set fyre on their Goddes. For they were no Goddes, but the worke of the handes of man, euen wood and stone. And therfore they destroyed them.
2 Kings 19:19 Nowe therfore Lorde our God, saue thou vs oute of his hande, that all the kingdomes of the earth may knowe, that thou Lorde art God alone.
2 Kings 19:20 And Isaiah the sonne of Amoz sent to Hezekiah sayinge: thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: that thou hast prayed to me concernynge Sennaherib kinge of Assiria, I haue hearde it.
2 Kings 19:21 This is the kinge that the lorde sayth of him: he hath despysed the, O virgine doughter of Sihon: he hath shaked his head at the, thou doughter of Ierusalem:
2 Kings 19:22 whom hast thou rayled on? and whom hast thou reuyled? Agaynste whome hast thou exalted thy voyce? and hast lyfte vp thyne eyes so hye?
2 Kings 19:23 Euen against the holy of Israel. By the hand of thy messengers thou hast rayled on the Lorde, & sayde: with the multitude of my charettes I am come vp to the heyght of the mountaynes euen along by the sides of Libanon, and haue cut of the hye Cedar trees and the lustye fyre trees therof euen to the wood of Carmel that belongeth therto.
2 Kings 19:24 I haue dygged and droncke straunge waters, and haue dryed vp with the soles of my fete poles enclosed.
2 Kings 19:25 But hast thou not hearde howe I haue ordeyned suche a thynge a great whyle a go, & haue prepared it from the begynnynge? And now I bryng it forthe and it shalbe to destroy and to brynge stronge cities into rude heapes of stones.
2 Kings 19:26 And the enhabiters of them shalbe of lytle power, and faynt herted and confounded. They shalbe lyke the grasse of the felde & grene erbes, and as the hey on the toppes of the houses whych whetherth or it come to any heyght.
2 Kings 19:27 I wote where thou dwellest, and thy cominge out and goyinge in know I to, and howe thou settest vp thy brystelles agaynste me.
2 Kings 19:28 And because thou settest vp thy bristelles against me, and that thy raginge is come vp to myne eares: therfore I wil put a rynge in thy nose and a byt in thy lyppes, and wyll brynge the backe agayne the same way thou camest.
2 Kings 19:29 And this shalbe a signe vnto the: eate this yeare of the frutes of the seade that fell out, & the next yeare, that waxeth of it selfe. And the thirde yeare sowe ye and reape, plant vineyardes, and eate the frutes therof.
2 Kings 19:30 For the doughter of Iuda that is escaped and lefte, shall yet againe take rotinge dounewarde & beare frute vpwarde.
2 Kings 19:31 For out of Ierusalem shall go a remnaunt, and a nombre that shall escape out of mount Sion: the zeale of the lord of Hostes shall brynge this thinge to passe.
2 Kings 19:32 Wherfore thus saith the Lorde, of the kinge of Assiria: he shall not come to this citie, nor shote arow into it, nor come before with shild nor cast any bancke agaynst it:
2 Kings 19:33 but shall go backe agayne the waye he came, and shall not come at his cytye sayth the Lorde.
2 Kings 19:34 For I wyll defende this cytye and saue it, for myne owne sake, and for Dauid my seruauntes sake.
2 Kings 19:35 And the selfe same nyght the Aungel of the Lorde went out & smote in the hoste of the Assirians an hundred four skore & fiue thousand. And when they were vp erly in the morning beholde, they were al dead corses.
2 Kings 19:36 And so Sennaherib kynge of Assiria auoyded & departed & went againe, and dwelt at Niniueh.
2 Kings 19:37 And as he was in his deuocyon knelynge in the house of Nisroch hys God, Adramelech and Sarasar smote him with the swerde. And they escaped into the lande of Ararat, and Asarhadon hys sonne raygned in his steade.

CHAPTER: 20

2 Kings 20:1 Aboute that tyme Hezekiah was sick vnto the death. And the Prophete Isaiah sonne of Amos came to him & sayde to hym: Thus sayth the Lorde: put thyne houssholde in an ordre, for thou shalt dye and not lyue.
2 Kings 20:2 And Hezekiah turned his face to the wal & besought the Lorde sayinge:
2 Kings 20:3 Oh Lorde, remembre yet howe I haue walked before the truly and with a perfect herte, and haue done that whyche is good in thy sighte, and wepte a great pace.
2 Kings 20:4 And Isaiah was skarce gone oute into the midle of the citie, but that the word of the lord came to him sayinge:
2 Kings 20:5 turne agayn & tell Hezekiah the captayne of my people. Thus sayth the Lorde God of Dauid thy father: I haue hearde thy prayer & seane thy teares. Behold I wyll heale the, and this daye thre dayes thou shalt go vp into the house of the Lorde.
2 Kings 20:6 And I wyl length thy daies yet fiftene yeare and wyll delyuer bothe the and this citie oute of the hand of the kinge of Assiria, & wil defend this citie for mine owne sake, & for Dauid my seruauntes sake.
2 Kings 20:7 And Isaiah sayde: brynge a lumpe of figges. And they brought and put it on the sore, and he recouered.
2 Kings 20:8 Then sayde Hezekiah to Isaiah: what is the signe, that the Lorde will heale my, & that I shall go vp into the house of the Lorde the thyrd daye?
2 Kings 20:9 And Isaiah saide: this sygne shalt thou haue of the Lorde, that the Lorde wil do that he hath spoken: shal the shadowe go forwarde ten degrees, or go backe agayne ten degrees?
2 Kings 20:10 And Hezekiah saide: it is a lyght thynge for the shadowe to go doune ten degrees. Therfore I will not that: but let the shadowe go backewarde ten degrees.
2 Kings 20:11 And Isaiah the Prophete called to the Lorde, and he brought the shadowe ten degrees backewarde, by whyche it had gone doune, in the dyal of Ahaz.
2 Kings 20:12 The same ceason Berodach Baladan the sonne of Baladan king of Babylon sent letters and presentes vnto Hezekiah, for he heard how that Hezekiah was sycke.
2 Kings 20:13 And Hezekiah harkened vnto them, and shewed them al that was in the spycery house, and hys syluer and goulde & odoures & precyouse oyntmentes & hys armorye and all that was founde in hys treasure, there was nothing in his house or in al his reaulme, that he shewed them not.
2 Kings 20:14 Then came Isaiah the Prophete vnto kyng Hezekiah, and sayde to him: What saye these men, and from whence come they to the? And Hezekiah sayde: they be come from a farre countrey, euen from Babylon.
2 Kings 20:15 And he sayd: what haue they sene in thyne house? And Hezekiah sayd: al that is in my house, haue they sene: there is nothinge amonge my treasure that I haue not shewed them.
2 Kings 20:16 And Isaiah sayde to Hezekiah: heare the worde of the Lorde.
2 Kings 20:17 Beholde the day shall come, that all that is in thyne house and that thy fathers haue layde vp in store vnto this day, shalbe caryed to Babilon, and nothing shalbe lefte sayth the lord.
2 Kings 20:18 And of thy sonne that proceaded oute of the, whiche thou begattest, shall there be caryed away, and shalbe made chambrelaines in the palace of the kynge of Babilon.
2 Kings 20:19 And Hezekiah sayde to Isaiah: welcome be the worde of the Lorde whiche thou hast spoken: so that peace and truthe be kept in my dayes.
2 Kings 20:20 The remnaunt of the deades of Hezekiah & al his power, and how he made a pole and conduyte and brought the water into the cytye, are written in the boke of the chronycles of the kynges of Iuda.
2 Kings 20:21 And Hezekiah layde him to rest with hys fathers, and Manasseh hys sonne raygned in his steade.

CHAPTER: 21

2 Kings 21:1 Manasseh was twelue yeare olde when he beganne to raygne, & raygned fyfty and fyue yeare in Ierusalem: hys mothers name was Haphzibah.
2 Kings 21:2 And he dyd that displeased the Lorde, euen after the abhominacions of the Heathen whyche the Lorde caste oute before the chyldren of Israel. And he went
2 Kings 21:3 and buylt the hilaulters agayne, which Hezekiah hys father had destroyed. And he reared vp aulters to Baal and made groues, as dyd Ahab kinge of Israel. And he bowed him selfe vnto all the hoste of heauen and serued them.
2 Kings 21:4 And he buylt aulters in the verye house of the Lorde, of whiche the Lorde had sayd: In Ierusalem I wil put my name.
2 Kings 21:5 And he buylt aulters vnto all the Hoste of heauen, euen in two courtes of the house of the Lorde.
2 Kings 21:6 And he offered his sonne in fyre, and obserued dismall dayes, and vsed witchcrafte and maintened workers wyth spirites, and tellers of fortuners: and wrought muche wyckednesse in the syght of the Lorde to angre hym.
2 Kings 21:7 And he put an ymage of a groue that he had made, euen in the very temple of whiche the Lorde had sayd to Dauid and to Salomon hys sonne: in thys house and in Ierusalem whiche I haue chosen out of all trybes of Israel, wil I put my name for euer.
2 Kings 21:8 Neither wil I make the fete of Israel moue any more out of the lande whiche I gaue their fathers: so that they wilbe diligent to do al I haue commaunded them, and all the lawe that my seruaunt Moses commaunded them.
2 Kings 21:9 But they herkened not: for Manasseh had led them out of the waye, to do more wyckedly then dyd the heathen people, whiche the Lord destroied from before the chyldren of Israel.
2 Kings 21:10 And the Lorde spake by his seruauntes the Prophetes sayinge:
2 Kings 21:11 because Manasseh kynge of Iuda hath done suche abhominacyons, and hath wrought wyckedly aboue all that the Amorites whyche were before him dyd, and hath made Iuda synne also wyth his ydoles.
2 Kings 21:12 Therfore thus sayth the Lord God of Israel. Beholde, I wyl brynge suche euyl vpon Ierusalem and Iuda, that the eares of all that heare it, shall tyngle at it.
2 Kings 21:13 And I wyll stretche ouer Ierusalem the squarynge lyne of Samaria and the plometh of the house of Ahab. And I wyl wype out Ierusalem, as a man would wipe a dyshe, and when he hath wyped, it turneth it vpsedoune.
2 Kings 21:14 And though I leue a remnaunt of myne enheritaunce, yet I wyl delyuer them into the handes of them that hate them, and they shalbe robbed and spoyled of al their enemies:
2 Kings 21:15 euen because they haue done wyckedly and haue angred me, sence the time theyr fathers came out of Egypte vnto thys daye.
2 Kings 21:16 And therto Manasseh shed innocent bloud exceadynge aboundantly, in so mnche that he replenysshed Ierusalem in all corners, beside his synne wherwyth he made Iuda synne & to do euyl in the syght of the Lorde.
2 Kings 21:17 The rest of the actes of Manasseh and all he dyd and hys sinne that he sinned, are written in the boke of the chronicles of the kinges of Iuda.
2 Kings 21:18 And Manasseh layd him to slepe wt his fathers, and was buryed in the garden of his owne house, euen in the garden of Oza: & Amon his sonne raygned in his steade.
2 Kings 21:19 Amon was .xxij. yeare olde when he began to raygne, and he raygned two yeare in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Mesalemeth the doughter of Haru of Iathbah.
2 Kings 21:20 And he did that displeased the Lorde as his father Manasseh dyd.
2 Kings 21:21 And he walked in al the way that hys father walked in, and serued the ydoles that hys father serued, and bowed hym selfe to them.
2 Kings 21:22 And he forsoke the Lorde God of his fathers and walked not in the waye of the Lorde.
2 Kings 21:23 And the seruauntes of Amon conspyred agaynst him, and slue him in hys own house.
2 Kings 21:24 But the people of the lande slue all that conspired agaynst kinge Amon, and made Iosiah his sonne kynge in hys roume.
2 Kings 21:25 The rest of the actes of Amon, which he dyd are wrytten in the chronicle of the kinges of Iuda.
2 Kings 21:26 And they buryed him in his sepulchre in the garden of Oza, and Iosiah hys sonne raygned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 22

2 Kings 22:1 Iosiah was .viij. yeare old when he beganne to raygne, & he raygned .xxxi. yeare in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Ididah the doughter of Adaiah of Bezecath.
2 Kings 22:2 And he dyd that semed ryghte in the syght of the lord, & walked in al the wayes of Dauid his father, & bowed neither to the right hande or to the lefte.
2 Kings 22:3 And the .xviij. yeare of hys raygne kynge Iosiah sent Saphan the sonne of Azaliah the sonne of Mesulam the scribe to the house of the Lorde, saying:
2 Kings 22:4 go to Helkiah the hye priest and let hym summe the siluer that is brought into the house of the Lorde, whych the kepers of the dores haue gathered of the people,
2 Kings 22:5 and let them delyuer it into the handes of the workmen that haue the ouersight of the house of the Lorde, whych shall geue it to them that worke vpon the house of the Lorde, to repaire the decayed places thereof,
2 Kings 22:6 euen vnto the carpenters and masons, and for to bye tymbre and fre stone to repayre the house.
2 Kings 22:7 How be it let no rekenyng be made wt them of the money that is deliuered into their handes, but let them do it of their conscience.
2 Kings 22:8 And Helkiah the hye pryeste sayde to Saphan the scribe: I haue founde the boke of the lawe in the temple of the Lorde, and Helkiah gaue the boke of Saphan, and he read it.
2 Kings 22:9 And then Saphan the scribe went to the kyng and brought him worde agayne, and sayde: thy seruauntes poured out the syluer that was founde in the temple, and haue delyuered it vnto the workemen that haue the ouersyghte of the house of the Lorde.
2 Kings 22:10 Forthermore Saphan the scribe shewed the kynge sayinge: Helkiah the prieste hathe delyuered me here a boke. And Saphan read it before the kynge.
2 Kings 22:11 And the kynge as sone as he had hearde, the wordes of the boke of the lawe, he rent hys clothes
2 Kings 22:12 and commaunded Helkiah the prieste, and Ahikam the sonne of Saphan and Achobor the sonne of Michaiah, and Saphan the scribe, and Asahiah a seruaunt of the kynges sayinge:
2 Kings 22:13 go ye and seke of the Lorde for me & the people and for all Iuda, concernynge the wordes of this boke that is founde. For it is a great wrathe of the Lorde that is kendled vpon vs, that our fathers haue not herkened vnto the wordes of thys boke, to do in all poyntes, as it is written therin.
2 Kings 22:14 And Helkiah the hye pryeste and Ahikam Achobor, Saphan, Ahasiah went vnto Oldah the Prophetisse wyfe to Selum the sonne of Tekuah the sonne of Haraham keper of the robes, whyche Prophetisse dwelt in Ierusalem in the seconde warre, and communed with her.
2 Kings 22:15 And she sayde to them: thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel. Tell the man, that sent you to me:
2 Kings 22:16 thus sayth the Lorde: beholde I wyll brynge euyll vpon this place, and on the dwellers therin: euen al the wordes of the boke, whiche the King of Iuda hath read,
2 Kings 22:17 because they haue forsaken me, and haue burntofferynges vnto other Goddes, to angre me with all the workes of their handes. Therfore is my wrath kendled agaynst thys place, and shall not be quenched.
2 Kings 22:18 But to the kynge of Iuda whyche sent you to enquyre of the Lorde, so shall ye saye: thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel, as touchinge the wordes whiche thou heardest.
2 Kings 22:19 Because thyne hert dyd melt, and thou mekedest thy selfe before me the Lorde, when thou heardest what I spake agaynst thys place, and the enhabiters of the same, howe that it shoulde be destroyed and made acursed, and tarest thy clothes and weptest before me: of that also I haue hearde sayth the Lorde.
2 Kings 22:20 And therfore se, I wyll receyue the vnto thy fathers & wyll fet the vnto thy graue in peace, thyne eyes shall se none of the euyl whych I wyll bryng vpon thys place. And they brought the Kyng worde agayne.

CHAPTER: 23

2 Kings 23:1 And then the kynge sent and gathered vnto hym al the elders of Iuda and of Ierusalem.
2 Kings 23:2 And the Kyng went vp into the house of the Lorde, and all the men of Iuda and all the enhabytoures of Ierusalem wt hym, and the pryestes and the Prophetes and all the people bothe small and greate. And he read in the eares of them al the wordes of the boke of the couenaunt, whyche was founde in the house of the Lord.
2 Kings 23:3 And the kynge stode by a pyller, and made a couenaunt before the Lorde, that they shoulde walke after the Lorde, and kepe his commaundementes and hys wytnesses and hys ordynaunces wyth all their hertes, and al theyr soules, and make good the wordes of the sayde appointmente, that were wrytten in the forsayde boke. And all the people consented to the appoyntment.
2 Kings 23:4 And the kynge commaunded Helkiah the hye prieste and the inferioure pryestes and the kepers of the dore, to bringe out of the temple of the Lorde, al the vesselles that were made for Baal and for the groue & for al the host of heauen. Add he burnt them without Ierusalem in the feldes of Cedron, and caryed the asshes of them into Bethel.
2 Kings 23:5 And he put doune the Camarites, whyche the kynges of Iuda had set to burne offerynges in the hylaulters in the cities of Iuda round aboute Ierusalem and also them that burnt sacrifices vnto Baal to the sonne and to the mone and to the planetes, and to all the hoste of heauen.
2 Kings 23:6 And he brought out the groue from the temple of the Lorde without Ierusalem vnto the broke Cedron, and burnt it at the broke Cedron and stampte it to pouldre, and cast the dust therof vpon the graues of the people of the countrey.
2 Kings 23:7 And he brake doune the celles of the malehores that were in the house of the Lorde, where the wemen woue lytle houses for the groue.
2 Kings 23:8 And he brought al the pryestes oute of the cities of Iuda, and defyled the hylaulters where the pryestes dyd burne sacrifice, euen from Gabaa to Bersabe. And he brake doune the hylaulters of the Gates, that were in the enterynge of the Gate of Iosua the gouernoure of the citie, whyche were on the lefte hande of the gate of the citie.
2 Kings 23:9 Neuerthelesse the pryestes of the hilaulters myght not come at the aulter of the Lorde in Ierusalem, saue only they dyd eate of the swete breade amonge their brethren.
2 Kings 23:10 And he defyled Topheth also, whiche is the valeye of the children of Hennom, because noman shoulde offer hys sonne or hys doughter in fyre to Moloch:
2 Kings 23:11 he put doune the horses that the kynges of Israell had geuen to the sonne at the entrynge of the house of the lord, in the chambre of Nathanmelech the chamberlayne, which was of Paruarim, and burnt the charettes of the sonne wyth fyre.
2 Kings 23:12 And the aulters that were on the toppe of the parloure of Ahal, whyche the kynges of Iuda had made, and the aulters whiche Manasseh had made in the two courtes of the house of the Lorde, the kynge brake doune, and ranne hence, and cast the dust of them into the broke Cedron.
2 Kings 23:13 And the hilaulters that were before Ierusalem on the ryght hande of the mounte Mashith, whyche Salomon kynge of Israel buylt to Astharoth the abhominacion of the Zidons and to Chamos the abhominacyon of the Moabites, and to Milchom the abhomynacyon of the children of Ammon, the kynge defyled:
2 Kings 23:14 and brake the ymages and cut doune the groues, and fylled the places with the bones of men.
2 Kings 23:15 Moreouer the aulter that was at Bethel, the hylaulter made by Ieroboam the sonne of Nabath whyche made Israel synne, both the aulter and also the hyll he brake doune, and burnt the hyll and stampte it to pouder, and burnt the groue.
2 Kings 23:16 And as Iosiah turned hym selfe, he spyed the graues that were in the mounte, and set and fet the bones oute of the graues, and burnt them vpon the aulter and poluted it accordynge to the worde of the lord that the man of God had proclamed, whiche openly had denounced the same thinges.
2 Kings 23:17 Then the kynge saide: what meaneth younder graue stone that I se? And the men of the citye tolde hym: it is the sepulchre of the man of God, whyche came from Iuda and openlye denounced the selfe same thynges that thou hast done to the aulter of Bethel.
2 Kings 23:18 And he said: let hym be: se that noman moue hys bones. And so his bones scaped wyth the bones of a Prophete that came oute of Samaria.
2 Kings 23:19 And therto all the houses of the hilaulters of the cities of Samaria whiche the kynges of Israel had made, to angre wyth all: Iosiah put out of the way, and dyd to them in al pointes as he dyd in Bethel.
2 Kings 23:20 And he sacryfyced all the priestes of the hylaulters that were there euen vpon the aulters, and burnt mennes bones vpon them, and returned to Ierusalem.
2 Kings 23:21 And the kynge commaunded al the people sayinge: kepe the feaste of passouer vnto the Lorde your God, as it is wrytten in the boke of thys couenaunt.
2 Kings 23:22 For there was no passouer holden lyke that, from the daies of the iudges that iudged Israel, and thorowe oute all the dayes of the kynges of Israel and of Iuda.
2 Kings 23:23 And in the .xviij. yeare of kynge Iosiah was thys passouer holden to the Lorde in Ierusalem.
2 Kings 23:24 And therto workers wyth spyrytes, sothsayers, ymages of witchcrafte, ydoles, and al other abhomynacyons that were spyed in the lande of Iuda and in Ierusalem, Iosiah put out of the waye, to make good the wordes of the law, whyche were wrytten in the boke that Helkiah the prieste founde in the house of the Lorde:
2 Kings 23:25 lyke vnto him was there no kynge before him, that turned to the Lorde with al hys herte, with al his soule and all hys myght, accordynge to all the lawe of Moses, neyther after him arose there any suche.
2 Kings 23:26 Notwithstandynge the Lorde turned not from his fearce and great wrath, wherwyth he was angrye against Iuda vpon al the prouocacyons that Manasseh prouoked hym.
2 Kings 23:27 But the Lorde sayd: I will put Iuda to, out of my syghte, as I haue done Israell, and will cast of thys citie Ierusalem whyche I haue chosen and the house of which I haue sayd, my name shalbe there.
2 Kings 23:28 The rest of the deades of Iosiah and all he dyd, are wrytten in the boke of the storyes of the kynges of Iuda.
2 Kings 23:29 In his dayes Pharao Necoh kynge of Egipt went againste the kynge of Assiria to the ryuer of Euphrates. And kynge Iosiah went against hym, and was slayne of hym at Magedo when he had sene him.
2 Kings 23:30 And his seruauntes caryed him dead from Magedo and brought him to Ierusalem, and buried him in hys owne sepulchre. And the people of the land toke Iehoahaz the sonne of Iosiah, and annoynted him and made hym kynge in hys fathers roume.
2 Kings 23:31 And Iehoahaz was .xxiij. yeare olde when he beganne to raygne, and raygned thre monethes in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Hamital the doughter of Ieremiah of Lobnah.
2 Kings 23:32 And he dyd that dyspleased the Lorde, in all thynges as his fathers hath done.
2 Kings 23:33 And Pharao Necoh put him in bondes at Reblah in the lande of Hemath in that tyme of hys raigne in Ierusalem, and put the lande to a tribute of an hundred talentes of syluer, and a talent of golde.
2 Kings 23:34 And Pharao Necoh made Eliakim the sonne of Iosiah, kynge in the roume of Iosiah hys father, and turned his name to Iehoakim and toke Iehoahaz away, whyche when he came to Egypte dyed there.
2 Kings 23:35 And Iehoakim gaue the syluer & the gold to Pharao: how be he it taxed the lande, to geue the money at the commaundement of Pharao and as euery man was set at, so he requyred the syluer and the goulde of the people of the land, to geue Pharao Necoh.
2 Kings 23:36 Iehoakim was .xxv. yeare olde, when he beganne to raygne, & he raigned .xi. yeare in Ierusalem. His mother was named Zebdah the doughter of Phadaiah of Ramah.
2 Kings 23:37 And he dyd that was euyll fauoured in the syght of the Lorde, lyke in all thynges, as dyd his fathers.

CHAPTER: 24

2 Kings 24:1 In his dayes came Nabuchodonozor kynge of Babylon, & Iehoakim became his seruaunte thre yeare, and then turned and rebelled agaynst him.
2 Kings 24:2 And the Lorde sent vpon hym men of warre oute of Caldey, out of Siria, oute of the Moabites, & from the children of Ammon: and sent them into Iuda, to destroye it, accordyng to the sayinge of the Lorde whiche he spake by hys seruauntes the Prophetes.
2 Kings 24:3 Only at the bydding of the Lorde happened it so to Iuda, to put them out of his syght, for the synne of Manasseh accordinge to all he dyd:
2 Kings 24:4 and for the innocent bloude, that he shedde, and fylled Ierusalem with innocent bloude, whych the Lord woulde not forgeue.
2 Kings 24:5 The rest of the deedes of Iehoakim and al he dyd, are wrytten in the chronycles of the kynges of Iuda.
2 Kings 24:6 And Iehoakim layde him to slepe with his fathers, & Iehoacin his sonne raygned in his steade.
2 Kings 24:7 But the kyng of Egipt came now no more out of his lande: for the kynge of Babylon had taken from the ryuer Euphrates, all that pertayneth to the kynge of Egypte.
2 Kings 24:8 Iehoacin was .xviij. yeare olde, when he beganne to raygne, and raygned in Ierusalem thre monethes. His mothers name was Nehustha the doughter of Elnathan of Ierusalem.
2 Kings 24:9 And he dyd that dyspleased the eyes of the Lord in al pointes as his father did.
2 Kings 24:10 In hys tyme came the seruauntes of Nabuchodonozor kynge of Babylon, to Ierusalem, and the cytye was beseged.
2 Kings 24:11 And Nabuchodonozor came to the cytie as his seruauntes were yet a besegynge of it.
2 Kings 24:12 And Iehoacin the kynge of Iuda came oute to the kinge of Babilon, with his mother, his seruaunte, hys Lordes, and hys chambrelaynes. And the king of Babilon toke him, in the eyght yeare of his raygne.
2 Kings 24:13 And he caryed oute thence all the treasure of the house of the Lorde, and the treasure of the kynges house, and brake all the vesselles of goulde, whyche Salomon kynge of Israel had made, in the temple of the Lorde, as the Lorde had sayde.
2 Kings 24:14 And he caried awaye all Ierusalem, and all the Lordes, and all the men of myghte, to the nombre of ten thousande into captyuyte, and all craftes men and Ioyners, none remaynynge saue the poore people of the lande.
2 Kings 24:15 And he caryed awaie Iehoacin to Babilon, and the kynges mother, and the kynges wyues, & hys chambrelaynes, and the mightye of the lande caryed he awaye from Ierusalem to Babilon.
2 Kings 24:16 And al the men of actiuite to the nombre of seuen thousande, & craftesmen and ioyners a thousand, all stronge & apte for warre,
2 Kings 24:17 dyd the kyng of Babilon bring to Babilon to dwell. And the kinge of Babilon made Mathaniah hys fathers brother, king in his stead, and chaunged his name and called him Zedekiah.
2 Kings 24:18 Zedekiah was .xxi. yeare olde when he beganne to raygne, & he raygned a .xi. yeare in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Hamital the doughter of Ieremiah of Lobnah.
2 Kings 24:19 And he dyd euyl in the sight of the lorde, in al pointes lyke to Iehoakim.
2 Kings 24:20 For throughe the wrath of the Lorde it so chaunsed to Ierusalem and Iuda, vntyl he had cast them out of hys syghte. And the sayde Zedekiah rebelled agaynst the king of Babylon.

CHAPTER: 25

2 Kings 25:1 Wherfore in the nynth yeare of hys raygne, the tenthe daye of the tenthe monethe, came Nabuchodonozor Kynge of Babilon wyth all his power to Ierusalem: and pytched agaynst the towne and made engynes agaynst it on euery syde.
2 Kings 25:2 And the cyty continued beseged vnto the .xi. yeare of kynge Zedekiah.
2 Kings 25:3 And the nynthe daye of the fourthe monethe of that yeare, there was so great hongre in the cytye, that there was no sustinaunce for the people of the lande.
2 Kings 25:4 And therto the cytye was broken vp: wherfore al the men of Armes fled by nyght, by a waye thorowe a Gate, betwene two walles harde on the Kynges garden: the Caldeyes lyenge aboute the cytie. And the kynge went strayght towarde the deserte.
2 Kings 25:5 And the hoste of the Caldeyes folowed after him, and toke hym in the deserte of Iericho, all his armye beynge scatered awaye from him.
2 Kings 25:6 And when they had taken him, they brought him to Nabuchodonozor the kynge of Babilon to Reblah, where they reasoned wyth him.
2 Kings 25:7 And they slue the sonnes of Zedekiah before hys eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and fettered him, and caried him to Babylon.
2 Kings 25:8 And the seuenthe day of the fyfth moneth which was in the nintenth yeare of king Nabuchodonozor kynge of Babylon, came Nabusaradan seruaunte of the kinge of Babilon, and chefe Marshal, vnto Ierusalem:
2 Kings 25:9 and burnte the house of the Lorde and the kynges house, and all the houses of Ierusalem, and al greate houses burnte he wyth fyre,
2 Kings 25:10 And al the hoste of the Caldeyes that were with the chefe Marshal, brake doune the walles of Ierusalem rounde aboute.
2 Kings 25:11 And the rest of the people that were lefte in the cytie, and them that were fled to the kynge of Babilon, & the remnaunt of the comen people, Nabusaradan the chefe Marshal caryed awaye,
2 Kings 25:12 and lefte of the poore of the lande to dresse the vynes, and to tyl the grounde.
2 Kings 25:13 And the pyllers of brasse that were in the house of the Lorde and the botomes, and the brasen sea, that was in the house of the Lorde the Caldeyes brake, & caryed the brasse of them to Babylon.
2 Kings 25:14 And the lauers, shouelles, dressynge kniues, ladelles, and the mynystrynge vesselles of brasse, they caried awaie.
2 Kings 25:15 And the firepannes & basens that were eyther of gould or syluer,
2 Kings 25:16 them toke the chefe Marshal away with the two pillers and the sea of brasse, and the bottomes whiche Salomon had made in the house of the Lorde. The brasse of al these vesselles was without weyght.
2 Kings 25:17 The heyghte of the one piller was .xviij. cubites, and the heade theron was brasse and thre cubites long wyth a wrethe & pomegranetes round aboute vpon the heade, all of brasse. And of the same fasshyon was the seconde pyller wt a wrethe.
2 Kings 25:18 And the chefe Marshall toke Saraiah the chefe preste, and Zophoniah, the hiest preste saue one, & thre kepers of the dore.
2 Kings 25:19 And out of the citie he toke a certayne chambrelayne that had the ouersyght of the men of warre, and fiue men that were euer in the kynges presence, whiche were founde in the cytye, and Sopher the captayne of the Hoste that taught the people of the lande to make warre and threskore men of the people of the lande that were founde in the citie also.
2 Kings 25:20 And Nabusaradan the chefe Marshall toke them and brought them to the Kynge of Babilon to Reblah.
2 Kings 25:21 And the kynge of Babilon smote them and slue them at Reblah in the lande of Hemath. And so Iuda was caried awaye out of their lande.
2 Kings 25:22 And ouer the people that remayned in the lande of Iuda, whiche Nabuchodonozor Kynge of Babilon lefte, he set Godoliah the sonne of Ahikam the sonne of Saphan.
2 Kings 25:23 And when all the capitaynes of the men of warre and the men hearde that the Kynge of Babilon had made Godoliah gouerner: there came to Godoliah to Mazphah: Ismael the soune of Nathaniah and Iohanan the sonne of Kareah and Saraiah the sonne of Thanehumeth the Netophathite and Iezoniah the sonne of Maachati and theyr men.
2 Kings 25:24 And Godoliah sware to them and to theyr men, and sayde to them: feare not ye the seruauntes of the Caldeyes. But dwelle in the lande and serue the Kynge of Babilon and ye shalbe in good condycion.
2 Kings 25:25 But it chaunced the seuenth monethe after, that Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah the sonne of Elisama of the Kynges bloude came, and ten men with hym and smote Godoliah that he dyed: and so did he the Iewes & the Caldeys that were with hym at Mazphah.
2 Kings 25:26 There vpon all the people both smalle and greate and the captaynes of the men of warre arose & went to Egipte: for they were afrayed of the Caldeyes.
2 Kings 25:27 Notwithstandinge yet the .xxxiiij. yere after Iehoacin Kynge of Iuda was caryed awaye, the .xxvij. daye of the twelueth monethe, dyd Euilmerodah Kynge of Babilon lifte vp the head of Iehoacin Kynge of Iuda out of the presone house,
2 Kings 25:28 and speake kyndelye to hym and set hys seate aboue the seate of all the Kynges that were with hym in Babilon,
2 Kings 25:29 and chaunged hys preson garmentes. And he dyd euer eate breade before hym all the dayes of hys lyfe.
2 Kings 25:30 And a continuall porcyon was assygned hym of the Kynge, daye by daye as long as he lyued.

BOOK: 1 Chronicles

CHAPTER: 1

1 Chronicles 1:1 Adam, Seth, Enos:
1 Chronicles 1:2 Kainan, Mahalehel, Iared:
1 Chronicles 1:3 Hanoch Mathusaleh, Lamech:
1 Chronicles 1:4 Noah, Sem, Ham, and Iapheth.
1 Chronicles 1:5 The sonnes of Iapheth: were Gomer, Magog, Madai, Iauan, Thubal, Mosoch & Thiras.
1 Chronicles 1:6 The sonnes of Gomer were: Ascanez, Ipheth & Togormah.
1 Chronicles 1:7 The sonnes of Iauan: Elisah, Tharisah, Cethim & Dodanim.
1 Chronicles 1:8 The sonnes of Ham: Cus, Mizraim, Phut and Canaan.
1 Chronicles 1:9 The sonnes of Cus. Saba, Heuilah, Sabatha, Remah and Sabathaca. The sonnes of Remah: Saba and Dadan.
1 Chronicles 1:10 And Cus begat Nemrod, whiche Nemrod beganne to waxe myghtye vpon the erthe.
1 Chronicles 1:11 And Mizraim begat Ludim, Anamin, Laabim, Nephthuim,
1 Chronicles 1:12 Phetrusim and Chasluim: of whiche came the Philistines & the Chaptherites.
1 Chronicles 1:13 And Canaan, begat Zidon his eldest sonne, and Heth,
1 Chronicles 1:14 Iebusi, Amori, Gergesi,
1 Chronicles 1:15 Heui, Araki, Sini,
1 Chronicles 1:16 Aruadi, Zamari and Hemathi.
1 Chronicles 1:17 The sonnes of Sem: Elam, Assur, Arphacsad, Lud, Aram, Vz, Hul, Gether and Mosoch.
1 Chronicles 1:18 And Arphacsad begat Salah and Salah begat Eber.
1 Chronicles 1:19 And vnto Eber were borne two sonnes: the name of the one was Phaleg, because that in his dayes the lande was deuyded. And hys brothers name was Iektan.
1 Chronicles 1:20 Iektan begat Elimodah, Saleph Hazermoth and Iarah:
1 Chronicles 1:21 Haduram, Vsal, and Deklah:
1 Chronicles 1:22 Ebal Abimael, and Saba:
1 Chronicles 1:23 Ophir, Heuilah, and Iobab. All these were the sonnes of Iektan.
1 Chronicles 1:24 Sem, Arphacsad, Salah:
1 Chronicles 1:25 Eber, Phaleg Rau:
1 Chronicles 1:26 Serug, Nahor, Thareh:
1 Chronicles 1:27 Abram otherwise called Abraham.
1 Chronicles 1:28 The sonnes of Abraham Isaac and Ismael.
1 Chronicles 1:29 And these are theire generacyons: the Eldest sonne of Ismael was Nabaioth, then Kedar, Adbeel & Mabsam:
1 Chronicles 1:30 Masma, Dumah, Massa, Hadar & Thema:
1 Chronicles 1:31 Iatur, Naphis and Kedmah. These are the sonnes of Ismael.
1 Chronicles 1:32 The sonnes of Keturah Abrahams concubine: she bare Zamram, Ieksan, Madan, Madian, Iesbok and Suah. The sonnes of Ieksan, Saba, & Dadan.
1 Chronicles 1:33 The sonnes of Madian: Ephah, Epher, Henoch, Abida and Eldaah. All these are the sonnes of Keturah.
1 Chronicles 1:34 Abraham begat Isaac. The sonnes of Isaac Esau & Israel.
1 Chronicles 1:35 The sonnes of Esau: Eliphaz Rauel, Iehus, Iaalom and Koreh.
1 Chronicles 1:36 The sonnes of Eliphal: Theman, Omer, Zephi, Gaatham, Kenes, Themna & Amalek,
1 Chronicles 1:37 The sonnes of Rauel: Nahath, Zarah, Samah and Mesah.
1 Chronicles 1:38 The sonnes of Seir: Lotan, Sobal Zebeon, Anah, Dison, Ezer and Disan.
1 Chronicles 1:39 The sonnes of Lotan: Hori & Homam, & Thamna was Lotans syster.
1 Chronicles 1:40 The sonnes of Sobal: Alian, Manahath, Ebal, Sephi, and Onam. The sonnes of Zebeon: Aiah and Anah.
1 Chronicles 1:41 The sonnes of Anah: Dison. The sonnes of Dison: Hamaran. Esebon, Iethran and Charan.
1 Chronicles 1:42 The sonnes of Ezer: Balaan, Saauan and Iakan. The sonnes of Disan: Vz, & Aram.
1 Chronicles 1:43 These are the kynges that raygned in the lande of Edom before anye Kynge raygned amonge the chyldren of Israel: Bale the sonne of Beor, and the name of hys cytie was Denahabath.
1 Chronicles 1:44 And when Bale was deed, Iobab the sonne of Zareh of Bozrah raygned in his stede.
1 Chronicles 1:45 And after the dethe of Iobab, Husam of the lande of Themani raygned in his rowme,
1 Chronicles 1:46 and after the dethe of Husam, Hadad, the sonne of Badad whiche bett the madianites in the feldes of Moab, raygned in his rowme, & the name of hys citie was Auith.
1 Chronicles 1:47 And after the dethe of Hadad, Semlah of Marekah raygned in hys steade.
1 Chronicles 1:48 And after the dethe of Semlah Saul of Rohoboth vpon Euphrates raygned in his place.
1 Chronicles 1:49 And after the dethe of Saul, Baal Hanan the sonne of Achobor raygned in hys rowme.
1 Chronicles 1:50 And after the dethe of Baal Hanan, Hadad raygned in his place, & the name of his citie was Phau, & his wiues name was Mehetabeel the daughter of Matred the daughter of Mesahab.
1 Chronicles 1:51 But after the deethe of Hadad, there were dukes in Edom. Duke Thamna, duke Aliah duke Ietheth:
1 Chronicles 1:52 duke Oholbama, duke Elah, duke Phinon,
1 Chronicles 1:53 duke Kenaz, duke Theman, duke Mabzar:
1 Chronicles 1:54 duke Magdiel & duke Iram. These were the dukes of Edom.

CHAPTER: 2

1 Chronicles 2:1 These be the sonnes of Israel: Ruben Simeon, Leui, Iuda, Isacar and Zabulon:
1 Chronicles 2:2 Dan, Ioseph, Beniamin Nephthali, Gad and Asser.
1 Chronicles 2:3 The sonnes of Iuda: Er, Onan, & Selah. These thre were borne hym of the daughter of Sua the Cananitesse. But Er the eldest sonne of Iuda was euill in the syght of the Lorde, and therfore he slue him.
1 Chronicles 2:4 And Thamar hys daughter in law bare him Pharez and Zarah: so that all the sonnes of Iuda were fyue.
1 Chronicles 2:5 The sonnes of Pharez: Hezron & Hamul.
1 Chronicles 2:6 The sonnes of Zarah: Zamri, Ethan, Heman, Chalchal and Dara, fiue in all.
1 Chronicles 2:7 The sonnes of Carmi: Achar that troubled Israel, whiche transgressed in the vnlawfull thynges.
1 Chronicles 2:8 The sonnes of Ethan: Azaria.
1 Chronicles 2:9 The sonnes of Hezron that were borne hym: Ierhameel, Ram and Calubai.
1 Chronicles 2:10 And Ram begat Aminadab: and Aminadab begat Nahazon a Lorde amonge the chyldren of Iuda.
1 Chronicles 2:11 And Nahason begat Salma: and Salma begat Booz:
1 Chronicles 2:12 and Booz begat Obed: and Obed begat Isai.
1 Chronicles 2:13 And Isai begat hys eldest sonne Eliab, and Abinadab the seconde, and Samaa the thirde,
1 Chronicles 2:14 Nathanael the fourthe, Radai the fifte,
1 Chronicles 2:15 Ozem the syxte, and Dauid the seuenthe.
1 Chronicles 2:16 Whose systers were Zaruiah and Abigail. The sonnes of Zaruiah: were Abisai, Ioab and Azahel, thre.
1 Chronicles 2:17 And Abigail bare Amaza, the father of whyche Amaza was Iether an Ismaelite.
1 Chronicles 2:18 And Caleb the sonne of Hezron begat Asubah a woman and Ieroth whose sonnes are these: Iaser, Sobab and Ardon.
1 Chronicles 2:19 But Asubah died, & Caleb toke Ephratha which bare him Hur.
1 Chronicles 2:20 And Hur begat Vri, and Vri begat Bezeleell.
1 Chronicles 2:21 And afterwarde Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Galaad, & was when he toke her, thre skore yere olde. And she bare hym Segub.
1 Chronicles 2:22 And Segub begat Iair which had .xxiij. cytyes in the lande of Galaad.
1 Chronicles 2:23 And he ouercame the Gessurites and the Aramites, & toke the townes of Iair from them, and Kenath with the townes that longed to the same, euen threskore townes. All these were the sonne of Machir the father of Galaad.
1 Chronicles 2:24 And after the deeth of Hezron at Caleb in Ephrata, Abia, hys wyfe bare hym Ashur the father of Thekua.
1 Chronicles 2:25 And the sonnes of Ierhameel the eldest sonne of Hezron were, Ram, the eldest and Buna, Oram, Ozem and Ahaiah.
1 Chronicles 2:26 And Ierhameel had yet another wyfe named Atarah whiche was the mother of Onam.
1 Chronicles 2:27 And the sonnes of Ram, the eldest sonne of Ierhameel were, Maaz, Iamin and Akar.
1 Chronicles 2:28 The sonnes of Onam were, Samai and Iada. The sonnes of Samai: Nadab & Abisur.
1 Chronicles 2:29 And the wyfe of Abisur was called Abihahil whych bare hym Ahaban and Molid.
1 Chronicles 2:30 The sonnes of Nadab: Saled and Appaim. But Saled dyed without chyldren.
1 Chronicles 2:31 The sonne of Appaim was Iesei. The sonne of Iesei was Sesan. And the sonne of Sesan was Oholai.
1 Chronicles 2:32 And the sonne of Iada the brother of Samai were Iethur and Ionathan. But Iethur dyed without children.
1 Chronicles 2:33 The sonnes of Ionathan were Phaleth and Ziza. These were the sonnes of Ierhameel.
1 Chronicles 2:34 Sesan had no sonnes but onlye daughters. And Sesan had a seruaunt that was an Egipcian named Ieraha
1 Chronicles 2:35 to whome he gaue his daughter to wife, & she bare hym Athai.
1 Chronicles 2:36 And Athai begat Nathan. And Nathan begat Zabad.
1 Chronicles 2:37 And Zabad begat Ophlal. Ophlal begat Obed,
1 Chronicles 2:38 Obed begat Iehu. Iehu begat Azariah,
1 Chronicles 2:39 Azariah begat Helez. Helez begat Eleasah,
1 Chronicles 2:40 Eleasah begat Sisamai. Sisamai begat Selum.
1 Chronicles 2:41 Selum begat Iecamiah. Iecamiah begat Elisama.
1 Chronicles 2:42 The sonnes of Caleb the brother of Ierhameel were Mesa his eldest sonne which was the father of Ziph: and the sonnes of Maresa the father of Hebron.
1 Chronicles 2:43 The sonnes of Hebron were Coreh, Taphuah Rekem and Sama,
1 Chronicles 2:44 Sama begat Raham the father of Ierakaam. And Rekem begat Samai.
1 Chronicles 2:45 The sonne of Samai was Maon. And Maon was the father of Bethzur.
1 Chronicles 2:46 And Ephah a concubyne of Calebs bare Haram, Mosa & Gazez: And Haran begat Gazez
1 Chronicles 2:47 The sonnes of Iahadai were Regem, Iotham, Gesam, Phalet, Ephah and Saaph.
1 Chronicles 2:48 And Maachah another concubyne of Calebs bare Sabor Thahanah.
1 Chronicles 2:49 And she bare also Saaph the father of Madmanah, and Sue the father of Machbenah & the father of Gabaa. And Caleb had a doughter called Acsah.
1 Chronicles 2:50 These were the sonnes of Caleb the sonne of Hur the eldeste sonne of Ephrata: Sobal the father of Cariath Iarim:
1 Chronicles 2:51 and Salma the father of Bethlehem: and Hareph the father of BethGeder.
1 Chronicles 2:52 And Sobal the father of Kariath Iarim had sonnes euen the halfe kinrede of Menuah.
1 Chronicles 2:53 The kynredes of Kariath Iarim were the Iethites the Puthithes the Semathites and the Maserites. And of them came the Zarathites and the Esthaolites.
1 Chronicles 2:54 The sonnes of Salma, Bethlehem & Netophathi that were the glory of the house of Ioab, and halfe the Manathites & of the Zaraites.
1 Chronicles 2:55 And so were the kyndredes of the wryters that dwelt at Iabes, the Tirathites, the Simeathites and Suchathites which are the Kenites, that came of Hemath the father of Beth Rechab.

CHAPTER: 3

1 Chronicles 3:1 These are the sonnes of Dauid, which were borne hym in Hebron: the eldest Amnon of Ahinoam the Iesraelitesse. The seconde Daniel by Abigaill the Carmelitesse.
1 Chronicles 3:2 The thirde Absalom the sonne of Maacah doughter of Tholmai kinge of Gesur. The fourth Adoniah the sonne of Hagith.
1 Chronicles 3:3 The fyfte Saphatiah by Abital. The sixte Iethraam by Eglah his wife.
1 Chronicles 3:4 These .vi. were borne hym in Hebron where he raygned seuen yeare and sixe monethes. And in Ierusalem he raygned .xxxiij. yeare.
1 Chronicles 3:5 And these were borne hym in Ierusalem: Samna, Sobab, Nathan & Salomon: these .iiij. of the doughter of Bath Sua and the doughter of Amiel.
1 Chronicles 3:6 Then Iebahar Elisama, Elphalet,
1 Chronicles 3:7 Nogeh, Nepheg, Iaphia,
1 Chronicles 3:8 Elisama, Eliada, and Eliphelet: nyne in numbre.
1 Chronicles 3:9 These are all the sonnes of Dauid, beside the sonnes of his concubines and Thamar theyr syster.
1 Chronicles 3:10 Salomons sonne was Rehoboam, whose sonne was Abiah: and Asa was hys sonne, and Iehosaphat hys sonne:
1 Chronicles 3:11 whose sonne was Ioram: and hys sonne was Ohoziah, and Ioas was sonne to hym.
1 Chronicles 3:12 And hys sonne was Amaziah, and hys sonne was Azariah, and hys sonne was Iotham.
1 Chronicles 3:13 And Ahaz was hys sonne, and Hezekiah was sonne to hym, and Manasseh was hys sonne.
1 Chronicles 3:14 And Amon was hys sonne, And Iosiah was sonne to hym.
1 Chronicles 3:15 And the sonnes of Iosiah were, the eldeste sonne Iohanan, the seconde Iehoakim, the thirde Zedekiah, and the fourth Selum.
1 Chronicles 3:16 The sonnes of Iehoakim were Ieconiah hys sonne, whose sonne was Zedekiah.
1 Chronicles 3:17 The sonnes of Ieconiah the Presoner were Salathiel,
1 Chronicles 3:18 Melchiram, Phadaiah, Senazer, Iecamiah: Hosama and Nadabiah.
1 Chronicles 3:19 The sonnes of Phadaiah were Zorobabel and Semei. The sonnes of Zorobabel, Mosolam, Hananiah and Salumith theyr syster,
1 Chronicles 3:20 and Hasubah, Ohel, Barachiah, Hasadiah, Iosab, Hesed, fyue in numbre.
1 Chronicles 3:21 The sonnes of Hananiah: Phaltiah and Iesaiah, whose sonne was Raphiah, and hys sonne Arnan, and his sonne was Obdiah, and hys sonne Sechaniah.
1 Chronicles 3:22 The sonne of Sechaniah was Semaiah. And the sonnes of Semaiah were Hatus, Iegall Bariah, Naariah Saphat and Hesa, syxe.
1 Chronicles 3:23 And the sonnes of Naariah were Elioenai, Hezekiah and Azricam, thre.
1 Chronicles 3:24 And the sonnes of Elioenai were Hodaiah, Eliasib, Pheleiah, Akub, Iohanan, Dalaiah and Anani, seuen.

CHAPTER: 4

1 Chronicles 4:1 The sonnes of Iuda: Pharez: Hezron, Carmi, Hur and Soball.
1 Chronicles 4:2 And Reaiah the sonne of Sobal begat Iahath. And Iahath begat Ahimai and Laad whych are the kinredes of the Zareathites.
1 Chronicles 4:3 And of these came the father of Etam, Iezrael, Iesema and Iedebos, with their syster called Zalelphuni:
1 Chronicles 4:4 And Phanuel father of Gedor: And Eser the father of Husah. These are the sonnes of Hur the eldeste sonne of Ephrata father to Bethlehem.
1 Chronicles 4:5 And Ashur the father of Thekua had two wyues: Halaah and Naarah.
1 Chronicles 4:6 And Naarah bare hym Ahusam, Hepher, Themani and Hahastari. These were the sonnes of Naarah.
1 Chronicles 4:7 And the sonnes of Haleah were Zareth, Izoar and Ethuan.
1 Chronicles 4:8 And Cuz begat Anub & Zobebah, and the kinredes of Aharhel the sonne of Harum.
1 Chronicles 4:9 And Ieabes was nobler then hys brethren. And his mother called his name Ieabes saying: because I bare him with sorow.
1 Chronicles 4:10 But Ieabes called on the God of Israel, saying: If thou shalt blesse me, & enlarge my costes, and shalt let thyne hand be wyth me, & wylt kepe me from euyll that it vexe me not. And God sent hym hys desyre.
1 Chronicles 4:11 Calub the brother of Suah begat Mahir, whyche was the father of Esthon.
1 Chronicles 4:12 And Esthon begat Beth Rapha and Phaseh and Thehenah the father of the cytye of Nahas whych are the men of Rechah.
1 Chronicles 4:13 The sonnes of Kenas: Othniel & Saraiah. And the sonnes of Othniel were Hathath.
1 Chronicles 4:14 And Maonothi begat Ophrah. And Saraiah begat Ioab the father of them of the valeye of craftesmen, so called because they were craftesmen.
1 Chronicles 4:15 And the sonnes of Caleb the sonne of Iephoneh were Hiru, Ela and Naem. And the sonne of Ela was Kenas.
1 Chronicles 4:16 And the sonnes of Iehaleleel were Siph and Ziphah, and Thiria and Asarael.
1 Chronicles 4:17 And the sonnes of Ezra: were Iether, Mered, Epher, Ialon, Thahar, Mariam and Samai, and Iesbah the father of Esthamoa.
1 Chronicles 4:18 And hys wyfe Iehudiah bare Iared the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socoh, and Ieuthiel the father of Zonoah. And these were the sonnes of Bethiah the doughter of Pharao whyche Mered toke.
1 Chronicles 4:19 The sonnes of the wyfe of Hodia the syster of Nahan the father of Keilah were Hagarmi and Esthamoa the Maachathite.
1 Chronicles 4:20 The sonnes of Simon were Amnon and Rinah, Benhanan and Thilon. And the sonnes of Iesi were Soheth and Benzoheth.
1 Chronicles 4:21 The sonnes of Selah the sonne of Iuda were Er the father of Lecah, and Laadah the father of Maresah, and the kynredes of the housholdes of them that wrought bysse in the house of Asbea.
1 Chronicles 4:22 And Iokim and the men of Cozebah, and Ioas and Saraph, whyche were inhabited in Moab, but returned to Lehem & to Debarim Aikim.
1 Chronicles 4:23 These were potters and dwelt amonge trees and hedges and were in the Kynges worcke and dwelt euen there.
1 Chronicles 4:24 The sonnes of Simeon: Namuel, Iamin, Iarib, Zorah and Saul,
1 Chronicles 4:25 whose sonne was Selum, and the sonne of hym was Mabsam, and hys sonne was Masma.
1 Chronicles 4:26 And the sonne of Masma was Hamuel, and hys sonne was Zachur, and the sonne of hym was Semei.
1 Chronicles 4:27 Semei had syxtene sonnes and syxe doughters. But hys brethren had not manye chyldren, nether were the kynredes of them lyke to the chyldren of Iuda in multitude.
1 Chronicles 4:28 And they dwelt at Bersabe, Moladah and at Hazar Sual,
1 Chronicles 4:29 at Balaah, Ezem, Tholad,
1 Chronicles 4:30 Bathuel, Hormah and at Zikeleg:
1 Chronicles 4:31 at Bethmarcaboth, Hazar Susim, Bethberei and Saarim. These were theyr cytyes vnto the raygne of Dauid.
1 Chronicles 4:32 And theyr vyllages were Etam, Ain, Remon, Tochen and Asan, fyue townes
1 Chronicles 4:33 & all theyr vyllages that were rounde aboute the sayde cytyes vnto Baal. Thys is the habitacyon of them and theyr genealogie.
1 Chronicles 4:34 And Mosobab, Iemlech, Iosah the sonne of Amasiah:
1 Chronicles 4:35 and Ioel and Iehu the sonne of Iosabiah the sonne of Saraiah the sonne of Asiel:
1 Chronicles 4:36 and Elioenai, Iakobah, Isohaiah: Asaiah, Adiel, Isimiel and Banaiah:
1 Chronicles 4:37 Ziza the sonne of Sephei the sonne of Alon the sonne of Idaiah, the sonne of Zemri, the sonne of Samaiah.
1 Chronicles 4:38 These are soche as came by name, heades of theyre kynreddes. And the auncient housholdes of them sprede in multitude.
1 Chronicles 4:39 And they went as farre as Gador, euen vnto the east syde of the valeye, to seke pasture for theyr catell.
1 Chronicles 4:40 And they founde fat pasture and good and a wyde lande bothe quyet and frutefull: for they of Ham dwelt there before.
1 Chronicles 4:41 And these now a fore wrytten by name went in the dayes of Hezekiah king of Iuda, and smote the tentes of them & the habitacions that were founde there, and destroyed them vtterlye vnto this daye, & there dwelt in theyr rowmes: because there was pasture there for theyr shepe.
1 Chronicles 4:42 And therto there went of the sayde children of Simeon fyue hundred men: Phaalthiah Naariah Raphiah and Oziel the sonnes of Iesi beynge theyr heades:
1 Chronicles 4:43 and smote the reste of the Amalekites that were escaped & they dwelt there vnto thys daye.

CHAPTER: 5

1 Chronicles 5:1 The sonnes of Ruben the eldest sonne of Israel: for he was the eldest. But because he defyled his fathers beed, his byrthryght was geuen vnto the sonnes of Ioseph the sonne of Israel, and so he is not rekened vnto the byrthe ryght.
1 Chronicles 5:2 For vnto Iuda whych was mightie amonge hys brethren, was geuen the principalitye before hym. But the byrthryght was geuen Ioseph.
1 Chronicles 5:3 The sonnes then of Ruben the eldest sonne of Israel, were Henoch, Phalu, Hezron and Carmi.
1 Chronicles 5:4 The sonnes of Ioel: Samaiah, and hys sonne Gog, and hys sonne Semei,
1 Chronicles 5:5 and hys sonne Micah, and the sonne of hym was Reaiah, and hys sonne was Baal,
1 Chronicles 5:6 and Beerah was hys sonne. Whyche Beerah Thiglath Phalneser, Kynge of Assyria caryed awaye: for he was a great Lorde amonge the Rubenites.
1 Chronicles 5:7 But vnto hys brethren in theyr kynredes, when they are rekened after theyr byrthe, were Ieiel and Zachariah the chefe heades.
1 Chronicles 5:8 And Bala the sonne of Azan the sonne of Sema the sonne of Ioel, dwelt in Aroer and so forthvnto Nebo and Baalmaon.
1 Chronicles 5:9 And eastwarde he enhabyted vntyll the wyldernesse, euen vpon the ryuer Euphrates, for theyr catell was moche in the lande of Galaad.
1 Chronicles 5:10 And in the dayes of Saul they warred wyth the Hagarites whyche were ouerthrowen by theyre handes. And they dwelt in theyr tentes thorowe out all the eastlande of Galaad.
1 Chronicles 5:11 And the Chyldren of Gad dwelt ouer agaynste them in the lande of Basan, euen vnto Selcah.
1 Chronicles 5:12 And in Basan Ioel was the chefest and Sapham the next, then Iaanai and Saphat.
1 Chronicles 5:13 And theyr brethren in the auncyent housholdes of them, were Michel, Mosolam, Seba, Iorai, Ioacan, Zia, Eber and Seuen.
1 Chronicles 5:14 These were the chyldren of Abihail the sonne of Huri the sonne of Ieroah Galaad the sonne of Michael the sonne of Iesisai the sonne of Iahado the sonne of Buz.
1 Chronicles 5:15 Ahi was the sonne of Abdiel the sonne of Guni the head of an auncyent housholde amonge them.
1 Chronicles 5:16 And they dwelt in Galaad & in Basan and her townes, and in all the Suburbes of Saron, euen vnto the ende of theyr borders.
1 Chronicles 5:17 And they were all rekened by kynreddes in the dayes of Iotham kynge of Iuda, and in the dayes of Ieroboam kynge of Israel.
1 Chronicles 5:18 The sonnes of Ruben of Gad and of halfe the trybe of Manasseh, euen of fyghtynge men able to beare shylde and swerde, & shott with bowe, and taught to make warre, were foure and fourtye thousande seuen hundred & threskore that went out to battell.
1 Chronicles 5:19 And they fought wyth the Hagarites and wyth Ietur, Naphas and Nodab.
1 Chronicles 5:20 And they were holpe agaynst them, and the Hagarites were delyuered into theyr handes with all that were wyth the Hagarites. For they cryed to God in the battell, and he hearde them, because they trusted to hym.
1 Chronicles 5:21 And they toke of theyr cattell fyftye thousande camelles, and two hundred and fyftye thousand shepe, and two thousande asses, & of the people an hundreth thousand:
1 Chronicles 5:22 for there fell manye deed because the warre was of God. And they dwelt ther in theyr steades vntyll the tyme that they were caryed awaye.
1 Chronicles 5:23 And the chyldren of halfe the trybe of Manasseh dwelt in the lande, from Basan vnto Baal Hermon and Samir and vnto mount Hermon,
1 Chronicles 5:24 and they were manye. And these were the heades of the auncyent housholdes of them: Epher, Iesi, Eliel, Azriel, Ieremiah, Hodaiah, Iehadiel, men of great power, men of name and heades of the auncient housholdes of them.
1 Chronicles 5:25 But when they had transgressed agaynst the God of theyr fathers and had gone a whorynge after the Gods of the people of the lande, which God destroyed before them,
1 Chronicles 5:26 God stered vp the spyryte of Phul Kynge of Assyria and the spyryte of Thiglath Phalneser Kynge of Assyria, and caryed awaye the Rubenites, the Gaddites and the halfe trybe of Manasseh, and brought them vnto Helah, Habor, Hara and to the Ryuer Gozan, wher they remayne vnto thys daye.

CHAPTER: 6

1 Chronicles 6:1 The sonnes of Leui: Gerson, Cahath and Merari.
1 Chronicles 6:2 The sonnes of Cahat: Amram, Izahar, Hebron and Oziel.
1 Chronicles 6:3 The children of Amram: Aaron, Moses & Miriam. The sonnes of Aaron: Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
1 Chronicles 6:4 Eleazar begat Phinehes. Phinehes begat Abisue.
1 Chronicles 6:5 Abisue begat Boki. Boki begat Ozi
1 Chronicles 6:6 Ozi begat Zarahiah. Zarahiah begat Meraioth.
1 Chronicles 6:7 Meraioth begat Amariah. Amariah begat Ahitob.
1 Chronicles 6:8 Ahitob begat Zadoc. Zadoc begat Ahimaaz.
1 Chronicles 6:9 Ahimaaz begat Azariah. Azariah begat Iohanan.
1 Chronicles 6:10 Iohanan begat Azariah whyche mynystred in the temple that Salomon buylt in Ierusalem.
1 Chronicles 6:11 Azariah begat Amariah. Amariah begat Ahitob.
1 Chronicles 6:12 Ahitob begat Zadoc. Zadoc begat Selum.
1 Chronicles 6:13 Selum begat Helkiah. Helkiah begat Azariah.
1 Chronicles 6:14 Azariah begat Saraiah, Saraiah begat Iehozedec
1 Chronicles 6:15 whiche Iehozedec when the Lorde caried awaye Iuda and Ierusalem by the hand of Nabuchodonozor, went wyth them.
1 Chronicles 6:16 The sonnes of Leui now are these: Gersom, Cahath and Merari.
1 Chronicles 6:17 And these be the names of the sonnes of Gersom: Lobni and Semei.
1 Chronicles 6:18 And the sonnes of Cahath were Amram, Izahar, Hebron and Oziel,
1 Chronicles 6:19 the sonnes of Merari: Moholi and Musi These are the kynreddes of Leui concernynge theyr auncient fathers.
1 Chronicles 6:20 The sonnes of Gersom was Lobni, and hys sonne Iahath, & his sonne Zamah,
1 Chronicles 6:21 and hys sonne Ioah, and his sonne Ado, and his sonne Zerah, and hys sonne Ieathrai.
1 Chronicles 6:22 The sonnes of Cahath: Aminadab and his sonne Careh, and hys sonne Assir,
1 Chronicles 6:23 and hys sonne Elcanah, and hys sonne Abiasaph, and hys sonne Asir,
1 Chronicles 6:24 and Thahath was his sonne, and Vriel hys sonne, and Oziah hys sonne, and Saul was hys sonne.
1 Chronicles 6:25 The sonnes of Elcanah: Amasai, Ahimot
1 Chronicles 6:26 and Elcanah. The sonnes of Elcanah, Zophai whose sonne was Nahath,
1 Chronicles 6:27 and hys sonne Eliab and Ieroham hys sonne, and Elcanah hys sonne,
1 Chronicles 6:28 and Samuel the sonne of hym. And the sonnes of Samuel: the eldest Vasni and then Abiah.
1 Chronicles 6:29 The sonnes of Merari: Moholi, and his sonne Lobni, and his sonne Semei, and hys sonne Oza
1 Chronicles 6:30 and hys sonne Samaa, and hys sonne Hagiah, and hys sonne Asaiah.
1 Chronicles 6:31 These be they whyche Dauid set for to singe in the house of the Lorde, after that the Arcke had reste.
1 Chronicles 6:32 And they mynystred before the dwellinge place of the tabernacle of wytnesse wyth syngynge, vntyll Salomon had buylt the temple of the Lorde in Ierusalem. And then they wayted on theyr offyces accordinge to the order of them.
1 Chronicles 6:33 These are they that wayted with theyr children of the sonnes of Cahath: Heman a synger, whyche was the sonne of Ioel, the sonne of Samuel.
1 Chronicles 6:34 The sonne of Elcanah, the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Eliel: the sonne of Thoah,
1 Chronicles 6:35 the sonne of Zuph, the sonne of Elcanah, the sonne of Mahath, the sonne of Amasai,
1 Chronicles 6:36 the sonne of Elcanah, the sonne of Ioel, the sonne of Asariah, the sonne of Zophoniah:
1 Chronicles 6:37 the sonne of Thahath, the sonne of Asir, the sonne of Abiasaph the sonne of Coreh:
1 Chronicles 6:38 the sonne of Izahar, the sonne of Cahath: the sonne of Leui the sonne of Israel.
1 Chronicles 6:39 And his brother Asaph stode on his ryght hande, whych was the sonne of Barachiah, the sonne of Samaa:
1 Chronicles 6:40 the sonne of Michael the sonne of Baasaiah, the sonne of Melchiah,
1 Chronicles 6:41 the sonne of Athani, the sonne of Zarah, the sonne of Adaiach:
1 Chronicles 6:42 the sonne of Ethan, the sonne of Zamah, the sonne of Semei:
1 Chronicles 6:43 the sonne of Iahath, the sonne of Gersom, the sonne of Leui.
1 Chronicles 6:44 And theyr brethren the sonnes of Merari stode on the lefte hand: Ethan the sonne of Chusi, the sonne of Abdi, the sonne of Maloch:
1 Chronicles 6:45 the sonne of Hasabiah, the sonne of Amaziah, the sonne of Helkiah:
1 Chronicles 6:46 the sonne of Amazi, the sonne of Boni, the sonne of Somer:
1 Chronicles 6:47 the sonne of Moholi, the sonne of Musi, the sonne of Merari, the sonne of Leui.
1 Chronicles 6:48 Their brethren the Leuites were apoynted vnto all maner seruyce of the tabernacle of the house of God.
1 Chronicles 6:49 But Aaron & his sonnes burnt vpon the aulter of burntofferynges and on the aulter of incense, and were apoynted vnto all that was to do in the place moste holy, and to make an attonement for Israel in all poyntes accordinge as Moses the seruaunt of God had commaunded.
1 Chronicles 6:50 These are the sonnes of Aaron: Eleazar, whose sonnes was Phinehes, and hys sonne Abisue:
1 Chronicles 6:51 and his sonne Boki, and the sonne of hym Ozi, and hys sonne Zarahia,
1 Chronicles 6:52 and the sonne of hym Meraioth, and his sonne Amariah, and the sonne of hym Ahitob:
1 Chronicles 6:53 and Zadoc hys sonne, and Ahimaaz his sonne.
1 Chronicles 6:54 And these are the dwellinge places of them in theyr townes and costes: I meane of the sonnes of Aaron of the kynredde of the Caathites, for so theyr lot fell.
1 Chronicles 6:55 They gaue vnto them Hebron in the lande of Iuda wyth the Suburbes roundeaboute yt.
1 Chronicles 6:56 But the countreye and vyllages pertaynynge therto, they gaue to Caleb the sonne of Iephoneh.
1 Chronicles 6:57 And to the sonnes of Aaron they gaue the Franchesed cytyes, Hebron and Lobnach, wyth theyr Suburbes: and Iathyr and Ethemoa wyth theyr Suburbes:
1 Chronicles 6:58 and Hilen wyth her Suburbes, and Dabir wyth her Suburbes:
1 Chronicles 6:59 and Asan wyth her Suburbes, and Bethsemes wyth her Suburbes.
1 Chronicles 6:60 And out of the trybe of Beniamin Gabee and her Suburbes, Alemath wyth her Suburbes, Anathoth wyth her Suburbes: so that al theyr cytyes amonge theyr kynreddes were .xiij.
1 Chronicles 6:61 And vnto the sonnes of Cahath the remnant of the kynne of the trybe, were cytyes geuen out of the halfe trybe of Manasseh by lote, ten cytyes.
1 Chronicles 6:62 And vnto the sonnes of Gersom amonge theyr kynreddes were geuen out of the trybe of Isacar & out of the trybe of Asser and out of the trybe of Nephthali: and out of the trybe of Manasseh in Basan, thyrtene cytyes.
1 Chronicles 6:63 And vnto the sonnes of Merari were geuen by lot amonge theyr kynreddes out of the trybe of Ruben, and out of the trybe of Gad, and out of the trybe of Zabulon, twelue cytyes.
1 Chronicles 6:64 And the chyldren of Israel gaue the Leuites suche cytyes wyth theyr Suburbes,
1 Chronicles 6:65 & that by Lot, out of the trybe of the chyldren of Iuda and of the trybe of Symeon and out of the trybe of the chyldren of Beniamin: euen the sayde cyties that are rehersed by name.
1 Chronicles 6:66 And concernynge the sonnes of Cahath, the cytyes of theyr coste were of the trybe of Ephraim.
1 Chronicles 6:67 In whych trybe they gaue vnto them the cytyes of Refuge: Sichem in mount Ephraim wyth her Suburbes, and Gaser wyth her Suburbes,
1 Chronicles 6:68 Iecmaam wyth her Suburbes, Bethhoron wyth her Suburbes,
1 Chronicles 6:69 Aialon wyth her Suburbes, and Geth Remon wyth her Suburbes.
1 Chronicles 6:70 And out of the halfe tribe of Manasseh, Aner wyth her Suburbes, and Baalam wyth her Suburbes amonge the kyndredes of the rennant of the sonnes of Cahath.
1 Chronicles 6:71 And vnto the sonnes of Gerson were geuen out of the kyndrede of the halfe trybe of Manasseh: Golon in Basan wyth her Suburbes and Astharoth wyth her Suburbes.
1 Chronicles 6:72 And out of the trybe of Isacar, Kedes wyth her Suburbes, Daberath wyth her Suburbes,
1 Chronicles 6:73 Ramoth with her Suburbes and Anem with her Suburbes.
1 Chronicles 6:74 And out of Asser, Masal wyth her Suburbes, Abdon with her Suburbes,
1 Chronicles 6:75 Hukok with her Suburbes & Rohob wyth her Suburbes.
1 Chronicles 6:76 And out of the trybe of Nephthali, Kedes in Galilea wyth her Suburbes, Hamon wyth her Suburbes, and Kariathiarim wyth her Suburbes.
1 Chronicles 6:77 And vnto the rest of the children of Merari were geuen out of the trybe of Zabulon, Remono with her suburbes & Thabor wyth her suburbes.
1 Chronicles 6:78 And on the other syde Iordan by Iericho euen on the east syde of Iordan were geuen them out of the trybe of Ruben: Bozor in the wildernesse wyth her suburbes Iahezah with her suburbes,
1 Chronicles 6:79 Rademoth with her suburbes. Mephath with her suburbes.
1 Chronicles 6:80 And out of the trybe of Gad, Ramoth in Gallad wyth her suburbes, Mahanaim with her suburbes,
1 Chronicles 6:81 Hesebon wyth her suburbes, and Iezer wyth her suburbes.

CHAPTER: 7

1 Chronicles 7:1 The sonnes of Isacar: Thola Phuah Iasub and Samron, foure.
1 Chronicles 7:2 The sonnes of Thola: Ozi, Rephaiah Ieriel, Iathamai, Iebsam & Samuel whiche were heades in the auncyent housholdes of Thola & men of myghte amonge theyr kynreddes: the numbre of them in the dayes of Dauid were two & twentye thousande and syxe hundred.
1 Chronicles 7:3 The sonnes of Ozi: Izrahiah. The sonnes Izrahiah: Michael, Obadiah Ioel, Iesiah, fyue headmen in al.
1 Chronicles 7:4 And amonge them in theyr kynreddes & auncyent housholdes sixe & thyrtye thousand men prepared to warre: For they had many wyues and sonnes.
1 Chronicles 7:5 And of theyr brethren amonge all the kynreddes of Isacar were rekened of men of warre foure skore and seuen thousande in al.
1 Chronicles 7:6 The sonnes of Beniamin: Bale, Bochor & Iadiael, thre.
1 Chronicles 7:7 The sonnes of Bale: Ezbon, Ozi, Oziel, Ierimoth and Vri, fyue heades auncient houses and men of myghte & were in numbre .xxij. thousande and .xxxiiij.
1 Chronicles 7:8 The sonnes of Bochor, Zamirah, Ioas, Eliezer, Elioenai, Amri, Ierimoth, Abiah, Anathoth and Alamath. Al these are the children of Bochor,
1 Chronicles 7:9 & were rekened in their kindredes with the heades of the auncient housholdes of them that were men of power, twentye thousande and two hundred.
1 Chronicles 7:10 The sonnes of Iediael: Balahan. The sonnes of Balahan: Ieus, Beniamin, Ahud and Canaanah, Zetham, Tharsis and Ahisahar.
1 Chronicles 7:11 All these are the sonnes of Iediael and auncient heades and men of myghte .xvij. thousande and two hundred that wente oute to battel.
1 Chronicles 7:12 And Suphim and Huphim were the chyldren of Ir. And the Husites were the chyldren of Aher.
1 Chronicles 7:13 The sonnes of Nephthali: Iahaziel, Guni Iezer and Selum, the chyldren of Balahah.
1 Chronicles 7:14 The sonnes of Manasseh: Azriel whyche Aramiah hys concubine bare: she bare also Machir the father of Galaad.
1 Chronicles 7:15 And Machir gaue to Huphim and Suphim wyues. And the name of hys syster was Maacah. And the name of another sonne was Zalphahad. And Zalphahad had doughters.
1 Chronicles 7:16 And Maacah the wyfe of Machir bare a sonne and called his name Pharez, and the name of his brother was Zares, and his sonnes were Vlom and Rekem.
1 Chronicles 7:17 The sonnes of Vlam was Badan. These are the sonnes of Galaad the sonne of Machir the sonne of Manasseh.
1 Chronicles 7:18 And hys syster Melcath bare Ieshud, Abieser and Mohulah:
1 Chronicles 7:19 And the sonnes of Semida were Ahaian, Sechem, Lekechi & Aniam.
1 Chronicles 7:20 The sonnes of Ephraim: Suthalah, whose sonne was Bared, and Thanath hys sonne, and hys sonne Eladah, and Thahath his sonne:
1 Chronicles 7:21 and Sabad his sonne, and Suthelah his sonne and Eser and Elead. And the men of Geth that were borne in the lande, slue them, because they were come doune to take awaye theyr catell.
1 Chronicles 7:22 And Ephraim theyr father mourned many a daye and hys brethren came to comforte him.
1 Chronicles 7:23 And he went into hys wyfe whyche conceyued and bare hym a sonne, and he called the name of it Bariah because it went euyll wyth hys housholde.
1 Chronicles 7:24 And hys doughter was Sarah, whych buylt Bethoron the nether and also the vpper, and Ozan Sarah.
1 Chronicles 7:25 And Raphah was hys sonne, whose sonne was Reseph, wyth hys brother Thaleh, whose sonne was Reseph, with hys brother Thaleh, whose sonne was Thahan,
1 Chronicles 7:26 and his sonne Laadam, and his sonne Amihud, and his sonne Elisama,
1 Chronicles 7:27 and his sonne Nun and hys sonne Iosua.
1 Chronicles 7:28 And their possessyon and habitacion was Bethel and the tounes that longed therto, & vnto the East of Naeran and on the westesyde of Gazer wyth the tounes therof, and Sichem wyth the tounes of the same, and Adaiah with her tounes,
1 Chronicles 7:29 and a longe by the borders of the chyldren of Manasseh, Bethsean wyth her tounes, Thaanah wyth her tounes, Magedo with her tounes and Dud wyth her tounes. In those dwelt the chyldren of Ioseph the sonne of Israel.
1 Chronicles 7:30 The sonnes of Aser: Iomnah, Iesuah, Isuai, Bariah & Serah theyr syster.
1 Chronicles 7:31 The sonnes of Bariah: Teber and Melchiel whych was the father of Barsayth.
1 Chronicles 7:32 And Heber begat Iaphleth, Somer, Hotham and Sua theyr syster.
1 Chronicles 7:33 The sonnes of Iaphlet: Phisah, Banahal and Asauath. These are the chyldren of Iaphlet.
1 Chronicles 7:34 The sonnes of Somer: Ahi, Rohagah, Iahubah and Eram.
1 Chronicles 7:35 And the sonnes of hys brother Helem were Zophah. Iemna, Seles and Amal.
1 Chronicles 7:36 The sonnes of Zophah. Suah, Harnepher, Sual, Bari, Iamrah,
1 Chronicles 7:37 Bozor, Hod, Sama, Silsa, Iethran and Beera.
1 Chronicles 7:38 The sonnes of Iether, Iephoneh, Phasaph, and Ara
1 Chronicles 7:39 the sonnes of Ola: Areh, Haniel and Rezia.
1 Chronicles 7:40 And these were the chyldren of Asser and heades of auncient houses and pure felowes and men of might and the head Lordes. And when they were numbred in araie to battel, they were in numbre .xxvi. thousand men.

CHAPTER: 8

1 Chronicles 8:1 Beniamin begat Bale hys eldest sonne, Asbal the seconde, Aharah the thyrde,
1 Chronicles 8:2 Nohah the fourth and Raphah the fyfte.
1 Chronicles 8:3 And the sonnes of Bale were Adar, Gera, Abihud,
1 Chronicles 8:4 Abisua, Naaman, Ahohah,
1 Chronicles 8:5 Gera, Sephuphan and Huran.
1 Chronicles 8:6 And these are the sonnes of Ahud auncient heades amonge the Enhabiters of Gabaa, which caryed them to Manahath:
1 Chronicles 8:7 Naaman, Ahiah and Gera, whyche Gera caried them awaye and begat Oza and Ahihud.
1 Chronicles 8:8 And he begat Saharaim in the countrey of Moab after he had sent them awaye, Husim and Barah was hys wyues.
1 Chronicles 8:9 And he begat of Hodes his wyfe Iobab, Zebia, Mosa, Malchan,
1 Chronicles 8:10 Ieuz Sachian and Marma. These are hys sonnes beynge auncient heades.
1 Chronicles 8:11 And of Husim he begat Ahithob and Elphaal.
1 Chronicles 8:12 The sonnes of Elphaal were, Eber, Misaam, and Samad whyche buylt Ono, Lod, and the tounes longynge therto:
1 Chronicles 8:13 and Barah and Sama, whyche were auncyent heades amonge the enhabiters of Aialon, and they draue out awaye the enhabiters of Geth.
1 Chronicles 8:14 And Haio, Sesac, Ierimoth,
1 Chronicles 8:15 Sabadiah, Arod, Edar,
1 Chronicles 8:16 Michael, Iespha, and Ioha, the sonnes of Bariah:
1 Chronicles 8:17 Zabadiah, Mosolam, Hezeki, Heber,
1 Chronicles 8:18 Isamari, Iesllah, Iobab the sonnes of Elphaal.
1 Chronicles 8:19 And Iakim, Zecri, Sabdi,
1 Chronicles 8:20 Elianai, Zelethai, Eliel,
1 Chronicles 8:21 Adaiah, Baraiah, Zamareth the sonnes of Semei.
1 Chronicles 8:22 And Iesphan, Eber, Eliel,
1 Chronicles 8:23 Abdon Zecri, Hanan,
1 Chronicles 8:24 Hananiah, Ailan, Anthothiah,
1 Chronicles 8:25 Iephdaiah and Phanuel are the sonnes of Sesac.
1 Chronicles 8:26 And Samsari, Sohoriah, Otholiah,
1 Chronicles 8:27 Iersiah, Eliah and Zechri are the sonnes of Ieroham,
1 Chronicles 8:28 These were auncient heades in theyr kynredes and dwelt in Ierusalem.
1 Chronicles 8:29 And at Gabaon dwelleth the father of Gabaon whose wyfe was called Maacah.
1 Chronicles 8:30 And his eldest sonne was Abdon, then Zur, Cis, Baal, Nadab,
1 Chronicles 8:31 Gedur, Ahaio & Zacher.
1 Chronicles 8:32 And Makeloth begat Samaah. And these also dwelt with theyr brethren in Ierusalem ouer agaynst them.
1 Chronicles 8:33 And Ner begat Cis, and Cis Saul, & Saul begat Iehonathan, Melchisua, Abinadab & Isbaal.
1 Chronicles 8:34 And the sonnes of Iehonathan was Meribbaal and Meribbaal begat Micah.
1 Chronicles 8:35 And the sonnes of Micah were Phithon, Melech, Tharea & Ahaz.
1 Chronicles 8:36 And Ahaz begat Iehoadah. And Iehoadah begat Elmoth, Asmoth and Zamri. And Zamri begat Moza.
1 Chronicles 8:37 And Moza begat Banah, whose sonne was Raphah, & hys sonne was Elasah, and hys sonne Azel.
1 Chronicles 8:38 And Azel had syxe sonnes whose names are these: Esricam, Bochru, Ismael, Sariah, Obdiah, and Hanan. All these were the sonnes of Azel.
1 Chronicles 8:39 And the sonnes of Asek his brother, were Vlam hys eldest, and Ieus the seconde and Eliphelet the thyrde.
1 Chronicles 8:40 And the sonnes of Vlam were mightie men and boowmen and had many sonnes and sonnes sounes, an hundred and fiftie. All these are the sonnes of Beniamin.

CHAPTER: 9

1 Chronicles 9:1 And all Israel were numbred by kynredes: & se, they be written in the boke of the kynges of Israel. And Iuda were caried awaye to Babilon for theyr offences.
1 Chronicles 9:2 And the olde enhabiters that dwelt in theyr owne possessyons & cyties were Israel, the prestes, Leuites & Mathinetites.
1 Chronicles 9:3 But in Ierusalem dwelt of the children of Iuda, of the chyldren of Beniamin and of the chyldren of Ephraim & Manasseh.
1 Chronicles 9:4 Othai the sonne of Amihud the sonne of Amri the sonne of Omrai of the sonne of Boni of the chyldren of Pharez, the sonne of Iuda.
1 Chronicles 9:5 And of Siloni, Asiah the eldest and hys sonnes.
1 Chronicles 9:6 And of the sonnes of Zarah, Ieuel wyth theyr brethren .vi. hundred .xc.
1 Chronicles 9:7 And of the sonnes of Beniamin: Salo the sonne of Mosolam the sonne of Hoduiah, the sonne of Hasnuah,
1 Chronicles 9:8 and Iobaniah the sonne of Ieroham. And Elah the sonne of Ozi the sonne of Mochori. And Mosolam the sonne of Saphatiah the sonne of Rauel the sonne of Iebania
1 Chronicles 9:9 with other theyr brethren in theyr kynredes, nyne hundred fiftie & sixe. And all these were honorable heades in the auncient housholdes of them.
1 Chronicles 9:10 And of the priestes: Iedaiah, Iehoiarib & Iacin:
1 Chronicles 9:11 Azariah the sonne of Helkiah the sonne of Mosolam, the sonne of Zadoc the sonne of Maraioth the sonne of Ahitob the chefeste in the house of God.
1 Chronicles 9:12 And Adaiah the sonne of Ierohan the sonne of Phashor the sonne of Melchiah. And Maasi the sonne of Adiel the sonne of Iehezrah the sonne of Mosolam the sonne of Mosolamoth the sonne of Emer,
1 Chronicles 9:13 wt other their brethren heades in the auncyent housholdes of them, a thousande seuen hundred and thre skore actiue men in the worcke of the seruyce of the house of God.
1 Chronicles 9:14 And of the Leuites: Semeiah the sonne of Hasub, the sonne of Esricam, the sonne of Hasabiah of the sonnes of Merari.
1 Chronicles 9:15 And Bacbakar the Carpenter and Galal. And Mathaniah the sonne of Micah, the sonne of Zecri the sonne of Asaph.
1 Chronicles 9:16 Obdiah the sonne of Semeiah the sonne of Galal the sonne of Iduthun. And Barachiah the sonne of Aza the sonne of Elcanah that dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites.
1 Chronicles 9:17 The porters were Selum, Acub, Talmon and Ahiman with their brethren, Selum beyng the chefe.
1 Chronicles 9:18 For vnto that tyme they had watched at the kinges gate eastward in the tentes of the children of Leui by companyes.
1 Chronicles 9:19 And Selum the sonne of Coreh the sonne of Abiasaph the sonne of Coreh with hys brethren the Corehites in the house of their fathers had their businesse and offyce to kepe the dore of the tabernacle: for their fathers in the Hoste of the Lorde kepte the enteringe.
1 Chronicles 9:20 And Phynehes the sonne of Eleazar was ruler ouer them before the Lord, whiche was wyth hym.
1 Chronicles 9:21 And Zachariah the sonne of Moselamiah kepte the dore of the tabernabcle of witnesse.
1 Chronicles 9:22 Al these were chosen felowes to kepe the tresholdes, two hundred and twelue, and were numbred in their villages. And them dyd Dauid and Samuel the sear institute in their fidelite.
1 Chronicles 9:23 And their children had the ouersighte of the gates of the house of the Lorde and of the house of the tabernacle to kepe them.
1 Chronicles 9:24 In foure quarters were the kepers: toward the easte, west, north, and southe.
1 Chronicles 9:25 And theyr brethren that were in the countre came in their wekes as their course came about wyth them.
1 Chronicles 9:26 For the Leuites were commytted to be pryncypall porters of fydelyte. And they had the ouersight of the vestryes and treasures of the house of God,
1 Chronicles 9:27 & laye all nyghte roundabout the house of God: because the kepyng therof pertayned to them, and to open it euery mournynge.
1 Chronicles 9:28 And certain of them had the rule of the ministring vessels and brought them in & oute by tale.
1 Chronicles 9:29 And of them were certain apoynted to ouerse the vessels & al holy ornamentes, & of the floure, wine, oyle, frankincense & swete odoures.
1 Chronicles 9:30 But certayne of the sonnes of the priestes were set to make swete sauoures.
1 Chronicles 9:31 And Mathathiah one of the Leuites, the eldest sonne of Selum: the Corathite, had the ouersight of the thinges that were baken in the fryenge panne.
1 Chronicles 9:32 And other of theyr brethren the sonnes of Cahath had the ouersighte of the shewbred, to prepare agaynst all sabothes.
1 Chronicles 9:33 These are the syngers auncient heades amonge the Leuites deuyded by chambres: for they had to do bothe daye & nyght.
1 Chronicles 9:34 These were the auncient amonge the Leuites in theyr generacions. And these dwelt at Ierusalem.
1 Chronicles 9:35 And in Gabaon dwelt Ieuell the father of Gabaon, whose wyfe was called Maacah.
1 Chronicles 9:36 And hys eldest sonne was Abdon, then Zur, Cis, Baal, Ner and Nadab:
1 Chronicles 9:37 Gedor, Ahio Zachariah and Makeloth.
1 Chronicles 9:38 And Makeloth begat Semaam. And they also dwelt wyth theyr brethren at Ierusalem, euen harde by them.
1 Chronicles 9:39 And Ner begat Cis, & Cis Saul. And Saul begat Iehonathan, Melchisua, Abinadab & Esbaal.
1 Chronicles 9:40 And the sonne of Iehonathan, was Meribbaal. And Meribbaal begat Micah,
1 Chronicles 9:41 & the sonnes of Micah were, Phiton, Melech and Thaharea.
1 Chronicles 9:42 And Ahaz begat Iaarah. And Iaarah begat Almath, Asmoth, Zamri. And Zamri begat Moza.
1 Chronicles 9:43 And Moza begat Baana whose sonne was Raphaia, and hys sonne was Eleasah, and his sonne Azel.
1 Chronicles 9:44 And Azel had sixe sonnes whose names are these: Ezricam, Bochru, Ismael, Sariah, Obdiah and Hanan. These are the sonnes of Azel.

CHAPTER: 10

1 Chronicles 10:1 And the Philistines fought agaynst Israel. And the men of Israel fled before the Philistines and were ouerthrowen & slayne in Mounte Gelboe.
1 Chronicles 10:2 And the Philistines folowed Saul and hys sonnes and slue Iehonathan, Abinadab and Melchisua the sonnes of Saul.
1 Chronicles 10:3 And the battell went sore agaynst Saul, in so moche that the shoters met hym, and he was wounded of the shoters.
1 Chronicles 10:4 Then sayde Saul to hys wepon bearer draw they swerde and thrust me thorowe therwyth, that these vncircumcised come not and do me shame. And his wepone bearer woulde not, but feared excedynglye. Wherupon Saul caught a swerde & fell vpon yt.
1 Chronicles 10:5 And when hys harnesbearer sawe that Saul was deed, he fell on a swerde also and dyed.
1 Chronicles 10:6 And thus Saul and hys thre sonnes and all hys house dyed together.
1 Chronicles 10:7 And when all the men that dwelt in the valeyes, saw how they fled, & that Saul and his sonnes were dead they forsoke theyr cyties & ranne awaye, and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
1 Chronicles 10:8 And on the morow when the Philistines came to stripe the dead bodyes, they founde Saul and hys sonnes ouerthrowen in mounte Gelboe.
1 Chronicles 10:9 And when they had stript hym they toke hys head and hys harnesse and sent them into the lande of the Philistines round aboute to shew tydynges vnto theyr Gods & to the people.
1 Chronicles 10:10 And they put hys harnesse in the houses of theyr Gods. But hys skulle they hanged in the house of Dagon.
1 Chronicles 10:11 And when all they of Iabes in Galaad hearde all that the Philistines had done to Saul,
1 Chronicles 10:12 all the men of warre arose & fet awaye the bodye of, Saul and the bodyes of hys sonnes and brought them to Iabes and buryed the bones of them vnder an ocke in Iabes, and fasted seuen dayes.
1 Chronicles 10:13 And so Saul dyed for hys trespace that he trespaced agaynst the Lorde, in that he kept not the worde of the Lorde, and in that he asked councell of a woman that wrought with a sprite,
1 Chronicles 10:14 and asked not of the Lorde. And therfore the Lorde killed hym & turned the kyngdome vnto Dauid the sonne of Iesai.

CHAPTER: 11

1 Chronicles 11:1 Then all Israel gathered them selues to Dauid vnto Hebron, & sayde: se we be they bones and they fleshe.
1 Chronicles 11:2 And moreouer in tyme past, euen when Saul was kynge, thou leddest Israel out and in. And the Lorde thy God sayde vnto the: thou shalt fede my people Israel, and thou shalt be captayne ouer my people Israel.
1 Chronicles 11:3 And when al the elders of Israel were come to the kynge to Hebron, Dauid made a couenaunt with them there before the Lorde. And they annoynted Dauid king ouer Israell, accordynge to the worde of the Lorde by the hand of Samuel.
1 Chronicles 11:4 And Dauid and all Israell went to Ierusalem whyche is Iebus: for there dwelt the Iebusites the enhabiters of the lande.
1 Chronicles 11:5 And the enhabiters of Iebus sayd to Dauid, thou comest not here. Neuerthelater Dauid wanne the castel of Sion, which is called the cytye of Dauid.
1 Chronicles 11:6 Then sayde Dauid: whosoeuer smyte the Iebusites fyrst, shalbe the pryncypall captayne & a Lord. And Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah went fyrst vp, and was therfore the chefe captayne.
1 Chronicles 11:7 And because Dauid dwelt in the castel, therfore it was called the cytye of Dauid.
1 Chronicles 11:8 And he built the cyty on euery syde euen from Milo roundeabout. But Ioab repared the reste of the cytye.
1 Chronicles 11:9 And Dauid prospered and waxed greate, and the Lorde of Hostes was wyth hym.
1 Chronicles 11:10 These are the principal men of powre that claue to Dauid in hys kyngdome wyth all Israel, to make hym kynge vpon Israel accordinge to the worde of the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 11:11 And this is the numbre of the myghtye men whyche Dauid had: Isabaam the sonne of Hachamoni the chefe of .xxx. he lyfte vp hys spere agaynst .iij. hundred, & slue them at one tyme.
1 Chronicles 11:12 And after hym Eleazar the sonne of Dodo an Ahothite, which was one of the thre mightyest.
1 Chronicles 11:13 He was wyth Dauid at Phasdamin where the Philistines were gathered to battel. And there was there a parsell of ground full of barleye, and the people fled for feare of the Phylystines.
1 Chronicles 11:14 And they stepte forth into the myddes of the furlonge and saued it and slue the Philistines. And the Lord gaue a great victorye.
1 Chronicles 11:15 And the thre of the .xxx. chefe went to a rocke to Dauid at the caue Odolam. And the Hoste of the Phylystines had pytched in the valey of Raphaim.
1 Chronicles 11:16 And Dauid was in an holde. And there was a garison of the Philistines at Bethlehem that same tyme.
1 Chronicles 11:17 And Dauid longed & sayde: Oh that one would geue me of the water of the well of Bethlehem that is in the gate, for to drincke.
1 Chronicles 11:18 And the thre brake thorow the Host of the Philistines and drew of the water of the well of Bethlehem that was in the gate, and toke it and brought yt to Dauid. Neuerthelesse Dauid woulde not dryncke of yt, but offered yt to the Lorde,
1 Chronicles 11:19 and sayd: God forbyd yt me, that I shoulde do thys thynge, that I shoulde dryncke the bloude of these men that haue put theyr lyues in Ieopardye (for with the Ieopardye of theyr lyues they brought yt) & therfore he woulde not dryncke it. This dyd the thre myghtyest.
1 Chronicles 11:20 And Abisai the brother of Ioab was capitayne of the thre, and he lyfte vp hys spere agaynst .iij. hundred and slue them, and had a name amonge the thre.
1 Chronicles 11:21 And he was moche more nobler then anye of the thre, and was theyre captayne. But was not lyke to any of the thre in actes.
1 Chronicles 11:22 Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada the sonne of a stronge man that had done great deades & was of Cabzeel: he slue two stronge lyons of Moab, & went downe and slue a Lyon in a pyt in tyme of snowe,
1 Chronicles 11:23 And he slue an Egipcian whyche was a man of a size, euen fyue cubytes longe, and in hys hand had a speare lyke a weuers beame. And the other went to hym wyth a waster and plucked the speare out of the Egipcians hande, and slue hym wyth hys speare.
1 Chronicles 11:24 Soche thynges dyd Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada, and had a nawe wyth the thre myghtyest,
1 Chronicles 11:25 and was the gloryousest of thyrtye: but attayned not vnto the thre. Also Dauid made hym of hys secret councell.
1 Chronicles 11:26 And these were the beste men of warre of the Hoste: Asahel the brother of Ioab and Elhanan the sonne of Dodo out of Bethlehem.
1 Chronicles 11:27 Samoth the Harorite, Helez the Phalonite:
1 Chronicles 11:28 Ira the sonne of Akes the Thekuite, Abieser the Anathothite:
1 Chronicles 11:29 Sobacai the Husathite, Ilai the Ahohite:
1 Chronicles 11:30 Maharai the Nethophathite and Heled the sonne of Baanah the Nethophatite:
1 Chronicles 11:31 Ithai the sonne of Rebai of Gabaah that pertayneth to the chyldren of Beniamin: Banaiah the Pharathonite:
1 Chronicles 11:32 Haurai of the ryuer of Gaas, and Abiel the Arbathite:
1 Chronicles 11:33 Azmoth the Baharumite, Elahaba the Saalbonite.
1 Chronicles 11:34 The sonnes of Hassem the Gezonite, Ionathan the sonne of Sagah, an Haratite:
1 Chronicles 11:35 Ahiam the sonne of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the sonne of Vr.
1 Chronicles 11:36 Hepher the Mecharathite, Ahiah the Phalonite:
1 Chronicles 11:37 Hezro the Carmelite and Naari the sonne of Azbai:
1 Chronicles 11:38 Ioel the brother of Nathan: Mibahar the sonne of Gari:
1 Chronicles 11:39 Zelec an Ammonite and Nahari a Berothite the bearer of the Harnesse of Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah:
1 Chronicles 11:40 Ira the Iethrite and Gareb a Iethrite
1 Chronicles 11:41 Vriah the Hethite, Zabad the sonne of Oholni:
1 Chronicles 11:42 Adina the sonne of Siza a Rubenite and an head amonge the Rubenites and .xxx. aboute hym:
1 Chronicles 11:43 Hanan the sonne of Maacah & Iosaphat a Mathanite:
1 Chronicles 11:44 Ozeah an Astharothite: Sama and Iaiel the sonnes of Hothan an Aroerite:
1 Chronicles 11:45 Iedial the sonne of Zamri and Ioha hys brother Thozites:
1 Chronicles 11:46 Eliel a Mahumite. And Ieribai and Iosoiah the sonnes of Elnaem and Iethmah a Moabite.
1 Chronicles 11:47 Eliel and Obed and Iasiel of Masobaiah.

CHAPTER: 12

1 Chronicles 12:1 And these folowenge came to Dauid to Zikelag, whyle he yet kept hym selfe close for feare of Saul the sonne of Cis: and they were of the men that socoured the battell,
1 Chronicles 12:2 wepened wyth boowes, and coulde handle stones, arowes and bow as well wyth the lefte hande as wyth the ryght, and were of Sauls brethren, euen of the trybe of Beniamin.
1 Chronicles 12:3 The chefest were Ahiezer and Ioas the sonnes of Samaah a Gobaonite, and Iaziel a Phalite, the sonnes of Azmoth. Baracah and Iehu of Anathoth.
1 Chronicles 12:4 And Isamaiah a Gabaonite as mightye as any of thyrtye and more myghtye to. And Ieremiah, Iehaziel, Iohanan and Iosabad of Gedor.
1 Chronicles 12:5 Eleusai, Ierimoth Baaliah Samariah and Saphatiah: Haraphites,
1 Chronicles 12:6 Elcanah, Iesiah, Azrael, Ioezer, Ioseboam of Karehim.
1 Chronicles 12:7 And Ioelah and Zabadiah the sonnes of Ieroham of Gedor.
1 Chronicles 12:8 And of the Gadites there separated them selues vnto Dauid when he kept an holde in the wildernesse, men of myghte and men apte for warre and coulde handle shylde & speare, whose faces were lyke the faces of Lyons, and they were therto as swifte as the Rooes of the mountaynes:
1 Chronicles 12:9 Ezer the fyrste, Obdiah the seconde, Eliab the thyrde,
1 Chronicles 12:10 Masmannan the fourthe Ieremiah the fyfte,
1 Chronicles 12:11 Ethi the syxte, Eliel the seuenthe,
1 Chronicles 12:12 Iohanam the eight, Elsabad the nynthe,
1 Chronicles 12:13 Ieremiah the tenthe, and Macahbanai the eleuenthe.
1 Chronicles 12:14 These were of the sonnes of Gad and were captaynes ouer the men of warre, the small ouer an hundred, and the greate ouer a thousande.
1 Chronicles 12:15 These are they that went ouer Iordan in the fyrste monethe, when he had fylled ouer all hys bancke. And they put to flight them of the valeye bothe of the East syde and also the Weste.
1 Chronicles 12:16 And there came of the chyldren of Beniamin and Iuda to the holde of Dauid.
1 Chronicles 12:17 And Dauid went out to them and answered and sayde to them: If ye be come peasablye vnto me, to helpe me, myne hert shalbe together with you. But and yf you come to begyle me and to be myne aduersarye, seynge ther is no wyckednes in myne handes, the God of oure fathers loke theron and rebuke yt.
1 Chronicles 12:18 And the spirite came vpon Amasai a captayne ouer .xxx. and he sayde, thyne are we Dauid, and on thy syde thou sonne of Iesai peace be wt the, and peace be with thine helpers, for thy God helpeth the. Then Dauid receyued them and made them heades of companyes of the men of warre.
1 Chronicles 12:19 And there felle of Manasseh to Dauid, when he went with the Philistines agaynst Saul to battel, but holpe them not. For the Lordes of the Philistines toke councel and sent him away saying: he wil fall to his maister Saul to the Ieopardye of oure heades.
1 Chronicles 12:20 And as he went to Zikelag there fell to him of Manasseh: Ednah Iozabad, Iediel, Michael, of Iozabad, Elihu and Zalthai, heades of the thousandes of Manasseh.
1 Chronicles 12:21 And they holpe Dauid agaynst those rouers. For they were all myghtye men and Capitaynes in warre.
1 Chronicles 12:22 And there came one or other to Dauid daye by day to helpe him: vntyll it was a great Hoste, lyke the Hoste of God.
1 Chronicles 12:23 And this is the numbre of the heades prepared to battel, that came to Dauid to Hebron, to turne the kyngdom of Saul to hym, accordinge to the mouth of the Lord.
1 Chronicles 12:24 The chyldren of Iuda that bare shylde & sperre were sixe thousand and eight hundred trymmed to warre.
1 Chronicles 12:25 Of the chyldren of Symeon, men of myght to warre, seuen thousand and one hundred.
1 Chronicles 12:26 And of the chyldren of Leui were foure thousande and sixe hundred.
1 Chronicles 12:27 And Iehoiada was the chefe of them of Aaron, and with him thre thousand and seuen hundred.
1 Chronicles 12:28 And Zadock a younge man of greate power had hys fathers housholde wyth Capitaynes .xxij.
1 Chronicles 12:29 And of the chyldren of Beniamin the brethren of Saul, were thre thousand. And a great parte of them dyd yet folowe the house of Saul.
1 Chronicles 12:30 And of the chyldren of Ephraim, were .xx. thousand and eight hundred, men of myghte and named men in the housholdes of their fathers.
1 Chronicles 12:31 And of the halfe trybe of Manasseh .xviij. thousande, whyche were apoynted by name to go to make Dauid Kynge.
1 Chronicles 12:32 And of the chyldren of Isacar, whyche were men that had vnderstandynge in the ryght tyme to knowe what Israel ought to do: The heedes of them were two hundred, and all theyr brethren at theyr wyll.
1 Chronicles 12:33 And of Zabulon that went out wyth the Hoste and proceded in the araye to battell wyth all maner of wepons of warre, fyftye thousande that kepte in order wyth one accorde.
1 Chronicles 12:34 And of Nephthali a thousande Capitaynes, and with them with shylde and speare .xxxvij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 12:35 And of Dan prepared to battell, were .xxviij. thousande and .vi. hundred.
1 Chronicles 12:36 And of Asser that went out wyth the Hoste to make battell, fourtie thousand.
1 Chronicles 12:37 And of the other syde Iordan, of the Rubenites, Gaddites and of the halfe trybe of Manasseh wyth all manner of instrumentes of warre an hundred and twentie thousand.
1 Chronicles 12:38 All these beynge men of warre able to ordre the araye, came to Hebron with pure herte, to make Dauid Kynge vpon all Israel. And therto all the rest of Israel was of one accorde to make Dauid Kynge.
1 Chronicles 12:39 And there they were with Dauid thre dayes eatynge & drynckyng: for theyr brethren prepared for them.
1 Chronicles 12:40 Moreouer they that were nye to them, as Isacar, Zabulon and Nephthali brought bredde on Asses, Camels, mules and oxen, & meate: floure, figges, reasyngs, wyne, oyle, oxen, and shepe aboundantlye. For there was myrthe in Israel.

CHAPTER: 13

1 Chronicles 13:1 And Dauid counceled with the Capitaines of thousandes and hundredes, & with all the Lordes,
1 Chronicles 13:2 and sayde vnto all the congregacyon of Israel: If it seme you good & also to be of the Lord ouer God? Let vs take & sende vnto the remnaunt of oure brethren thorow out all the land of Israel, & to the preastes and Leuites wyth them, in theyr cyties and suburbes, and geather them to geather to vs.
1 Chronicles 13:3 And lett vs brynge agayne the Arcke of the Lorde to vs: for we regarded yt not in the dayes of Saul.
1 Chronicles 13:4 And all the congregacion was content so to do, for the thynge semed good in the eyes of all the people.
1 Chronicles 13:5 And Dauid geathered all Israel to geather from Sihor in Egypt vnto Hemath, to bring the Arcke of the Lorde from Kariath Iarim.
1 Chronicles 13:6 And Dauid went vp & all Israel to Baalah, and so to Kariath Iarim that is in Iuda, to fet thence the Arcke of the God & Lorde that sytteth on the Cherubes. Where hys name is called on.
1 Chronicles 13:7 And they caryed the Arcke of God in a newe carte out of the house of Aminadab. And Oza & his brother draue the carte.
1 Chronicles 13:8 And Dauid & all Israel played before God with all theyr myght, with syngyng, harpes, psalteries, tymbrelles and trompettes.
1 Chronicles 13:9 And when they came on the thressynge flowre of Chidon, Oza put forth his hande to holde the arcke, for the oxen stombled.
1 Chronicles 13:10 And the Lorde was wroth with Oza & smote hym, because he put hys hande to the Arcke. And there he dyed before God.
1 Chronicles 13:11 And Dauid was displeased, because the Lorde had rent a rent in Oza and called the sayde place Perez Oza vnto this daye.
1 Chronicles 13:12 And Dauid was so afrayed of God that daye, that he sayde, how shall I brynge the Arcke of God whome to me.
1 Chronicles 13:13 And so Dauid brought not the Arcke home to him to the cytie of Dauid: But turned it in to the house of Obed Edom o Gethite.
1 Chronicles 13:14 And the Arcke of God was wyth Obed Edom in his house, thre monethes. And the Lorde blessed the house of Obed Edom & all that he had.

CHAPTER: 14

1 Chronicles 14:1 After that Hiram kynge of Tire sent messengers to Dauid and tymbre of Cedar trees with masons and Carpenters, to buylde hym an house.
1 Chronicles 14:2 Wherby Dauid perceyued that the Lorde had prepared hym to be kyng vpon Israel, in that his kyngdome was lifte vpon hye, because of hys people Israel.
1 Chronicles 14:3 And Dauid toke yet mo wyues at Ierusalem and begat mo sonnes & daughters.
1 Chronicles 14:4 And these are the names of his children which he had borne hym at Ierusalem: Samua, Sobab. Nathan, and Salomon:
1 Chronicles 14:5 Iebhar, Elisua and Eliphalet:
1 Chronicles 14:6 Noga, Nepheg and Iaphiah.
1 Chronicles 14:7 Elisama, Baliada and Eliphelet.
1 Chronicles 14:8 And when it was knowne among the Philistines that Dauid was anoynted kyng vpon all Israel, all the Philistines went vp to seke Dauid. And Dauid hearde of yt & went oute agaynst them.
1 Chronicles 14:9 And the Philistines came and praunsed in the valeye of Raphaim.
1 Chronicles 14:10 And Dauid asked God saying: shall I go agaynst the Philistines & wylt thou delyuer them into myne handes? And the Lorde sayde to hym: go, for I wyll delyuer them into thyne hande.
1 Chronicles 14:11 And when they were come as ferre as Baal Pharazim, Dauid bett them there. And Dauid sayde: God hathe deuyded myne enemyes with myne hande as a man wol deuyde water. And therfore they called the name of the sayde place Baal Pharazim.
1 Chronicles 14:12 And they lefte theyr Gods there, which Dauid badde to be burnt wyth fyre.
1 Chronicles 14:13 And the Philistines came agayne & ranne abroade in the valeye.
1 Chronicles 14:14 Then Dauid asked God: And God sayde to hym: go not after them, but turne awaye from them, & come vpon them strayght from the peere trees.
1 Chronicles 14:15 And when thou hearest a sounde go in the toppes of the peeretres, then go out to battell: for God will go out before the to smyte the hoste of the Philistines.
1 Chronicles 14:16 And Dauid dyd as God commaunded hym. And they smote the hoste of the Philistines all the waye from Gabaon to Gazer.
1 Chronicles 14:17 And the fame of Dauid went out into all landes, and the Lorde made all nacyons feare hym.

CHAPTER: 15

1 Chronicles 15:1 And Dauid made hym houses in the citie of Dauid, & prepared a place for the Arcke of God, & pitched for yt a tent.
1 Chronicles 15:2 And then Dauid sayd, the Arcke of God ought not to be caryed but of the Leuites. For them hath the Lord chosen to beare the Arcke of the Lorde and to minystre to hym for euer.
1 Chronicles 15:3 And therfore Dauid geathered all Israel to Ierusalem, to fetche the Arcke of the Lord vnto the place, which he had ordeyned for it.
1 Chronicles 15:4 And Dauid brought together the children of Aaron & the Leuites.
1 Chronicles 15:5 Of the sonnes of Cahath: Vriel the chefe, and of his brethren an hundred and .xx.
1 Chronicles 15:6 And of the chyldren of Merari: Asaiah the chefe, and of his brethren .ij. hundred and .xx.
1 Chronicles 15:7 And of the sonnes of Gerson Ioel the chefe, and of his brethren an hundred and thyrtie.
1 Chronicles 15:8 And of the children of Elizaphan: Semeiah the chefe and of hys brethren two hundred.
1 Chronicles 15:9 And of the sonnes of Hebron Eliel the chefe, and of his brethren .lxxx.
1 Chronicles 15:10 And of the sonnes of Oziel, Aminadab the chefe, and of hys brethren an hundred and .xij.
1 Chronicles 15:11 And Dauid called to Zadock & Abiathar the preastes, and to the Leuites Vriel, Asaiah Ioel, Semeiah, Eliel & Aminadab:
1 Chronicles 15:12 & sayde vnto them: ye are the princypall heades of the Leuites, sanctefye therfore youre selues and youre brethren, and brynge the Arcke of the Lord God of Israel vnto the place that I haue prepared for it.
1 Chronicles 15:13 For because ye were not ther at the fyrst tyme, the Lorde oure God made a rent amonge vs, for that we sought hym not as the fashion ought to be.
1 Chronicles 15:14 And the preastes and the Leuites sanctefied them selues, to fett the Arcke of the Lorde God of Israel.
1 Chronicles 15:15 And the chyldren of the Leuites bare the Arke of God vpon their shoulders with staues theron as Moses commaunded accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 15:16 And Dauid spake to the chefe heades of the Leuites, that they should appoynte of theyr brethren to synge wt instrumentes of musycke psalteries, harpes & symbales that sounded, and to synge on hye with Ioyfulnesse.
1 Chronicles 15:17 And the Leuites appoynted Heman the sonne of Ioel: and of his brethren, Asaph the sonne of Barachiah. And of the sonnes of Merari theyr brethren: Ethan the sonne of Cusaiahu.
1 Chronicles 15:18 And with them theyr brethren of the seconde degree: Zachariah, Ben, Iaaziel, Semiramoth Iahiel, Vni, Eliab, Banaiah, Maasiah, Mathathiah, Eliphelehu, Makaniah, Obed, Edom and Iaiel, porters.
1 Chronicles 15:19 Heman, Asah and Ethan sange with symbales of brasse to make a sound.
1 Chronicles 15:20 And Zachariah, Oziel, Semiramoth, Iehiel, Ani, Eliab, Maasaiah and Bananiah sang with psalteris on an Almoth.
1 Chronicles 15:21 And Mathathiah, Eliphelehu, Makeniah, Obed Edom, Ieiel, and Ozaziah sange with harpes and eight aboue the courage with all.
1 Chronicles 15:22 And Conaniah the chefe of the Leuites was maister of the songe and taught to synge, for he was a man of vnderstandinge.
1 Chronicles 15:23 And Barachiah and Elcanah kepte the dore of the Arcke.
1 Chronicles 15:24 And Sacaniah, Iehosaphat, Nathanael, Amasai, Zachariah, Banaiah and Eliezer priestes were blowers wyth trompettes before the Arcke of God. And Obed, Edom and Iahiah were kepers of the dore of the Arcke.
1 Chronicles 15:25 And Dauid and the elders of Israel & the Capitaines ouer thousandes went to fet the Arcke of the apoyntement of the Lorde: oute of the house of Obed Edom with gladnesse.
1 Chronicles 15:26 And when God had holpe the Leuites that bare the Arcke of the apoyntement of the Lorde, they offered .vij. oxen and .vij. rammes.
1 Chronicles 15:27 And Dauid had on him an albe of bysse, & so had the Leuites that bare the Arcke, and so had the syngers, and Conaniah the ruler of the songe & of the syngers. And Dauid had moreouer vpon him an Ephod of lynen.
1 Chronicles 15:28 And al Israel brought the Arcke of the Lordes couenaunt wyth shoutynge and blowynge of hornes, & with trompettes and symbales that sounded, and wyth psalteries and harpes.
1 Chronicles 15:29 And as the Arcke of the appoyntment of the Lorde came into the cytye of Dauid, Michol the doughter of Saul loked oute at a wyndowe: and when she sawe kynge Dauid daunsyng and playinge, she despysed him in her herte.

CHAPTER: 16

1 Chronicles 16:1 When they had brought in the Arcke of God they set in the tente that Dauid had pitched for it. And they brought burnt sacrifyce and peaceofferynges before God.
1 Chronicles 16:2 And when Dauid had made an ende of offerynge of burntofferynges and of peaceofferynges, he blessed the people wyth the name of the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 16:3 And he dealt all Israel bothe man and woman cracknell of breade a pece of fleshe and a messe of soppes.
1 Chronicles 16:4 And he appoynted certayne of the Leuites to ministre before the Lorde, and to repete, & to thanke and prayse the Lord God of Israel
1 Chronicles 16:5 euen Asaph the chefe, and next to him Zachariah then Ieiel, Semiramoth, Iehiel, Mathathiah, Eliab, Banaiah, Obed Edom, and Ieiel with Psalteries & Harpes. But Asaph wyth soundynge symbales
1 Chronicles 16:6 and Banaiah and Iahaziel pryestes wyth trompettes contynuallye before the Arcke of the couenaunt of God.
1 Chronicles 16:7 And that same tyme Dauid dyd appointe chefely to thanke the Lorde by Asaph and his brethren.
1 Chronicles 16:8 Thanke the lord, cal on his name, make his Actes knowen amonge the people.
1 Chronicles 16:9 Synge vnto hym and play vnto him, and recorde all hys wonderfull dedes.
1 Chronicles 16:10 Praise his holy name, and let the hertes of them that seke the Lorde reioyse.
1 Chronicles 16:11 Seke the Lorde and hys strengthe: Seke hys presence alwaye.
1 Chronicles 16:12 Remembre hys maruelles whych he dyd and his wonders, and the iudgementes of his mouthe.
1 Chronicles 16:13 The seade of Israel are his seruauntes: the children of Iacob are his chosen.
1 Chronicles 16:14 He is the Lord oure God: & in all landes are his iudgementes.
1 Chronicles 16:15 Thynke on hys appoyntmente euer, and on the worde he commaunded to a thousande generacyons.
1 Chronicles 16:16 Of his couenaunt to Abraham, and of his othe to Isaac:
1 Chronicles 16:17 which he set before Iacob for a decree, & to Israel for an euerlastynge couenaunt,
1 Chronicles 16:18 saying: to the I wyl geue the lande of Canaan, to be the porcyon of youre enheritaunce.
1 Chronicles 16:19 When you were a smalle company in nombre, euen but a few and therto straungers therin.
1 Chronicles 16:20 And they went from people to people, & from one kyngedom to another nacyon.
1 Chronicles 16:21 He suffered no man to do them wronge. But rebuked kynges for their sakes.
1 Chronicles 16:22 Touch not myne anoynted, nor do my Prophetes any harme.
1 Chronicles 16:23 Singe vnto the lord all the earthe: and shew from day to daye his victories.
1 Chronicles 16:24 Tell amonge the Heathen of hys glorye and amonge all nacyons of hys wonderfull deades.
1 Chronicles 16:25 For greate is the Lorde and to be praysed exceadyngly: & terrible is he aboue al Gods.
1 Chronicles 16:26 For al the Gods of the Heathen are Idoles. But the Lorde made heauen.
1 Chronicles 16:27 Prayse and honoure are in his presence: strength and gladnes are in hys place.
1 Chronicles 16:28 Asscribe to the lord ye kynredes of people. Asscribe to the Lorde glorye and strength.
1 Chronicles 16:29 Geue honoure vnto the Lordes name: brynge presentes and come before hym, and bowe to the Lorde in holy apparell.
1 Chronicles 16:30 All the earthe feare hym, he stablyshed the earthe that it can not moue.
1 Chronicles 16:31 The heauen reioyse and the earthe be glad, and let men tell amonge the nacyons that the Lorde is a kynge.
1 Chronicles 16:32 Let the sea thunder and hys fulnesse, and let the feldes reioyse, and all that is therin.
1 Chronicles 16:33 Moreouer let the trees of the wood rynge at the presence of the Lorde: for he cometh to iudge the earthe.
1 Chronicles 16:34 Thanke the Lorde for he is good, and his mercye lasteth euer:
1 Chronicles 16:35 and saye: saue vs o God oure sauyoure, and gather vs together, and delyuer vs from amonge the Heathen, to thanke thy holy name, and to prayse the with the prayse that becometh the.
1 Chronicles 16:36 Blessed be the Lorde God of Israel for euer and euer, and al nacyons saye Amen, so praysing the lord.
1 Chronicles 16:37 And he lefte there before the arcke of the Lordes couenaunt, Asaph and his brethren to mynystre before the Arcke euermore daye by daye.
1 Chronicles 16:38 And Obed Edom with hys brethren thre skore and eyght, and Obed Edom the sonne of Iduthun and Ozah to be porters.
1 Chronicles 16:39 And Zadock the pryeste wyth hys brethren the priestes set he before the tabernacle of the Lorde at the hylaulters at Gabaon,
1 Chronicles 16:40 to offer burntofferynges vnto the Lorde vpon the burntofferynge aulter perpetuallye at mornynge, and eueninge, accordynge to all that is wrytten in the lawe of the Lorde whyche he commaunded Israel.
1 Chronicles 16:41 And wyth them Heman and Iduthun, and other that were chosen and named by name, to thanke the Lord that hys mercye lasteth euer.
1 Chronicles 16:42 And wyth the sayde Heman and Iduthun were trompettes & soundyng simbales, & instrumentes of the melody of God. And the sonnes of Iduthun were porters.
1 Chronicles 16:43 And then all the people departed, euery man to hys house: and Dauid returned to salute hys housholde.

CHAPTER: 17

1 Chronicles 17:1 And as Dauid dwelt in his house he sayde to Nathan the prophete: Lo, I dwell in an house of Cedar tree, and the Arcke of the Lordes couenaunt dwelleth vnder curtaynes.
1 Chronicles 17:2 And Nathan sayde to Dauid: do all that is in thyne hert, for God is wt the.
1 Chronicles 17:3 But the same nyghte the worde of God came to Nathan sayinge:
1 Chronicles 17:4 go & tel Dauid my seruaunte, thus saith the Lorde: thou shalt not buylde me an house to dwell in.
1 Chronicles 17:5 For I haue dwelt in no house, sence I brought out the children of Israel vnto this daye: But haue gone from tent to tent, & from one tabernacle to another. Neyther in anye place wheresoeuer
1 Chronicles 17:6 I haue walked thorowe oute all Israel, spake I euer one worde to any of the iudges of Israel, whyche I commaunded to fede my people sayinge: why buyld ye me not an house of Cedar tree?
1 Chronicles 17:7 Nowe therfore thus saye vnto my seruaunt Dauid: thus sayth the Lorde of Hostes: I toke the oute of the pasture from after shepe, that thou shouldest be captain ouer my people Israel.
1 Chronicles 17:8 And I haue bene with the in al thou tokest in hande, and haue weded oute al thyne enemies oute of thy syghte, and haue made the a name like the name of the greatest men of the earthe.
1 Chronicles 17:9 And I wil ordeyne a place for my people Israell, and wyll make it fast, & they shall dwell vnder it, & shall moue no more. Neither shal the children of wickednesse vexe them any more as at the begynuynge,
1 Chronicles 17:10 & sence the tyme I commaunded Iudges to be ouer my people Israel, & wyl brynge vnder all thyne enemies (for I tolde the that the lord woulde buylde the an house.)
1 Chronicles 17:11 But when thy dayes be exspyred, that thou must go after thy fathers, I wyll set vp thy seade after the, whiche shalbe of thy sonnes & wyl setle hys kyngedom.
1 Chronicles 17:12 He shall buyld my an house, and I wyll stablyshe hys seate for euer.
1 Chronicles 17:13 I wylbe hys father and he shalbe me sonne, and I wyll not put my mercy awaye from him, as I did from him that was before the.
1 Chronicles 17:14 But I wyl set him in myne house, and in my kyngdome for euer, and hys seate shalbe sure for euer.
1 Chronicles 17:15 When Nathan hath tolde Dauid according to all these wordes, & to al this vision,
1 Chronicles 17:16 kynge Dauid went & sate him before the lord & said: what am I O Lorde God and what is mine housholde, that thou hast promoted me thus ferre.
1 Chronicles 17:17 And yet this semed littell in thyne eyes O god. But that thou shouldest speake of thy seruauntes house for a great whyle to come: and hast loked vpon my as vpon a man of hye degre O Lorde God.
1 Chronicles 17:18 What can Dauid desire more of the, wherin thou shouldest make thy seruaunt more gloriouse? Thou knowest thy seruaunt:
1 Chronicles 17:19 & lord for thy seruauntes sake, euen accordyng to thyne own hert thou hast done all this magnificence, to shewe al bounteousnesse
1 Chronicles 17:20 Lorde, there is none lyke the, nor any God saue thou, accordyng to all that we haue hearde with our eares.
1 Chronicles 17:21 Moreouer what nacyon on the earth is lyke thy people Israel, which God went and redemed to be his own people, & to make the a name of excellencye & terriblenesse, with castyinge out nacyons from before thy people,
1 Chronicles 17:22 for euer, and thou Lord art become their God.
1 Chronicles 17:23 And now Lorde the thynge thou hast spoken concernynge thy seruaunt & his house be true for euer, and do as thou hast sayde.
1 Chronicles 17:24 And thy name continue & waxe great for euer, that it be sayde: the lorde of hostes, the God of Israel is God in Israel, and the house of Dauid thy seruaunt be stable before the.
1 Chronicles 17:25 For thou lord hast tolde thy seruaunte, that thou wilt build him an house. And therfore thy seruaunt hath founde in his herte to praye before the.
1 Chronicles 17:26 And now Lorde thou arte the very God, and hast promised this goodnesse vnto thy seruaunte.
1 Chronicles 17:27 Now therfore go to and blesse the house of thy seruaunte, that it may continue before the for euer. For what thou blessest O Lorde that is blessed for euer.

CHAPTER: 18

1 Chronicles 18:1 And after that Dauid bet the Philistines and subdewed them, and toke Geth & the townes that longed therto, out of the handes of the Philistines.
1 Chronicles 18:2 And he be the Moabites, and the Moabites became Dauids seruauntes, and payde hym trybute.
1 Chronicles 18:3 And Dauid bet Hadadezer kynge of Zobah vnto Hemath, as he went to brynge hys dominion vnto the ryuer Euphrates.
1 Chronicles 18:4 And Dauid toke from him a thousande charettes and seuen thousande horsemen and twenty thousand fote men, and brake al the charettes, saue that he reserued of them an hundred.
1 Chronicles 18:5 Then came the Sirians of Damasco to helpe Hadadezer kinge of Zobah. And Dauid slue of the Sirians .xxij. thousande,
1 Chronicles 18:6 and put garysons in Siria Damasco. And the Sirians became Dauids seruauntes and brought him tribute. For the Lorde holpe Dauid in all that he went to.
1 Chronicles 18:7 And Dauid toke the shyldes of goulde that were on the seruauntes of Hadadezer, and brought them to Ierusalem.
1 Chronicles 18:8 And from Tebahath & Chun, cytyes of Hadadezer, brought Dauid exceadynge muche brasse. Wherwith Salomon made the brasen sea, and the pyllers and the vesselles of brasse.
1 Chronicles 18:9 And when thou kynge of Hemath, heard how Dauid had beaten all the hoste of Hadadezer kynge of Zobach,
1 Chronicles 18:10 he sent Haduram his sonne to kynge Dauid, to salute him and to blesse him, because he had fought with Hadadezer & beaten him (for thou had warre wyth Hadadezer) and sent all maner and Iewelles of goulde, syluer & brasse with him.
1 Chronicles 18:11 And king Dauid dedicated them also vnto the Lord wt the syluer & goulde that he brought from all nacyons, from the Edomites, from the Moabites, from the children of Ammon, from the Philistines, & from the Amalechites.
1 Chronicles 18:12 And Abisai the sonne of Zaruiah slue of the Edomites in the salte valeye .xviij. thousande,
1 Chronicles 18:13 and put Soudiars in Edom, & all Edom became Dauids seruauntes, for the Lorde kepte Dauid in all that he toke in hande.
1 Chronicles 18:14 And Dauid raigned ouer all Israel, and dyd right and equyte vnto al his people.
1 Chronicles 18:15 And Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah was ouer the hoste, and Iehosaphat the sonne of Ahilud recorder,
1 Chronicles 18:16 and Zadock the sonne of Ahitob & Abimeleh the sonne of Abiathar were the priestes, & Susa was scribe,
1 Chronicles 18:17 & Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada was ouer the Cerethites, and the Phelethites, and the eldest sonnes of Dauid waited at the kinges hand.

CHAPTER: 19

1 Chronicles 19:1 After thys it chaunced that Nahas kynge of the chyldren of Ammon dyed, & his sonne made king in his steade.
1 Chronicles 19:2 Then said Dauid: I wil shewe kindnesse vnto Hanon the sonne of Nahas because hys father dealt kyndlye wyth me. And thervpon Dauid sent messengers to comforte hym ouer the death of hys father. And when the seruauntes of Dauid were come into the land of the children of Ammon to Hanon to comforte him,
1 Chronicles 19:3 the Lordes of the chyldren of Ammon sayd to Hanon: thynkest thou that Dauid dothe honoure thy father in thy syghte, that he hath sent comforters vnto the? Naye, but it is to searche & ouerthrowe, & to spye oute the lande, that hys seruauntes be come vnto the.
1 Chronicles 19:4 Whervpon Hanon toke Dauids seruauntes & shaued them, & cut of their cotes harde by their bottockes, & sent them awaye.
1 Chronicles 19:5 And there went that tolde Dauid how the men were serued. And the kynge sent to mete them (for the men were exceadyngly ashamed) & sayd: tarye at Iericho, vntyll youre beardes be growen, and then returne.
1 Chronicles 19:6 And when the chyldren of Ammon sawe that they stanke in the nose of Dauid, Hanon & the chyldren of Ammon sent a thousand talentes of syluer to hyre them charettes, and horsemen out of Mesopotamia & out Siria Maacah & out of Zobah.
1 Chronicles 19:7 And they hired .xxxij. thousand charettes, & the kyng of Maacah & his people, whyche came and pytched before Midba. And the children of Ammon gathered them selues together from their cityes and went oute to battel.
1 Chronicles 19:8 And as sone as Dauid hearde of it, he sent Ioab with all the host of stronge men.
1 Chronicles 19:9 And the children of Ammon came oute, & put them in araye to battell before the gate of the cytye. And the kynges that were come kepte them by them selues in the felde.
1 Chronicles 19:10 When Ioab sawe that the fronte of the battel was before hym and after, he chose out of all the youth of Israel, and put them in aray agaynst the Sirians.
1 Chronicles 19:11 And the rest of the people he deliuered vnto Abisai his brother, that they shoulde put them selues in araye agaynst the chyldren of Ammon,
1 Chronicles 19:12 & sayde: Yf the Sirians be to stronge for me, succoure me, and yf the chyldren of Ammon be to good for the, I wil helpe the.
1 Chronicles 19:13 Plucke vp thyne herte, and let vs playe the men for oure peopels sake and for the cities of oure God, and the Lord do what semeth him beste.
1 Chronicles 19:14 And Ioab and the people that were wyth hym drue nye to the Sirians, to fyght, & they fled before him.
1 Chronicles 19:15 And when the chyldren of Ammon sawe that the Sirians were fled, they ranne awaye likewyse from Abisai his brother, and gat them into the cytie. And Ioab came to Ierusalem.
1 Chronicles 19:16 And when the Siriens saw, that they were put to the worse of Israel, they sent messengers & fet out the Sirians that are beyonde the ryuer with Sophach the captayne of host of Hadadezer before them.
1 Chronicles 19:17 Whyche when it was tolde Dauid, he gathered all Israel, and went ouer Iordan, & went and set vpon them. And Dauid put him selfe in araye agaynst the Sirians, and they fought wyth him.
1 Chronicles 19:18 But the Sirians fled before Israel, and Dauid destroyed of the Siriens .vij. thousande charettes, and slue .xl. thousande fote men, and kylled Sophach the Captayne of the Hoste.
1 Chronicles 19:19 And when the seruauntes of Hadadezer sawe that they were put to the worse of Israel, they made peace with Dauid, and serued hym. Neyther woulde the Siriens helpe the children of Ammon any more.

CHAPTER: 20

1 Chronicles 20:1 And the yeare folowynge aboute the tyme that kynges go oute a warre fare, Ioab caryed out the armye of the host, and destroied the countrey of the chyldren of Ammon, and went and beseged Rabah, and destroyed it. But Dauid boade at Ierusalem whyle Ioab smote Rabah, and destroyed it.
1 Chronicles 20:2 And Dauid toke the croune of their kynge of his heade, and founde therin the wayght of a talent of goulde, & there were preciouse stones in it, and it was set on Dauids head. And he brought out also the spoile of the cytye, whiche was exceading much:
1 Chronicles 20:3 & he brought oute the people that were in it, and tamed them with sawes and harowes of yron & with brakes, and so dealt Dauid wyth all the cytyes of the children of Ammon. And Dauid, and all the people came agayne to Ierusalem.
1 Chronicles 20:4 After that there arose warre at Gazer wyth the Philistines. At whych tyme Sobocai the Husathite slue Saphai, that was of the chyldren of Raphaim, & they were subdewed.
1 Chronicles 20:5 And there was battell again wyth the Philistines, and Elhanan the sonne of Iair slue Lahemi the brother of Goliath the Gethite, whose speare was lyke the beam of a weuer.
1 Chronicles 20:6 And there chaunsed yet agayne warre at Geth, where was a man of a syze with .xxiiij. fingers & toes, six on euery hand, & syx on euery fote, & was the sonne of Haraphah & defyed Israel.
1 Chronicles 20:7 And Iehonathan the sonne of Samaa Dauids brother slue him.
1 Chronicles 20:8 These were borne of Haraphah at Geth, and were ouerthrowen by the hande of Dauid and of hys seruauntes.

CHAPTER: 21

1 Chronicles 21:1 And Satan stode vp agaynste Israel, and persuaded Dauid to nombre Israel.
1 Chronicles 21:2 And Dauid sayde to Ioab and the rulers of the people: go ye and nombre Israel from Bersabe to Dan, and brynge it to me that I may knowe the nombre of them.
1 Chronicles 21:3 And Ioab answered: the Lord make thy people an hundred tymes so many mo as they be. But my lord king, are they not al my lordes seruauntes: why then doth my lord requyre this thing? why shoulde my Lorde be a cause of trespace to Israel?
1 Chronicles 21:4 Neuerthelater the kynges wordes preuailed agaynst Ioab. And Ioab toke his waye. And went thorow oute all Israel, and came to Ierusalem,
1 Chronicles 21:5 and gaue the nombre of the counte of the people vnto Dauid. And al Israel were in nombre a thousand thousande, and an hundred thousande men that drewe swerde: and Iuda was .cccc.lxx. thousand men that drewe swerde.
1 Chronicles 21:6 But the Leuites and Beniamin he counted not amonge them. For the kynges deade semed abominable to Ioab.
1 Chronicles 21:7 And the the Lord dyspleased wt this thing, & smote Israel.
1 Chronicles 21:8 Then sayde Dauid to God: I haue synned exceadingly in doyinge thys thynge. Neuerthelesse yet do awaye the wekednesse of thy seruaunte, for I haue done aboue measure folyshly.
1 Chronicles 21:9 And the Lorde spake vnto Gad Dauids sear of vysions saying:
1 Chronicles 21:10 go and tel Dauid sayinge. Thus sayth the Lorde: I geue the the chose of thre thynges: chose the one of them, that I maye do vnto the.
1 Chronicles 21:11 And Gad came to Dauid and sayde vnto him. Thus sayth the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 21:12 Chose the eyther thre yeares famyshement, or thre monethes to be consumed of thine aduersaries, the swerde of thyne enemyes ouertakynge the: or else the swerde of the Lord thre dayes and pestilence in the lande, the Aungel of the Lorde destroyinge thorowe oute all the coastes of Israel. And now aduise thy self what word I shal brynge againe to hym that sent me.
1 Chronicles 21:13 And Dauid sayde to Gad: I am in an exceadynge strayte. But let me fal into the handes of the Lord, for passynge great in his mercye, and let me not falle into the handes of men.
1 Chronicles 21:14 And the Lorde sent pestilence vpon all Israel, so that there were ouerthrowen of Israel .lxx. thousande men
1 Chronicles 21:15 And God sent the Aungel to Ierusalem to destroye it. And as he was about to destroye, the Lorde behelde and had compassion on the wretchednesse, and sayde to the Aungell that destroyed, it is ynoughe, nowe cease thyne hand. And the Aungel of the Lorde stode by the thressyng floure of Ornan the Iebusite.
1 Chronicles 21:16 And Dauid lyfte vp hys eyes & saw the Aungel of the Lorde stand betwene the earth and heauen with a drawen swerde in his hande stretched oute towarde Ierusalem. Then fel Dauid & the elders of Israel clothed in sacke vpon their faces.
1 Chronicles 21:17 And Dauid said vnto God: Is it not I that commaunded to nombre the people? And I am he that haue sinned and done euyl in deade. But what haue these shepe done? let thyne hande therfore O Lorde God, be on me and on my fathers house, and not on thy people to destroye them.
1 Chronicles 21:18 And the Aungell commaunded Gad to saye to Dauid, that Dauid should go & rere vp an aulter vnto the Lorde, in the thressyng floure of Ornan the Iebusite.
1 Chronicles 21:19 And Dauid went at the saying of Gad whyche spake in the name of the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 21:20 And Ornan turned aboute and saw the Aungel, & hys foure sonnes with him & hyd them selues: for Ornan was thressynge whete.
1 Chronicles 21:21 And Dauid came to Ornan. And when Ornan loked and sawe Dauid, he went oute of the thressyng floure, & bowed himselfe to Dauid with his face to the grounde.
1 Chronicles 21:22 And Dauid sayde to Ornan: geue me the place of the thressyng flour, that I maye build an aulter therin vnto the Lorde. Let me haue it for as muche money as it is worthe, that the plage may cease from the people.
1 Chronicles 21:23 And Ornan sayde to Dauid, take it to the, and let my lord kynge do that semeth good in his eyes. Se, I geue the oxen for a burntsacryfice, & the thressynge sleades for wood, & wheate for meateofferynge. I geue it all.
1 Chronicles 21:24 But kyng Dauid said to Ornan: not so, but I wil bye it for as much moneye as it is worthe. I wyll not take that, whiche is thine, for the Lord, and offer burntofferynges wythoute coste.
1 Chronicles 21:25 And so Dauid gaue to Ornan for the place sycles of goulde .vi. hundred by wayght.
1 Chronicles 21:26 And Dauid buylt there an aulter vnto the Lorde & offered burntofferinges & peaceofferinges, & called vnto the Lorde & he hearde him from heauen in fyre vpon the aulter of burntofferyng.
1 Chronicles 21:27 And the Lorde commaunded the aungel to put vp his swerde agayne into the shethe of it.
1 Chronicles 21:28 At that tyme when Dauid sawe, that the Lorde had hearde him in the thressyng floure of Ornan the Iebusite, he vsed to offer there.
1 Chronicles 21:29 For the tabernacle of the Lorde, which Moses made in the wyldernesse, & the aulter of burntofferynge were at the ceason in the hyll at Gabaon.
1 Chronicles 21:30 And Dauid coulde not go before it to seke God, because he was afrayde of the swerde of the Aungel of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 22

1 Chronicles 22:1 And Dauid sayd: this is the house of the lord God, & thys is the burntofferynge aulter for Israel.
1 Chronicles 22:2 And Dauid commaunded to gather the straungers that were in the land of Israel, & set the hewers to hew stone, to buylde the house of God.
1 Chronicles 22:3 And Dauid prepared plentye of yron for nayles to the dores, of the gates, and to ioyne with all, & aboundance of brasse without waighte,
1 Chronicles 22:4 & of Cedar trees withoute nombre, For the Zidons and they of Tire brought much Cedar wood to Dauid.
1 Chronicles 22:5 For Dauid thus thought: Salomon my sonne is younge and tender, and the house that is to be buylt for the Lorde, must exceade in greatnesse, that it maye be spoken of and praysed in all landes. I wyll therfore make ordynaunce for it. And so Dauid prepared aboundance before hys death.
1 Chronicles 22:6 And he called Salomon hys sonne and charged hym to buylde an house for the lord God of Israel.
1 Chronicles 22:7 And Dauid sayd to Salomon: my sonne: I had in myne hert to buylde an house vnto the name of the Lorde my God.
1 Chronicles 22:8 But the worde of the Lorde came to me sayinge: thou hast shed muche bloude, and hast made many battelles. Thou shalt not buylt an house for my name, for thou hast shed muche bloude to the earthe in my syght.
1 Chronicles 22:9 Behold, a sonne shalbe borne the, whych shalbe a man of reste, for I will geue him reste from al his enemies round aboute. And his name shalbe Salomon: for I wyl sende rest and peace vpon Israel in his dayes.
1 Chronicles 22:10 He shall buylde an house for my name & he shalbe my sonne, and I wil be his father, and wyl stablyshe the seate of his kingedom vpon Israel for euer.
1 Chronicles 22:11 Now my sonne, the lord be with the, that thou mayst prospere & buyld the house of the Lorde thy God, as he hathe sayde of the.
1 Chronicles 22:12 And the Lord geue thy wysdom & vnderstandynge, & make the gouerner of Israel, & to kepe the law of the lord thy God.
1 Chronicles 22:13 For then thou shalt prospere. Yf thou shalte be dylygent to do the ordynaunces and lawes whiche the Lorde charged Moses with, to delyuer to Israell. Plucke vp thyne hert and be strong, dread not nor be discouraged.
1 Chronicles 22:14 Behold in myne aduersite I haue prepared for the house of the Lorde an hundred thousand talentes of goulde, and a thousande talentes of syluer and as for brasse, and yron can not be numbred, it is so muche. And I haue prepared timbre and stone, and thou shalt prouyde more therto.
1 Chronicles 22:15 Moreouer thou hast worckmen ynowe & masons and carpenters to worke in stone & timbre, and all maner of wyse men, for whatsoeuer worke it be.
1 Chronicles 22:16 And of gould, siluer, brasse and yron there is no nombre. Vp therfore & set vpon it, and the Lorde shalbe wyth the.
1 Chronicles 22:17 And Dauid commaunded all the Lordes of Israel, to helpe Salomon his sonne saying:
1 Chronicles 22:18 Is not the Lorde youre God with you? and hath he not geuen you rest on euery syde? for he hath geuen the enhabitoures of the lande into myne hande, and the lande is subdued before the Lorde and before hys people.
1 Chronicles 22:19 Nowe therfore set your hertes and youre soules, to seke the Lord youre God. And vp & buylde ye the temple of the Lorde God, to brynge the Arcke of the couenaunt of the Lorde, and the holy vesselles of God into the house so buylt for the name of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 23

1 Chronicles 23:1 And when Dauid was olde and stryken in yeares, he made Salomon hys sonne king ouer Israel.
1 Chronicles 23:2 And then he gathered together al the Lordes of Israel wt the pryestes & the Leuites.
1 Chronicles 23:3 And the Leuites were numbred from .xxx. year & aboue, and he tale of them in men polle by polle was .xxxviij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 23:4 Of whiche .xxiiij. thousand were set to forther the worcke of the house of the Lorde. And syxe thousand were officers & Iudges.
1 Chronicles 23:5 Four thousand were porters and four thousand praised the Lord with suche instrumentes as Dauid had made to prayse with all.
1 Chronicles 23:6 And Dauid put an ordre amonge the chyldren of Leui: Gerson, Cahath and Merari:
1 Chronicles 23:7 Of the Gersonites was Laadan and Semei:
1 Chronicles 23:8 The sonnes of Laadan: the chefe was Iehiel, and then Zethan and Ioel, thre.
1 Chronicles 23:9 The sonnes of Semei, Salomith, Haziel, and Haram, thre. These were the auncient heades of Laadan.
1 Chronicles 23:10 And the sonnes of Semei were also Iahath Zinah, Iaus and Bariah: these foure were the sonnes of Semei.
1 Chronicles 23:11 And Iahath was the chefe, Zinah the seconde. But Iaus and Bariah had no many sonnes, and therfore they were rekened for one auncient housholde.
1 Chronicles 23:12 The sonnes of Cahath: Amram, Izahar, Hebron & Vziel, foure.
1 Chronicles 23:13 The sonnes of Amram: Aaron and Moses. And Aaron was appoynted to consecrate in the place moost holy, with his sonnes for euer: & to burne the offerynges before the Lorde, and to ministre, & to blesse in his name for euer.
1 Chronicles 23:14 And as for Moses the man of God, hys chyldren were named wt the trybe of Leui.
1 Chronicles 23:15 The sonnes of Moses: Gerson & Eliezer.
1 Chronicles 23:16 And of the sonnes of Gerzon: Sabael was the chefe.
1 Chronicles 23:17 The sonnes of Eliezer: Rohabiah the chefe. And Eliezer had no nother sonnes: But the sonnes of Rohabiah were very manye.
1 Chronicles 23:18 And of the sonnes of Izahar: Salomi, the chefe.
1 Chronicles 23:19 The sonnes of Hebron: Ieriahu, the fyrste, Amariah the seconde, Iahaziel the thirde, and Iecmaam the fourthe.
1 Chronicles 23:20 The sonnes of Vziel: Micah the fyrste and Iesiah the seconde.
1 Chronicles 23:21 The sonnes of Merari: Mahali, and Musi, the sonnes of Mahali: Eleazar and Cis.
1 Chronicles 23:22 And Eleazar died and had no sonnes but doughters onlye, whiche their brethren the sonnes of Cis toke.
1 Chronicles 23:23 The sonnes of Musi: Mahali, Eder, and Ierumuth, thre.
1 Chronicles 23:24 These are the children of Leui in the housholdes of their fathers the auncyent heades, vewed and nombred by name and polle by polle from twentye yeare and aboue, to worcke in the seruyce of the house of the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 23:25 For Dauid sayde: the Lorde God of Israel hath geuen reste vnto his people, and they shall dwelle in Ierusalem for euer.
1 Chronicles 23:26 Moreouer the Leuites shoulde now no more beare the tabernacle and all the vesselles that pertayneth to the seruice therof.
1 Chronicles 23:27 But at the last commaundement of Dauid,
1 Chronicles 23:28 the Leuites were nombred from twenty yeare and aboue to wayte at the handes of the sonnes of Aaron in the seruyce of the house of the Lorde, & to haue the ouersyghte of the courtes, and of the store houses, and of the purefyinge of all holye thynges, and of the worcke of the thynges that serued for the house of God,
1 Chronicles 23:29 as the shewe breade, the fyne floure, the meateofferynges, the flannes of swete breade, and of the thinges baken in the frying panne, or broiled on the grydyron, and on all maner measures & cyse,
1 Chronicles 23:30 and to wayte euery morning to thanke and prayse the Lorde, and lykewyse at euen.
1 Chronicles 23:31 And to wayte on euery offerynge and burnt sacrifices vnto the Lorde, the Sabbothes and fyrst daies of the monethes, and other feastful dayes by nombre and custome, was their office euer before the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 23:32 And that they shoulde wayte on the tabernacle of wytnesse and on the holy place, and on the sonnes of Aaron their brethren, in the seruice of the house of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 24

1 Chronicles 24:1 The deuision of the sonnes of Aaron, Nabad, Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
1 Chronicles 24:2 But Nabad & Abihu died before their father, & hath not chyldren. And Eleazar & Ithamar were the priestes.
1 Chronicles 24:3 And Dauid ordered them on this maner: Zadock of the sonnes of Eleazar and Ahimelek of the sonnes of Ithamar to be in office by course.
1 Chronicles 24:4 And there were mo myghtye heades found of the sonnes of Eleazar, then of the sonnes of Ithamar. And they deuided them into .xvi. heades of auncient housholdes of the sonnes of Eleazar, & eyght of the sonnes of Ithamar.
1 Chronicles 24:5 And they put them in order by lot, one wyth another, that there shoulde be rulers in the sanctuarye and Lordes before God as well of the sonnes of Ithamar, as of the sonnes of Eleazar.
1 Chronicles 24:6 And Semeiah the sonne of Nathaneel the Scribe of the Leuites wrote them before the kynge and the Lordes, and before Zadock the pryeste, and Ahimelek the sonne of Abiathar, & before the auncient heades of the priestes & of the Leuites: one principal houshould for Eleazar and one for Ithamar.
1 Chronicles 24:7 And the fyrst lot fell to Iehoiarib. The seconde to Iedaiah.
1 Chronicles 24:8 The thirde to Harim. The fourth to Seorim.
1 Chronicles 24:9 The fyft to Melchiah. The sixte to Miamin.
1 Chronicles 24:10 The seuenth to Hakes. The eyght to Abiah.
1 Chronicles 24:11 The nynthe to Iesua. The tenth to Secaniah.
1 Chronicles 24:12 The leuenth to Eliasib. The twelueth to Iakim.
1 Chronicles 24:13 The thirtene to Huphah. The fourtene to Isbaab.
1 Chronicles 24:14 The fyftene to Belgah. The syxtene to Emer.
1 Chronicles 24:15 The seuentene to Hezir. The eyghtene to Haphzez.
1 Chronicles 24:16 The nynetene to Pathahaiah. The twentye to Iehesekiel.
1 Chronicles 24:17 The twentie & one to Iacin. The .xxij. to Gamul.
1 Chronicles 24:18 The .xxiij. to Delaiahu. The .xxiiij. to Maasiahu.
1 Chronicles 24:19 This is the order of them in their offices, to come into the house of the Lord accordinge to their maner vnder Aaron their father, as the Lorde God of Israel commaunded.
1 Chronicles 24:20 The rest of the sonnes of Leui: of the sonnes of Amram, Subael. Of the sonnes of Subael Iedehiabu.
1 Chronicles 24:21 Of the sonnes of Rohabiah, the fyrst Iesiah.
1 Chronicles 24:22 Of the Izaharites, Salemoth. Of the sonnes of Salemoth, Iahath.
1 Chronicles 24:23 And the sonnes of Hebron were Ieriahu the fyrste, Amariah the seconde, Iahaziel the thirde, Iekameam the fourthe.
1 Chronicles 24:24 Of the sonnes of Vsiel, Micah. Of the sonnes of Micah, Samir.
1 Chronicles 24:25 The brother of Micah was Iesiah. Of the sonnes of Iesiah, Zachariah.
1 Chronicles 24:26 The sonnes of Merari were Mahali and Musi. The sonnes of Iaaziahu, Beno.
1 Chronicles 24:27 The sonnes of Merari by Iaaziahu, Beno, Sohem, Zacur and Ebri.
1 Chronicles 24:28 Maheli had Eleazar, whyche had no sonnes.
1 Chronicles 24:29 The sonnes of Kis: Ierahemel.
1 Chronicles 24:30 The sonnes of Musi: Mahali, Eder and Iermoth. These are of the children of Leui in the housholdes of their fathers.
1 Chronicles 24:31 And these cast lottes next to their brethren the sonnes of Aaron, before Dauid the kynge and Zadock and Ahimelec, and the auncient heades and priestes of the Leuites, as wel the youngest brother as an auncient heade.

CHAPTER: 25

1 Chronicles 25:1 And Dauid and the captaines of the hoste appoynted out to do seruice, the sonnes of Asaph of Heman and Iduthun, whiche dyd prophesie with harpes psalteries & symbales: & the multytude of them were men to do seruyce in their offices.
1 Chronicles 25:2 The sonnes of Asaph: Zaur, Ioseph, Nathaniah, Aserealah, to wayte on Asaph, whyche prophesyed by the kynge.
1 Chronicles 25:3 The sonnes of Iduthun: Godoliah, Zuri, Isaiah, Rasabiah and Mathathiah, Semei, syxe, at the handes of their fathers Iduthun wyth harpes: which Iduthun prophesyed for to thanke and prayse the Lord.
1 Chronicles 25:4 The sonnes of Heman: Bokiahu, Mathaniah, Vziel, Zubuell, Ierimoth, Hananiah, Hanam, Eliathat, Gedalthi, Romanthi Ezer, Iesbokasah, Malothi, Hothir and Mahazioth.
1 Chronicles 25:5 All these were the sonnes of Heman the kynges Sear of vysions with the worde of God, to lyfte vp the horne. God gaue to Heman .xiiij. sonnes, and thre doughters.
1 Chronicles 25:6 All these were at the hande of their father to synge in the house of the lord with symbales, psalteries, and harpes in the seruyce of the house of God. And at the hand of the king was Asaph, Iduthun and Heman.
1 Chronicles 25:7 But the multitude of them were with theyr brethren that were connynge in the songe of the Lord. And the nombre of al that taught, were two hundred four skore and eyght.
1 Chronicles 25:8 And they cast Lottes indifferentlye how they shoulde wayte as wel the smalle as the greate, the scoler as well as the skole mayster.
1 Chronicles 25:9 And the fyrste lot of Asaph fell to Ioseph. The seconde to Godoliah with hys brethren & sonnes, twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:10 The thyrde fel to Zacur with hys sonnes & brethren beyng .xij. personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:11 The fourth to Izari with his sonnes and brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:12 The fyfte to Nathaniah wyth hys sonnes and brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:13 The syxte to Bokiahu with his sonnes & brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:14 The seuenth to Isarelah with hys sonnes & brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:15 The .viij. to Isaiah wyth hys sonnes & brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:16 The nynthe to Mathaniah wyth his sonnes & brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:17 The tenth to Semei wyth hys sonnes & brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:18 The eleuenth to Azaraell with hys sonnes & brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:19 The twelueth to Hasabiah with hys sonnes & brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:20 The thyrtene to Subuel with his sonnes & brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:21 The fourtene to Mathathiah with his sonnes & brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:22 The fyftene to Iermoth wyth his sonnes and brethren twelue persons.
1 Chronicles 25:23 The syxtene to Hananiah with hys sonnes and brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:24 The seuentene to Iesbokasah with hys sonnes & brethren twelue persons.
1 Chronicles 25:25 The eyghtene to Hanani with his sonnes and brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:26 The nientene to Malothi with his sonnes and brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:27 The twentye to Eliathah wyth hys sonnes and brethren twelue personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:28 The .xxi. to Hothir with hys sonnes & brethren .xij. personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:29 The .xxij. to Gedalthi with his sonnes and brethren .xij. personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:30 The .xxiij. Mahazioth wyth hys sonnes and brethren .xij. personnes.
1 Chronicles 25:31 The .xxiiij. to Romanthi Ezer wyth his sonnes and brethren .xij. personnes.

CHAPTER: 26

1 Chronicles 26:1 The deuysyon of the porters amonge the Corehites: Meselemiah the sonne of Koreh of the chyldren of Asaph.
1 Chronicles 26:2 And the sonnes of Mesemiah were these: Zachariah the eldest, Iadiel the seconde, Zabadiah the thyrde, Iathaniel the fourth,
1 Chronicles 26:3 Elam the fyfte, Iehohanan the syxte Elioenai the seuenthe.
1 Chronicles 26:4 And Obed Edom had sonnes: Semeiah the eldest, Iehosabad the second, Ioah the thyrd, Sacar the fourth, Nathanael the fyfte,
1 Chronicles 26:5 Amiel the sixte, Isacar the seuenth, and Polathai the .viij. for God had blessed hym.
1 Chronicles 26:6 And vnto Semeiah hys sonne were sonnes borne that ruled in the house of theyr father, for they were men of myghte.
1 Chronicles 26:7 The sonnes of Semeiah: Othni, Raphael, Obed and Elzabad & his brethren men of actyuite, Elihu and Samachiah.
1 Chronicles 26:8 All these were of the chyldren of Obed Edom, whiche with theyr brethren and theyr chyldren, actiue men & of strength to do seruice, were .lxij. of Obed Edom.
1 Chronicles 26:9 And Meseleniah had sonnes and brethren, actyue men, .xviij.
1 Chronicles 26:10 And Hosah of the chyldren of Merari, had sonnes: semri the chefe, yet he was not the eldest, but hys father made hym the chefeste.
1 Chronicles 26:11 Helkiah the seconde, Tabeliah the thyrde and Zachariah the fourth: so that all the sonnes & brethren of Hosah were .xiij.
1 Chronicles 26:12 Vnto these was deuyded the offyce of the portershepe as vnto heades ouer the men that wayted with theyr brethren, and mynistred in the house of the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 26:13 And they caste lottes, the smalle as well as the greate in the housholdes of theyr fathers, from gate to gate.
1 Chronicles 26:14 And the Eest lot fell to Selemiah. And for Zachariah hys sonne a wise counceler, they cast lottes, and hys lot came out towarde the North.
1 Chronicles 26:15 And Obed Edoms lot fell to the south. And to hys sonnes fell the councel houses.
1 Chronicles 26:16 And to Suphim and Hosah fell the weste with the gate Salecheth, where the waye ascendeth vpwarde, the one waye beynge faste by the other.
1 Chronicles 26:17 In the Eest kepte syxe Leuytes: in the North .iiij. a daye, & in the south .iiij. a daye, and in euerye councell house two, & in the watchhouses,
1 Chronicles 26:18 on the hye waye westwarde foure: two in a house.
1 Chronicles 26:19 These are the dyuysyons of the porters among the sonnes of Koreh & the sonnes of Merari.
1 Chronicles 26:20 And of the Leuites Ahiah had the ouersight of the treasure of the house of God, and of the treasure of the dedicate thynges.
1 Chronicles 26:21 As concernynge the sonnes of Laadan whiche were Gersonites. Laadan had auncyent fathers. Laadan the Gersonite had Iehieli.
1 Chronicles 26:22 The sonnes of Iehieli: Zethan & Ioel his brother, which were ouer the treasures of the house of the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 26:23 Amonge the Amramites, Izaharites, Hebronites & Ozielites,
1 Chronicles 26:24 was Subuel the sonne of Gerson the sonne of Moses a ruler ouer the treasure.
1 Chronicles 26:25 And of hys brethren the sonnes of Eliezer, was Rahabiah, whose sonne was Isaiah, & his sonne was Ioram, & hys sonne Zechri, and hys sonne was Selomith,
1 Chronicles 26:26 which Selomith and hys brethren were ouer all the treasures of the dedycate gyftes which Dauid the king, & the auncyent heades of the captaynes ouer thousandes & hundredes, and the capitaynes of the hoste had dedicated
1 Chronicles 26:27 of the spoyle wonne in battell, to mayntayne the house of the Lord:
1 Chronicles 26:28 & ouer al that Samuel the sear & Saule the sonne of Cis, and Abner the sonne of Ner, and Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah had dedicated. All that was dedicated, was vnder the hande of Selomith & of hys brethren.
1 Chronicles 26:29 Of the Izaharites Conaniah and hys sonnes were in businesses wythout forth made offycers and iudges ouer Israel.
1 Chronicles 26:30 And of the Hebronites Hasabiah & hys brethren men of actiuite a thousande & .vij. hundred were offycers in Israell on thys syde Iordan westwarde, in all busynesses of the Lorde and seruyce of the kynge.
1 Chronicles 26:31 And Iediah was the chefeste amonge the kynredes and fathers of the Hebronites. And in the fourtye yeare of the kyngedom of Dauid they were fought for. And there were founde of them men of actyuyte at Iezer in Galaad.
1 Chronicles 26:32 And hys brethren were in men of actiuite, two thousande & seuen hundred auncient heades, whiche Kynge Dauid made rulers ouer the Rubenites, Gaddites & the half tribe of Manasseh in all maters pertaynynge to God and busynesses of the kynge.

CHAPTER: 27

1 Chronicles 27:1 To speake of the chyldren of Israel: in the nombre of them were auncyent heades & capitaynes of thousandes & hundredes, and offycers that serued the kyng in all thynge accordyng to the companyes that came in or wente out, moneth by moneth, thorouout all the monethes of the yeare. And euerye companye had .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:2 Ouer the fyrste companye in the fyrste moneth, was Iasoboam the sonne of Zabdyel. And in hys nombre were .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:3 And the chefest of all the capytaynes in the host of the fyrste moneth was of the chyldren of Pharez.
1 Chronicles 27:4 Ouer the company of the second moneth Dodai an Ahohite, and in hys hoste was Makeloth a ruler. And in hys company were .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:5 The chefe captayne of the thyrde host in the thyrde moneth, was Banaiah the sonne of Iehoiada the prieste. And in his hoste .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:6 This is that Banaiah mightye amonge thyrtye and aboue thyrtye. And in hys parte was Amizabad hys sonne.
1 Chronicles 27:7 The fourth capitayne in the fourth moneth was Asael the brother of Ioab, & Zabadiah hys sonne after hym. And in hys hoste .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:8 The fyfte capitayne in the fyft moneth was Samahut the Iezrahite: and in hys hoste .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:9 The sixte capitayne in the syxte moneth was Ira the sonne of Akes a Thekuite: & in hys hoste .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:10 The seuenth Capitayne in the seuenth moneth, was Helei the Phalonite, of the chyldren of Ephraim: & in hys hoste .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:11 The eyghte capitayne in the eyghte monethe, was Sobocai an Husathite of the kynne of Sarah: & in hys host .xxiiij. thousand.
1 Chronicles 27:12 The nynth Capitayne in the nynthe monethe, was Abiezer an Anathothite of the sonnes of Iemini: & in hys hoste .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:13 The tenth capytayne in the tenth monethe, was Mahari the Netophathite of the Zarahites: & in hys host .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:14 The eleuenthe moneth, was Banaiah the Pharathonite of the chyldren of Ephraim: and in hys hoste .xxiiij. thousande.
1 Chronicles 27:15 The twelueth Capytayne in the twelueth moneth, was Heldai the Netophathite of Othoniel, and in hys hoste .xxiiij. thousand.
1 Chronicles 27:16 And the rulers ouer the trybes of Israel were these. Amonge the Rubenites, was Eliezer the sonne of Zechri. Amonge the Symeonites, was Saphatiah the sonne of Maacah.
1 Chronicles 27:17 Among the Leuites: Hasabiah the sonne of Kamuel. Among the Haromites: Zadock.
1 Chronicles 27:18 In Iuda. Eliu of the brethren of Dauid. In Isacar: Amri the sonne of Michael.
1 Chronicles 27:19 In Zabulon: Iesmaiah the sonne of Abdiah. In Nephthalie: Ierimoth the sonne of Azriel.
1 Chronicles 27:20 Amonge the chyldren of Ephraim: Hosea the sonne of Ozaiah. In the halfe tribe of Manasseh: Ioel the sonne of Phadaiah.
1 Chronicles 27:21 Of the halfe trybe of Manasseh in Galaad: Iado the sonne of Zachariah. In Beniamin: Iaasiel the sonne of Abner.
1 Chronicles 27:22 In Dan: Azariel the sonne of Ieroham. These are the Lordes in the trybes of Israel.
1 Chronicles 27:23 But Dauid toke not the nombre of them vnder .xx. yeare: for the Lord said: he would encrease Israel lyke vnto the starres of the skye.
1 Chronicles 27:24 And Ioab the sonne of Zaruiah beganne to nombre. And thoughe he fynyshed it not, yet there fel wrath for that vpon Israel. And therefore the numbre was not put in the chronicles of Kynge Dauid.
1 Chronicles 27:25 Ouer the kynges treasure was Azmoth the sonne of Adiel. And ouer the treasure of the feldes, in the cytyes, villages and castelles, was Iehonathan, the sonne of Oziah.
1 Chronicles 27:26 And ouer the worckemen in the feldes that tylled the ground was Ezri the sonne of Chelub.
1 Chronicles 27:27 And the ouersyght of the vyneyardes had Semeiah the Ramathite. Ouer the wynecellers & treasure of wyne was Sabdi the Saphonite.
1 Chronicles 27:28 And ouer the olyuetrees & mulberytrees that were in the valeys was Baal Hanan the Gadarite. And ouer the treasure of oyle was Ioas.
1 Chronicles 27:29 And ouer the oxen that fed in Saron was Setari the Saronite. And ouer the oxen in the valeys was Saphat the sonne of Adlai.
1 Chronicles 27:30 And ouer the camels Vbil the Ismaelite. And ouer the Asses was Iohadiah the Merothite.
1 Chronicles 27:31 And ouer the shepe was Iazis the Hagarite. All these were the rulers of the substaunce of kyng Dauid.
1 Chronicles 27:32 And Iehonatham Dauids brothers sonne, a man of counsel a man that thaught wysdome, & a writer he & Iehiel the sonne of Hachamoni waited on the kinges sonnes.
1 Chronicles 27:33 And Ahithophel was of the kynges councell. And Busai the Arachite was the kynges companyon.
1 Chronicles 27:34 And nexte to Ahitophel was Iehoiada the sonne of Banaiah & Abiathar. And the captayne of the kynges warre was Ioab.

CHAPTER: 28

1 Chronicles 28:1 And Dauid gathered together al the Lordes of Israel: the Lordes of the trybes, the Lordes of the companyes that mynystred to the kyng by course, the Lordes ouer the thousandes and ouer the hundredes, & the Lordes ouer all the goodes and catell of the kynge of his sonnes, with the chambrelaynes warryoures and all actiue men vnto Ierusalem.
1 Chronicles 28:2 And kyng Dauid stode vpon hys fete, & sayde. Heare me my brethren and my people: I had in myne herte to buylde an house of reste for the arcke of the couenaunt of the Lorde, & a fotestole for oure God, and had made redye to buyld.
1 Chronicles 28:3 But God sayd to me: thou shalt not buylde an house for my name, because thou arte a man of warre, & hast shed bloude.
1 Chronicles 28:4 Moreouer the Lorde God of Israel chose me of all the house of my father, to be kyng ouer Israel for euer, for he chose Iuda to be a capytayne: & in the house of Iuda, the house of my father, and of the sonnes of my father he had a luste to me, to make me kynge ouer all Israel.
1 Chronicles 28:5 And of all my sonnes (for the Lorde hathe geuen me manye sonnes) he hath chosen Salomon my sonne, to syt in the seate of the kingdom of the Lorde ouer Israel.
1 Chronicles 28:6 And he sayde vnto me: Salomon thy sonne, he shall buylde my house and my courtes, for I haue chosen hym to be my sonne, and I wyl be hys father
1 Chronicles 28:7 & wyll stablyshe hys kyngedome for euer, If he wyll harden hym selfe to do my commaundementes, and my lawes, as it goeth thys daye.
1 Chronicles 28:8 And nowe I saye vnto you before all Israel the congregacyon of the Lorde, and in the audience of oure God: kepe and seke for al the commaundementes of the Lorde your God, that ye maye enioye a good lande, and inheryte youre chyldren after you for euer.
1 Chronicles 28:9 And thou Salomon my sonne: knowe God thy father, and serue hym with a pure hert, and lust of soule. For the Lorde searcheth all hertes, and vnderstandeth all the Imaginacyons of thoughtes. If thou shalte seke hym, he wylbe founde of the: But & yf thou forsake hym, he wyll caste the of for euer.
1 Chronicles 28:10 Take hede now, for the Lord hath chosen the, to buylde an house of thy sanctuarye. Be stronge, and do it.
1 Chronicles 28:11 And Dauid gaue Salomon hys sonne the paterne of the porche & of the houses that longed therto, & of the store houses, vpper chambres, ynner parloures, and of the house of the mercye seate:
1 Chronicles 28:12 and the example of all that was in hys mynde, bothe of the courtes of the house of the Lord and of the treasure houses rounde aboute, for the treasures of the house of God, and for the treasure of the dedicate gyftes,
1 Chronicles 28:13 and of the companyes of the priestes & Leuytes that wayted by course, & of all workemanshyppe, that shulde serue for the house of the Lorde,
1 Chronicles 28:14 and for all vesselles that shuld serue in the house of the Lorde. And appoynted hym, what wayghte of goulde shoulde serue for thynges of goulde thorowoute all vessels for whatsoeuer vse it serued: and what wayghte of syluer shoulde suffyse for all maner of vesselles of syluer, for whatsoeuer purpose they serued.
1 Chronicles 28:15 And the wayghte of the goulden candelstyckes, and of theyr lampes of goulde, the wayghte for euerye candelsticke, and for theyr lampes. And for the candelstyckes of syluer by wayght, bothe for the candelstycke & also for her lampes accordynge to the offyce of euery candelstycke.
1 Chronicles 28:16 And the waight of gould for the tables of shewe breade, table by table: and lykewyse syluer for the tables of syluer.
1 Chronicles 28:17 And for fleshehokes, basens and drynckynge pottes of pure goulde. And for cuppes of goulde by wayghte, cuppe by cuppe. And for cuppes of syluer by wayght, cuppe by cuppe.
1 Chronicles 28:18 And for the aulter of incense of tryed goulde by wayghte. And the similytude of the seate of the Cherubes that stretched oute theyr winges, and couered the Arcke of the couenaunte of the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 28:19 All was geuen me by wrytynge of the hande of the Lorde, whiche made me vnderstande all the worckemanshippe of the paterne.
1 Chronicles 28:20 And Dauid sayde to Salomon hys sonne: harden thy self, and be strong, and do it, feare not, nor let thyne herte dyscourage the. For the Lorde God my God is wyth the, & shall not leaue the nor forsake the, vntyll thou haste fynyshed all the worcke that must serue for the house of the Lorde.
1 Chronicles 28:21 Beholde the priestes & Leuites deuyded in companyes, for to do all maner of seruyce that pertayneth to the house of God, and besyde that thou haste wyth the for all maner of worckemanshyppe, all that are wyllyng and wyse for anye maner of seruice. And the Lordes and all the people are at thy commaundement in all thynges.

CHAPTER: 29

1 Chronicles 29:1 And Dauid kynge sayde vnto all the congregacion: God hath specyallye chosen Salomon my sonne which is yet younge and tender, and the worcke is great for the house is not for man, but for the Lorde God.
1 Chronicles 29:2 Moreouer I haue prepared with al my myghte for the house of God, golde for thynges of goulde, and syluer for thynges of syluer, brasse for thynges of brasse, yron for thynges of yron, and wood for thynges of wood: & onykes stones, set stones, and of other gay stones, and all maner of precyouse stones, and of marbre great aboundaunce.
1 Chronicles 29:3 And yet because I haue luste to the house of my God: I haue seuerall goulde and syluer which I geue to the house of my God aboue all I haue prepared for the holye house:
1 Chronicles 29:4 euen thre thousande talentes of goulde of Ophir, and seuen thousande talentes of syluer tryed: to syle the walles of the house
1 Chronicles 29:5 with goulde where it becometh, and wyth syluer where syluer is mete, and for all maner of worcke by the handes of artificers. And let me se who is wyllynge also, to fyll hys hande for the Lorde thys daye.
1 Chronicles 29:6 And the auncyent Lordes and the Lordes of the trybes of Israel, and the Capytaynes of thousandes and hundredes & the Lordes ouer the substaunce of the kynge, were wyllynge,
1 Chronicles 29:7 and gaue for the seruyce of the house of God, fyue thousande talentes of goulde, and ten thousande peces of goulde coynes, and ten thousande talentes of syluer, and .xviij. thousande talentes of brasse, and an hundred thousande talentes of yron.
1 Chronicles 29:8 And they that had precyouse stones, gaue them for the treasure of the house of the Lorde, vnto the hande of Iehiell the Gersonite.
1 Chronicles 29:9 And the people reioysed that they were so wyllynge: for wyth a pure herte they were wyllynge vnto the Lorde. And therto Dauid the kynge reioysed with great gladnesse.
1 Chronicles 29:10 And Dauid blessed the Lorde before all the congregacyon and sayde: Blessed arte thou Lorde God of Israel oure father, from euer and for euer.
1 Chronicles 29:11 Thyne (O Lorde) is greatenesse, power glorye, vyctorye and prayse: for all that is in heauen and in earthe is thyne, and thyne is the kyngedome (O Lorde) and thou arte lyfte vp an head aboue all.
1 Chronicles 29:12 And rychesse and honoure come of the, and thou raygnest ouer all, and in thyne hande is power and strengthe, and in thyne hande it is to make greate, and to geue strengthe vnto all.
1 Chronicles 29:13 And nowe oure God, we thanke the, and prayse thy gloryous name.
1 Chronicles 29:14 For what am I? and what is my people? that we shulde obtayne strengthe to be so wyllynge? But all is of the, and of that we receyued of thyne hand we haue geuen the.
1 Chronicles 29:15 For we be but straungers before the and tenauntes, as were all oure fathers. Oure dayes on the earth is but a shadowe, and there is none abydynge.
1 Chronicles 29:16 O Lorde oure God, all thys kepe that we haue prepared to buylde the an house for thy holy name, cometh of thyne hande, & is all thyne.
1 Chronicles 29:17 I wote my God, that thou prouest the herte, and hast pleasure in playnesse. And in playnesse of myne herte I haue wyllynglye geuen all thys. And now I se thy people whiche are here in gladnesse, to offer wyllyngly to the.
1 Chronicles 29:18 O Lorde God of Abraham, Isaac and of Israell oure fathers, kepe thys for euer in the ymaginacion of the thoughtes of the herte of thy people, & prepare theyr hertes vnto the.
1 Chronicles 29:19 And geue vnto Salomon my sonne, a pure herte to kepe thy commaundementes, thy testimonyes & thyne ordinaunces, and to do all, and to buylde the house whiche I entended.
1 Chronicles 29:20 And Dauid sayde to all the congregacion: blesse the Lorde youre God. And all the congregacyon blessed the Lorde God of theyr fathers, & stouped & bowed them selues vnto the Lorde, & to the Kynge.
1 Chronicles 29:21 And they offered offerynges vnto the Lorde. And on the morowe after the sayde daye, they offered in burntofferynges vnto the Lord a thousand oxen, a thousand rammes & a thousand lambes with their drynckeofferynges. An they slue plenteouslye thorowout all Israel,
1 Chronicles 29:22 & did eate & dryncke before the Lorde the same daye with great gladnesse. And they made Salomon the sonne of Dauid kyng the second tyme, and anoynted hym vnto the Lorde, to be ruler, and Zadock to be the prieste.
1 Chronicles 29:23 And so Salomon sate on the seate of the Lorde, and was kynge for Dauid hys father, & prospered, and all Israel obeyed hym.
1 Chronicles 29:24 And all the Lordes and men of power, & therto all the sonnes of Kynge Dauid submytted them selues vnder kynge Salomon.
1 Chronicles 29:25 And the Lorde magnyfyed Salomon on hye, in the syghte of all Israel, and gaue hym so gloryouse a kyngedome as none of all that were kynges before in Israell had.
1 Chronicles 29:26 Now Dauid the sonne of Isai was kynge ouer all Israel.
1 Chronicles 29:27 And the space he raygned ouer Israel was fourtye yeare: seuen yeare in Hebron, & .xxxiij. yeare in Ierusalem.
1 Chronicles 29:28 And he dyed in a good age: old, ryche, and gloryouse: And Salomon his sonne raigned in hys steade.
1 Chronicles 29:29 The actes of Dauid the kyng both fyrste & laste, are written in the bokes of Samuell the sear and in the boke of Nathan the Prophete, and in the boke of Gad the sear of vysyons,
1 Chronicles 29:30 with all hys kyngdome & power, & tymes that wente ouer hym, & ouer all Israell, and ouer all the kyngedomes of the earthe.

BOOK: 2 Chronicles

CHAPTER: 1

2 Chronicles 1:1 And Salomon the sonne of Dauid waxed stronge in hys kyngedome, and the Lorde his God was with hym, and magnifyed him on hye.
2 Chronicles 1:2 And Salomon communed wyth all Israell, the capitaynes ouer thousandes and hundredes, the iudges & all other Lordes and auncyent heades thorowoute all Israell.
2 Chronicles 1:3 And so Salomon and all the congregacyon wyth hym, wente to the hylaulter of Gabaon: for there was the tabernacle of the wytnesse of God, which Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde made in the wyldernesse.
2 Chronicles 1:4 But the arcke of God had Dauid brought from Kariath Iarim, into the place he had prepared therfore. For he had pytched a tente for it at Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 1:5 Moreouer the brasen aulter that Bezeleel the sonne of Vri, the sonne of Or had made, was at Gabaon also, before the tabernacle of the Lorde. And Salomon and the congregacyon wente to vyset it.
2 Chronicles 1:6 And Salomon offered there before the Lorde vpon the brasen aulter that was by the tabernacle of wytnesse, a thousand burntsacrifyces.
2 Chronicles 1:7 And the same night God appeared vnto Salomon and sayde to hym: aske, what I shall geue the.
2 Chronicles 1:8 And Salomon sayde vnto God: thou hast shewed great mercye vnto Dauid my father, & haste made me kynge in hys steade.
2 Chronicles 1:9 And now Lord god let thy promyse vnto Dauid my father be true. For thou hast made me kynge ouer a people lyke the duste of the earthe in multitude.
2 Chronicles 1:10 Wherfore geue me wisdome and knowledge how to behaue my selfe vnto thys people: for who is able to iudge thys people that is so greate?
2 Chronicles 1:11 Then God said to Salomon, because thou haddest thys in thyne herte, and dyddest not aske treasure and rychesse, honoure & the lyues of thyne enemyes, neyther yet longe lyfe: But hast asked wysdome and knoweledge, to iudge my people, ouer whiche I haue made the kyng:
2 Chronicles 1:12 wisdome and knowledge shalbe geuen the, and I wyll geue the treasure, rychesse, & glorye also, that amonge the kynges before the or after the, none was or shalbe lyke the.
2 Chronicles 1:13 And so Salomon came from the hylaulter that was at Gabaon to Ierusalem from the tabernacle of wytnesse, and raygned at Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 1:14 And Salomon gathered charettes and horsemen: that he had a thousande & foure hundred charettes & .xij. thousande horsemen, which he bestowed in the charet cytyes, and about the kyng at Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 1:15 And the kynge made syluer & gould at Ierusalem as plenteous as stones & Cedar trees as plentye as the mulbery trees that grow in the valeys.
2 Chronicles 1:16 And the horses whiche Salomon had, were brought hym oute of Egypt from Keua. The kynges marchauntes fet them out at Keua at a pryce.
2 Chronicles 1:17 They came and broughte out of Egypte a charet for syxe hundred sycles, and an horse for an hundred & fyfty. And so broughte they to all the kynges of the Hethites, and to the kynges of Syrya thorow the handes of the sayde marchauntes.

CHAPTER: 2

2 Chronicles 2:1 And Salomon determined to buylde an house for the name of the Lorde, and an house for hys kyngedome:
2 Chronicles 2:2 and tolde out thre skore and ten thousand men to beare burdens and foure skore thousande to hewe in the mountayne, and thre thousande and sixe hundred to ouer se them.
2 Chronicles 2:3 And Salomon sent to Hiram kynge of Tyre, saying: As thou diddest deale with Dauid my father, and dyddest sende hym Cedar woode, to buylde hym an house to dwell in, euen so deale wyth me now:
2 Chronicles 2:4 that I may builde an house for the name of the Lorde my God, to consecrate it to hym to burne swete odours & to set shewbread before hym perpetuallye, & for burntsacrifyce mornynge and euenyng, & on the Saboth dayes, and the fyrst daye of euery newe mone, and in the solempne feastes of the Lorde oure God, so to continue euer in Israel.
2 Chronicles 2:5 And the house which I buyld, is great: for great is oure God aboue all Goddes:
2 Chronicles 2:6 So that wo can be able to buylde hym an house: when that heauen, neyther heauen aboue all heauens is able to receyue hym, what am I then that I shulde buylde hym an house? nay, but to burne sacryfyce before hym:
2 Chronicles 2:7 sende me now therfore a connynge man to worcke in goulde, syluer, brasse, yron, scarlet, cremosyn & Iacincte coloure, & that can skylle to graue, to be wyth the connynge men that are wyth me in Iuda and Ierusalem, which Dauid my father dyd prepare.
2 Chronicles 2:8 And sende me also Cedar trees, fyrre trees, & Algume trees out of Lybanon. For I wote well thy seruauntes can skylle to hew timbre in Lybanon. And se, my men shalbe wyth thyne,
2 Chronicles 2:9 that they may prepare me tymbre ynough. For the house which I builde is great & wonderfull.
2 Chronicles 2:10 And beholde, I sente for thy seruauntes the cutters and hewers of tymbre .xx. thousande quarters of beaten whete, & .xx. thousande quarters of barleye, & .xx. thousande bathes of wyne, & .xx. thousand bathes of oyle.
2 Chronicles 2:11 And Hyram kynge of Tyre aunswered in wrytynge & sente to Salomon: because the Lord loueth hys people, therfore he hath made the kyng ouer them.
2 Chronicles 2:12 And Hiram sayde moreouer: blessed be the Lord God of Israel which hath made bothe heauen and earth, that he hath geuen Dauid the kynge a wyse sonne that hath discrecyon and vnderstandynge, to buylde an house for the Lorde, and auother for his kingdome.
2 Chronicles 2:13 And nowe I haue sente a wyse man & a man of vnderstandyng called Hyram Abi,
2 Chronicles 2:14 and is the sonne of a woman of the doughters of Dan (howe be it, hys father was a Tiryan) and he can skylle to worke in gould, syluer, brasse, yron, stone, tymbre, scarlet, Iacinct bysse & cremosyn: and graue all maner of grauynges, & to fynde oute all maner sotle worck that shalbe set before hym, wyth thy conning men, and with the conning men of my Lorde Dauid thy father.
2 Chronicles 2:15 And now the whete, barleye, oyle and wyne whiche my Lorde hath sayde: let hym sende hys seruauntes.
2 Chronicles 2:16 And we wyll cut wood oute of Lybane, as muche as thou shalte nede, and wyll brynge it to the in shippes by the sea to porte Iapo: & thence thou mayest carye them to Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 2:17 And Salomon numbred all the straungers that were in the lande of Israel, after the tyme hys father Dauid had nombred them. And they were found an hundred, and .liij. thousande and syxe hundred.
2 Chronicles 2:18 And he set .lxx. thousande of them to beare burthens, and .lxxx. thousande to hewe in the mountayne, and thre thousand and syxe hundred to courage and to set the people a worck.

CHAPTER: 3

2 Chronicles 3:1 And Salomon beganne to build the house of the Lorde at Ierusalem in mount Moriah, whiche was shewed Dauid hys father when he prepared a place in the treshyng floure of Ornan the Iebusite.
2 Chronicles 3:2 And he began to buylde the seconde daye of the seconde moneth the fourth yeare of hys raigne.
2 Chronicles 3:3 And thys is the foundacyon of Salomon in buyldyng the house of God. The lenght was thre skore cubytes after the olde cubyte, and the bredeth .xx.
2 Chronicles 3:4 And the porche at the end was as large as the house bredeth .xx. cubytes: and the heyght was an hundred & .xx. cubites. And he ouerlayd it on the ynner syde wt pure gold.
2 Chronicles 3:5 And the great house he syled with fyrre tre, & ouerlayde it with good goulde, and graued therto paulmetrees and cheynes.
2 Chronicles 3:6 And he paued the house with preciouse stone goodlye. And it was goulde of Pharuaim.
2 Chronicles 3:7 And he ouerlayde the house: bothe beames, postes, walles & dores with goulde, & graued Cherubes vpon the walles.
2 Chronicles 3:8 And he made the house moost holy, whose length was .xx. cubytes lyke to the breadeth of the house, and the breadeth thereof was also .xx. cubytes. And he ouerlayde it with the best goulde, that drue to the summe of .vi. hundred talentes.
2 Chronicles 3:9 And the wayghte of the nayles of goulde was therto fyftye sycles. And he ouerlayde the vpper chambres wyth goulde.
2 Chronicles 3:10 And he made in the house moost holy two Cherubes of Image worke, & ouerlayd them with goulde.
2 Chronicles 3:11 And the wynges of the Cherubes were .xx. cubytes longe. The one wynge was fyue cubytes, and touched the wall of the house, and the other wynge was lykewyse .v. cubytes, & touched the wyng of the other Cherub.
2 Chronicles 3:12 And the one wynge of the other Cherub was fyue cubytes, and touched the wal of the house, and the other wynge was fyue cubites also, and raught to the wing of the other Cherub.
2 Chronicles 3:13 So that the wynges of the sayde Cherubes raughte .xx. cubytes. And they stode on theyr fete, & loked inwardes.
2 Chronicles 3:14 And he made a fore hangynge of Iacincte coloure, of scarlet, cremosyne & bysse: & caused Cherubes to be bourdered thereon.
2 Chronicles 3:15 And he made before the house two pyllers of .xxxv. cubytes long. And the heade that was aboue on the toppe of one of them was fyue cubytes.
2 Chronicles 3:16 And he made such chaynes as was in the quere, & put them on the heades of the pyllers, & made an hundred pomegranates, & put them on the chaines.
2 Chronicles 3:17 And he rered vp the pyllers before the temple, one on the ryghte hand, and another on the left, & called the ryght Iachin & the lefte Boaz.

CHAPTER: 4

2 Chronicles 4:1 And he made an aulter of brasse .xx. cubytes longe & .xx. cubytes broade & ten cubytes hye.
2 Chronicles 4:2 And he caste a brasen sea of ten cubytes from brym to brym, & round in compase & fyue cubytes hye: and a lyne of .xxx. cubytes myght haue compased it rounde about.
2 Chronicles 4:3 And the fashyon of oxen dyd compase it rounde about vnder it: that is to wete, two rowes of oxen cast when it was caste, dyd compase that sea which was ten cubytes wyde, rounde aboute.
2 Chronicles 4:4 And it stode also vpon twelue oxen: of which thre loked North thre West, thre Southe and thre East, and the sea vpon them aboue an hye, and the hynder partes of them inwarde.
2 Chronicles 4:5 And the thickest of it was an handebreade, and the brym lyke the brym of a cuppe, with floures of lylyes. And it receyued & helde the thousande bathes.
2 Chronicles 4:6 And he made ten lauers: & put fyue on the ryght hande & fyue on the left, to washe with all. And in them they thruste the fleshe of the burntofferynges. But the sea was for the priestes to washe in.
2 Chronicles 4:7 And he made ten candelstyckes of goulde in the fashyons, and put them in the temple: fyue on the ryghte hand & fyue on the lefte.
2 Chronicles 4:8 And he made also ten tables, and put them in the temple: fyue on the ryght syde and fyue on the lefte. And he made an hundred basens of goulde.
2 Chronicles 4:9 And he made the courte of the priestes, and the great courte and dores to it: and ouerlaid the dores of them with brasse.
2 Chronicles 4:10 And he set the sea in the ryghte syde of the East ende, towarde the Southe.
2 Chronicles 4:11 And Hyram made pottes, shouelles and basens. And Hyram fynyshed the worcke, he made for kynge Salomon vnto the temple of God,
2 Chronicles 4:12 the two pyllers with their scalpes of the two heades that were on the toppes of the pillers: and the two wrethes to couer the two scalpes of the heades that were on the toppes of the pillers,
2 Chronicles 4:13 and foure hundred pomegranates for the two wrethes, two rowes of pomegranates for euery wrethe, to couer the two scalpes of the heades that were on the pyllers.
2 Chronicles 4:14 And he made bottomes, and lauers vpon the bottomes,
2 Chronicles 4:15 & the sea wyth twelue oxen vnder it.
2 Chronicles 4:16 And therto pottes, schouelles, flesh hokes, and all theyr vesselles dyd Hyram Abi make for king Salomon for the house of the Lorde, of bright brasse.
2 Chronicles 4:17 In the playne of Iordan dyd the kyng caste them, in the thicke earthe, betwene Socoth & Zaredatha.
2 Chronicles 4:18 And made of all these vesselles so myghty great aboundaunce, that the weight of brasse coulde not be rekened.
2 Chronicles 4:19 And Salomon made all the vesselles that pertayned to the house of God: the goulden aulter and the tables with the shewe breade vpon them,
2 Chronicles 4:20 the candelstickes with theyr lampes to burne after the maner before the quere, & that of pure goulde,
2 Chronicles 4:21 and the floures and the lampes, and the snoffers were goulde, & that perfecte goulde:
2 Chronicles 4:22 and the dressynge knyues, basens, spones and censers of pure goulde. And the ynner dores of the place moost holye, and the dores of the temple to, were goulde.

CHAPTER: 5

2 Chronicles 5:1 And so was all the worcke that Salomon made for the house of the Lorde fynyshed. And when the worcke that Salomon made in the house of the Lorde was fynyshed: then Salomon brought in the gyftes dedicate by Dauid hys father, the syluer and the goulde and all the Iewelles, and put them amonge the treasure of the house of God.
2 Chronicles 5:2 Then Salomon gathered the elders of Israell together and all the heades of the tribes and auncyent Lordes amonge the chyldren of Israell, vnto Ierusalem, to brynge the arcke of the couenaunt of the Lorde oute of the cyty of Dauid which is Zion.
2 Chronicles 5:3 And all the men of Israell resorted vnto the kynge in the feaste of the seuenthe moneth.
2 Chronicles 5:4 And when all the elders of Israell were come, the Leuites toke vp the arcke.
2 Chronicles 5:5 And the priestes of the Leuytes brought away the arcke & the tabernacle of wytnesse, and all the holy vesselles that were in the tabernacle.
2 Chronicles 5:6 And king Salomon and all the congregacyon of Israel that were assembled vnto hym before the arck, offered shepe and oxen, so manye that they coulde not be tolde or numbred for multitude.
2 Chronicles 5:7 And the priestes broughte the arcke of the appoyntment of the Lorde vnto hys place in the quere of the temple & place moste holye: euen vnder the wynges of the Cherubes,
2 Chronicles 5:8 that the Cherubes stretched oute theyr wynges ouer the place of the arcke, & couered the arcke and her staues aboue on hye.
2 Chronicles 5:9 And the staues of the arcke were so longe, that they were sene a lytle before the quere, but not farre wythoute. And there it remayneth vnto this daye.
2 Chronicles 5:10 More ouer there was nothinge in the arcke saue the two tables whiche Moses put therein at Horeb, when the Lorde made a couenaunte with the chyldren of Israell, after they were come oute of Egypte.
2 Chronicles 5:11 And when the priestes were come oute of the holye place (for all the priestes that were founde, sanctyfyed them selues and dyd not wayt by course.)
2 Chronicles 5:12 But the Leuites euery one of them that were vnder Asaph, Heman and Iduthun, and among theyr chyldren and brethren, were arayed in bysse and sang wyth Simbales, Psalteryes, and harpes standyng East from the aulter, and wyth them an hundred and .xx. priestes blowynge trompettes.
2 Chronicles 5:13 And the trompette blowers & the syngers so agreed, that it semed but one voice in praysing & thankynge the Lorde. And as the voyce of the trompettes, symbales and instrumentes of melodye arose, & as they praysed the Lord, how that he was good and that hys mercye lasteth euer, the house of the Lorde was fylled with a cloude,
2 Chronicles 5:14 so that the priestes coulde not endure to mynyster by the reason of the cloude. For the glorye of the Lorde had fylled the house of God.

CHAPTER: 6

2 Chronicles 6:1 Then Salomon sayde: the Lorde hath spoken it, how that he wyll dwel in darckenesse.
2 Chronicles 6:2 And I haue buylt an habitacyon for the and a place to dwell in for euer.
2 Chronicles 6:3 And the kynge turned hys face, & blessed the hole congregacyon of Israel, and all the congregacyon of Israel stode.
2 Chronicles 6:4 And he sayde: blessed be the Lorde God of Israell which spake wyth hys mouthe to my father Dauid, & hath fulfylled it wyth handes, for God sayde:
2 Chronicles 6:5 sence the tyme I broughte my people oute of the lande of Egypte, I chose no cytye amonge all the trybes of Israell to buylde an house in, that my name myght be there, nether chose I any man to be a ruler ouer my people Israel.
2 Chronicles 6:6 But nowe I haue chosen Ierusalem to haue my name there, & haue chosen Dauid to be ouer my people Israell.
2 Chronicles 6:7 And it was in the herte of Dauid my father to buylde an house for the name of the Lorde God of Israel:
2 Chronicles 6:8 But the Lorde sayde to Dauid my father: for as muche as it was in thyne herte, to buylde an house for my name, thou dyddest well that thou haddest it in thine herte.
2 Chronicles 6:9 Notwithstandyng thou shalt not build the house, but thy sonne whiche shall Issue oute of thy loynes, he shall buyld an house for my name.
2 Chronicles 6:10 And the Lorde hath made good his saying that he hath spoken. For I arose in the roume of Dauid my father, & sate on the seate of Israel, as the Lorde promysed, & haue buylt an house for the name of the Lorde God of Israel.
2 Chronicles 6:11 And therein I haue put the arcke wherin the couenaunte of the Lorde made with the chyldren of Israel, is.
2 Chronicles 6:12 And he stepte forthe before the aulter of the Lord in the presence of all the congregacion of Israel, and stretched out his handes,
2 Chronicles 6:13 now Salomon had made a brasen pulpyte of fyue cubytes longe, and fyue cubytes broad, and thre of heyght, and had set it in the middes of the greate courte, vpon that he stept & kneled doune vpon hys knees before all the congregacyon of Israel & stretched oute hys handes to heauen
2 Chronicles 6:14 & sayde: Lorde God of Israel there is no God lyke the eyther in heauen or in earth, whiche kepest couenaunt & sheweste mercy vnto thy seruauntes that walck before the with all theyr hertes.
2 Chronicles 6:15 Which hast kepte with Dauid my father that thou promysedest him: thou saydeste it wyth thy mouthe, and haste fulfylled it with thyne hande, as it is to se this day.
2 Chronicles 6:16 Now Lord God of Israel kepe wt thy seruaunt Dauid my father, that thou promisedest him saying: thou shalt not be without one or other in my sight that shall sitte vpon the seate of Israel. Of this condicion yet, yf thy children will take hede to theyr waies to walcke in my lawe, as thou hast walcked before me.
2 Chronicles 6:17 Nowe Lorde God of Israel, let thy sayinge be true, whiche thou saydest vnto thy seruaunte Dauid.
2 Chronicles 6:18 How be it in very dede, can God dwel wt man on earth? Behold, nether heauen or heauen aboue all heauens is able to containe the: howe shuld the house then which I haue built for the do it?
2 Chronicles 6:19 But turne to the praier of thy seruaunte & to his supplicacion (O Lord my God) to herken vnto the voyce & prayer which thy seruaunte maketh before the.
2 Chronicles 6:20 That thyne eyes be open ouer this house daye & nyght, & ouer the place of which thou hast said, that thou woldest put thy name there: to herken vnto the prayer which thy seruaunte prayeth at thys place:
2 Chronicles 6:21 herken therfore vnto the prayers of thy seruaunt & of thy peole Israel, whiche they praye in thys place. But heare thou it oute of thy dwellyng place heauen: & when thou hearest it be mercyfull.
2 Chronicles 6:22 If a man synne agaynst his neybour, & an adiuracyon be layd to hys charge, to adiure him with al, & the adiuracion come before thine aulter in thys house:
2 Chronicles 6:23 then heare thou from heauen, & worcke & iudge thy seruauntes, that thou rewarde the euyll, and bring his waye vpon hys heade, & iustify the ryghteous & geue him accordynge to hys ryghteousnesse.
2 Chronicles 6:24 Lykewyse yf thy people Israel be put to the worse before theyr enemies, because they haue synned agaynste the: Yet yf they turne and confesse thy name, and make intercessyon & praye before the in thys house,
2 Chronicles 6:25 then heare thou from heauen and be mercyful vnto the synne of thy people Israel, and brynge them agayne vnto the lande which thou gauest to them and to theyr fathers.
2 Chronicles 6:26 If heauen be shut vp, that there be no raine, because they haue synned agaynste the: yet yf they praye at thys place, and confesse thy name and turne from theyr synnes at thy scourgynge:
2 Chronicles 6:27 then heare thou from heauen, and be mercyfull vnto the synne of thy seruauntes, & of thy people Israel, that thou shewe them a good waye to walke in, and sende rayne vpon thy lande whiche thou haste geuen vnto thy people, for an enherytaunce.
2 Chronicles 6:28 If there chaunce darthe in the lande, pestilence, burnynge or smytynge of corne, grashoppers or caterpyllers, or that theyr enemies besege them in the cytyes of theyr owne land, or what soeuer plage or syckenesse it be.
2 Chronicles 6:29 Then all the supplicacyons and prayers that shalbe made of all men amonge all thy people Israell, whiche shall knowe euery man his owne sore and hys owne greffe, & shal stretche oute theyr handes towarde thys house:
2 Chronicles 6:30 thou shalte heare from heauen thy dwellyng place and shalte be mercyfull, and geue euery man accordynge vnto all hys waye, euen as thou shalte knowe euery mannes herte: for thou onelye knoweste the hertes of the chyldren of Adam:
2 Chronicles 6:31 that they maye feare the, and walke in thy wayes as long as they lyue vpon the earth whiche thou gauest to oure fathers.
2 Chronicles 6:32 Therto a straunger which is not of thy people Israel, yf he come from a farre lande for thy greate names sake, and thy myghtye hande, and stretched oute arme, and therfore come & praye at thys house:
2 Chronicles 6:33 thou shalte heare hym from heauen thy dwellyng place, & shalt do accordyng to all that the straunger calleth to the for. That all the nacyons of the earthe maye knowe thy name, and feare the, as doth thy people Israell: and that it maye be knowen how that this house which I haue buylt, is called after thy name.
2 Chronicles 6:34 When thy people shall go oute to warre, agaynste theyr ennemyes the waye that thou shalte send them. If they pray to the, the way towarde thys cytye whiche thou haste chosen and house whiche I haue buylt for thy name:
2 Chronicles 6:35 then heare from heauen, theyr supplicacyon & prayer, and helpe them in theyr ryghte.
2 Chronicles 6:36 If they shall synne agaynste the (as there is no man but that he shall synne) & thou be angrye wyth them, and delyuer them to their enemyes, and they layde them away captyue vnto a lande ferre or neare,
2 Chronicles 6:37 yet yf theyr hertes come to them agayne in the lande where they be in captiuite, and turne and praye vnto the in the land where they be in captiuite, saying: we haue synned & haue done euyl & wickedly
2 Chronicles 6:38 & turne agayne to the, wyth all theyr hertes & all theyr soules, in the lande of theyr captyuite where they be kepte in bondage, and so praye towarde theyr lande which thou gauest vnto theyr fathers, and cytye which thou hast chosen, and to thys house whiche I haue built for thy name:
2 Chronicles 6:39 Then heare from heauen thy dwellyng place, their supplicacyon & prayers & iudge theyr cause, and be mercifull vnto thy people, though they haue synned against the.
2 Chronicles 6:40 So now my God let thyne eyes be open & thyne eares attente vnto the prayers made in thys place.
2 Chronicles 6:41 And now vp Lorde God in thy restynge place: both thou and the arcke of thy strengthe, and let thy priestes put on vyctorye and thy saynctes reioyse in goodnesse.
2 Chronicles 6:42 And Lorde God turne not away the face of thyne anointed. But remembre the mercyes promysed to Dauid thy seruaunte.

CHAPTER: 7

2 Chronicles 7:1 And when Salomon had made an ende of praying, there came doune fyre from heauen & consumed the burntofferyng and the sacryfyces. And the glorye of the Lorde fylled the house:
2 Chronicles 7:2 that the priestes coulde not go into the house of the Lorde, because the glorye of the Lord had fulfilled the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 7:3 And all the children of Israell saw how the fyre came doune and the glory of the Lorde vpon the house, & stouped with their faces to the earth vpon the pauement & bowed them selues & confessed vnto the Lord, that he was good, and that hys mercye lasted euer.
2 Chronicles 7:4 And the kynge and all the people offered offerynges before the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 7:5 So that kynge Salomon offered .xxij. thousand oxen, and an hundred and twentye thousand shepe. And so the kynge & all the people halowed the house of God.
2 Chronicles 7:6 And the priestes wayted on theyr offices, and the Leuites with instrumentes of musycke of the Lorde which kinge Dauid made to confesse vnto the Lorde that hys mercye lasteth euer, when Dauid gaue prayse thorowe theyr handes. And the priestes blewe trompettes faste by them: and all Israell stode.
2 Chronicles 7:7 Moreouer Salomon halowed the myddle of the courte that was before the Lorde: for there he offered burntofferynges and the fat of the peaceofferynges, because the brasen aulter which Salomon had made, was not able to receyue the burntofferynges and the meat offerynges and the fatte.
2 Chronicles 7:8 And Salomon kepte a feast the same ceason of seuen dayes, and all Israel with hym, an exceadynge great congregacyon, euen from Hemath vnto the ryuer of Egypte.
2 Chronicles 7:9 And the eyght daye they made a gatheryng. For they kept the halowyng of the aulter seuen dayes, & the feast seuen dayes.
2 Chronicles 7:10 And the .xxiij. daye of the seuenth moneth, he let the people departe into theyr tentes, glad & merye in herte for the goodnesse that the Lord had shewed to Dauid, to Salomon & to Israel hys people.
2 Chronicles 7:11 And so Salomon fynyshed the house of the Lorde & the kynges house and al that came in his hert to make in the house of the Lorde and in hys owne house, and that prosperouslye.
2 Chronicles 7:12 And the Lorde apeared to Salomon by nyght, and said to him: I haue hearde thy peticyon & haue chosen thys place for my self to be an house of sacryfyce.
2 Chronicles 7:13 Moreouer yf I shut vp heauen that there be no rayne, or yf I commaund the locustes to deuoure the lande, or yf I send pestilence among my people:
2 Chronicles 7:14 yet yf my people that are named after my name, shall humble themselues & make intercessyon & seke my presence, & turne from their wicked wayes, then wyll I heare from heauen and be mercyfull to theyr synnes, & wyl heale theyr lande.
2 Chronicles 7:15 Therto myne eyes shalbe open & myne eares attente vnto the prayers made in thys place.
2 Chronicles 7:16 And fynally I haue chosen and sanctyfyed this house, that my name be there for euer, & myne eyes & myne herte shalbe there perpetuallye.
2 Chronicles 7:17 And yf thou shalte walke before me as Dauid thy father walked, to do accordynge to all that I haue commaunded the, & shalt obserue myne ordynaunces & my lawes:
2 Chronicles 7:18 then I wyll stablyshe the seate of thy kyngedome, accordynge to the couenaunt I made with Dauid thy father, saying: thou shalt haue euer one or other that shall rule in Israel.
2 Chronicles 7:19 But and yf ye turne awaye & forsake myne ordinaunces & my commaundementes which I haue set before you, and shal go & serue other Goddes & bowe youre selues to them:
2 Chronicles 7:20 then wyll I plucke them vp by the rotes oute of my lande which I haue geuen them, & wyll cast thys house which I haue sanctyfyed for my name out of my syght, & wyll make a prouerbe & a tale of it amonge all nacyons.
2 Chronicles 7:21 And this house that is so hye, shalbe a wonder to al that passeth therby, that they shall saye: why hath the Lorde dealte on thys fashyon with thys lande and with this house?
2 Chronicles 7:22 And it shalbe aunswered them because they forsoke the Lorde God of theyr fathers whiche brought them oute of the lande of Egypte, and caught holde on other Gods, and bowed to them, and serued them: euen therfore broughte he on them all thys euyll.

CHAPTER: 8

2 Chronicles 8:1 And after .xx. yeare when Salomon had buylt the house of the Lorde and hys owne house:
2 Chronicles 8:2 he buylte the cytyes that Hiram gaue him, and put of the children of Israel in them.
2 Chronicles 8:3 And Salomon went to Hemath Zobah and strengthed it.
2 Chronicles 8:4 And he buylte Thadmor in the wyldernesse and all the store cytyes whiche he buylte in Hemath.
2 Chronicles 8:5 And he buylt Bethhoron the vpper & Bethhoron the nether, and made them stronge cytyes wyth walles, gates, & barres.
2 Chronicles 8:6 And Baalath & all the store cyties that Salomon had, & al the charet cytyes & the cities of Horsmen, and all that Salomon had lust to buyld in Ierusalem and Libanon, and thorowoute all the lande of his domynyon.
2 Chronicles 8:7 And all the people that were left of the Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Heuites and Iebusites, which were not of the chyldren of Israel:
2 Chronicles 8:8 euen the children of them, which were left after them in the lande, and were not consumed of the chyldren of Israel, then dyd Salomon make trybutaryes vnto thys daye.
2 Chronicles 8:9 But of the chyldren of Israel dyd Salomon make no bondemen in his worke: but they were men of warre & rulers & great Lordes wyth him, & capytaynes ouer hys charettes and horsmen.
2 Chronicles 8:10 And kyng Salomons offycers that ouersaw and ruled the people, were two hundred and fyftye.
2 Chronicles 8:11 And Salomon brought the doughter of Pharao oute of the citie of Dauid into the house that he had made for her. For he saide: my wyfe shall not dwelle in the house of Dauid kynge of Israel, for it is holy, because the arcke of the Lorde came into it.
2 Chronicles 8:12 And from thence forthe Salomon offered burntofferynges vnto the Lorde on the aulter of the Lord which he had buylt before the porc
2 Chronicles 8:13 to offer day by daye accordynge to the commaundement of Moses, & in the Sabbotes & newe mones, and the thre solempne feastes of the yeare, the feast of swete breade, the feast of wekes and the feast of bothes.
2 Chronicles 8:14 And Salomon put the sortes of pryestes in companyes as Dauid hys father had ordered them, vnto the offyces, & the Leuites vnto theyr wayt, for to prayse & mynystre before the priestes daye by daye, and the porters by course at euerye gate. For so had Dauid the man of God commaunded.
2 Chronicles 8:15 And the commaundement of the kynge vnto the priestes & the Leuites concernyng whatsoeuer cause it was, and concernynge the treasures, was not disobeyed.
2 Chronicles 8:16 And all the worke of Salomon wente lustely forwarde euen vnto the daye of the foundacyon of the house of the Lorde was layde: & from thence tyll he had fynyshed it, that the house of the Lorde was perfecte.
2 Chronicles 8:17 And then went kynge Salomon to Azion Gaber and to Eloth & to the seas syde in the land of Edom.
2 Chronicles 8:18 And Hiram sent hym by the hande of his seruauntes, shyppes and seruauntes that coulde saille of the sea. Which went with the seruauntes of Salomon to Ophir, and brought thence foure hundred and fyftye talentes of goulde, and brought it to kinge Salomon.

CHAPTER: 9

2 Chronicles 9:1 And the quene of Saba heard of the fame of Salomon, and came to proue hym with ryddelles at Ierusalem, wyth a very great companye, & wyth camelles that bare swete odours and plentye of goulde & precyouse stone. And when she was come to Salomon, she communed with him of all that was in her herte.
2 Chronicles 9:2 And Salomon foyled her all her questyons, that there was nothynge hyd from Salomon, which he tolde her not.
2 Chronicles 9:3 And when the quene of Saba had sene the wysdome of Salomon and the house that he had buylt,
2 Chronicles 9:4 and the meate of hys table and the syttynge of hys seruauntes and the standyng of hys wayters, and theyr apparell, and hys buttelars wyth theyr apparell, & his parlour out of which he went into the house of the Lord there was no more herte in her.
2 Chronicles 9:5 And then she said to the king: the sayinge which I hearde in myne owne lande, of thyne actes and of thy wysdome is truet
2 Chronicles 9:6 But I beleued not the wordes of them, vntyll I came & myne eyes had sene it. And se, the one halfe of thy wysdome was not tolde me: thou exceadest the fame that I heard,
2 Chronicles 9:7 happye are thy men, & happye are these thy seruauntes which stande before the all waye and heare thy wysdome.
2 Chronicles 9:8 Blessed be the Lorde thy God whiche had luste to the, to make the kyng on hys seat, vnto the Lorde thy God. Because thy God loued Israel, to make them contynue euer, therfore made he the kynge ouer them to do ryght and equyte.
2 Chronicles 9:9 And she gaue the kyng an hundred & .xx. talentes of goulde, and of swete odoures excedynge great aboundaunce wyth preciouse stones, that there was no suche swete odoures as the quene of Saba gaue kynge Salomon.
2 Chronicles 9:10 And therto the seruauntes of Hyram and the seruauntes of Salomon which brought gould from Ophir, broughte also Algume woode and precyouse stones.
2 Chronicles 9:11 And the kynge made of the Algume wood steyares in the house of the Lorde and in the kynges palace, and harpes & psalteryes for syngers. And there was no suche woode sene before in the lande of Iuda.
2 Chronicles 9:12 And Kynge Salomon gaue to the quene of Saba all her desyre that she asked aboue that she brought vnto the kyng. And so she turned and went awaye to her owne lande wyth her seruauntes.
2 Chronicles 9:13 The summe of goulde that came to Salomon in one yeare, was syxe hundred .lxvi. talentes of goulde,
2 Chronicles 9:14 besydes that whiche chapmen and marchauntes brought, and all the kynges of Arabia and dukes of countreyes broughte goulde & syluer to Salomon.
2 Chronicles 9:15 And kynge Salomon made two hundred bokelars of gould .vi. hundred sicles of Beten gould to be a bokelar:
2 Chronicles 9:16 & thre hundred shyldes of Beten goulde, thre hundred sicles of goulde to a shylde, & he put them in the house of the forest of Lybanon.
2 Chronicles 9:17 And the king made a great seate of Iuorie and ouerlayde it with pure goulde.
2 Chronicles 9:18 And there were sixe steppes to the seate with a fote stole of goulde fastened to the seate: & pomelles on eche syde of the sittyng place,
2 Chronicles 9:19 & two lyons standynge by the pomelles. And .xij. lyons stode on the one syde & on the other vpon sixe steppes, that there was no such in any kyngdomm.
2 Chronicles 9:20 And all the drynckynge vesselles of kynge Salomon were gould, & al the vesselles of the house of the forest of Libanon, were pure gould And as for syluer, it was counted nothynge worthe in the dayes of Salomon.
2 Chronicles 9:21 For the kynges shyppes wente to Tharsis with the seruauntes of Hiram euery thre yeare once. And the shyppes of Tharsis brought gould, siluer the tethe of elephantes, apes, and pecockes.
2 Chronicles 9:22 And kynge Salomon passed all the kinges of the earth in rychesse and wysdome.
2 Chronicles 9:23 And al the kynges of the earth sought the presence of Salomon, to heare the wysdome that GOD had put in hys herte.
2 Chronicles 9:24 And they brought euery man his present in vesselles of syluer and vesselles of goulde, and rayment, harnesse, swete odoures, horses and mules yeare by yeare.
2 Chronicles 9:25 And Salomon had foure thousand maungers of horsses and charettes for them, and twelue thousande horsmen. And he bestowed them in the charet cityes & with the king at Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 9:26 And he raigned ouer all the kinges from Euphrates vnto the lande of the Philistines & so to the borders of Egypte.
2 Chronicles 9:27 And the kyng made syluer in Ierusalem as plenteous as stones, and Cedar trees as plenteous as the mulbery trees that growe in the valeys.
2 Chronicles 9:28 And Salomon had horses brought hym oute of Egypte and out of all landes.
2 Chronicles 9:29 And the rest of the actes of kyng Salomon both fyrste and last are wryten in the boke of Nathan the Prophete and in the prophesie of Ahiah the Silonite and in the vysyons of Iadi the sear of visyons agaynst Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat.
2 Chronicles 9:30 And when Salomon had raigned in Ierusalem vpon all Israel fourty yeares,
2 Chronicles 9:31 he layed hym to reste wyth his fathers, and was buryed in the cytie of Dauid hys father, and Rehoboam hys sonne raigned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 10

2 Chronicles 10:1 And Rehoboam went to Sichem: for to Sichem were all Israell come to make him kinge.
2 Chronicles 10:2 And when Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, beynge in Egypte heard it (for he was fled for fear of Salomon the king) he returned out of Egypt.
2 Chronicles 10:3 And they sent and called hym. And so Ieroboam and al Israel came and communed wyth Rehoboam, and sayde.
2 Chronicles 10:4 Thy father made vs a greuouse youck: but remytte thou somewhat of the greuouse seruyce of thy father and of hys heuy youcke that he put vpon vs, and we wyll serue the.
2 Chronicles 10:5 And he sayde to them: come agayne after thre dayes to me. And the people departed.
2 Chronicles 10:6 And Kynge Rehoboam counceled with the elders that stode before Salomon his father whyle he lyued, & sayde: what councell geue ye me, to answere thys people agayne?
2 Chronicles 10:7 And they tolde hym, saying: If thou shalt be kynd to thys people, & please them, and shalt speake louynge wordes to them, they wyl be thy seruauntes for euer.
2 Chronicles 10:8 But he lefte the councell whiche the elders gaue hym, & toke councell wyth the young men that were noursed vp wt hym, & had stande in hys presence,
2 Chronicles 10:9 and said to them: what aduise geue ye that I may answer thys people which haue communed with me, sayinge: Abate somewhat of the youck which thy father dyd put vpon vs.
2 Chronicles 10:10 And the young men that were nourced vp wyth hym talked wyth hym saying: thus answere the people that spake to the saying. Thy father made oure youcke heauye: But make thou oure youcke somewhat lyghter. Thus wyse aunswere them: my lytle fynger shalbe heuyer then my fathers loynes.
2 Chronicles 10:11 For where my father put a heauye youcke vpon you. I wyl put more therto, & where my father chastised you with whyppes, I wyl chastyse you with scorpyons.
2 Chronicles 10:12 And when Ieroboam and all Israel were come the thyrd day, as the king bade, saying: come agayne to me the thyrd daye.
2 Chronicles 10:13 The king answered them cruellye, for kinge Rehoboam lefte the councell of the aged men,
2 Chronicles 10:14 & answered them after the aduise of the young men saying: If my father made youre youcke greuouse, I wyll adde therto, and where my father chastised you wyth whippes, I will chastyse you with scorpions.
2 Chronicles 10:15 And so the kynge herkened not vnto the people, for the turnynge awaye was of God, that the Lord might make good hys sayinge whiche he spake by the hande of Ahiah the Silonite to Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat.
2 Chronicles 10:16 And when all Israell sawe that the kinge wolde not heare them, the people aunswered the king, sayinge: what parte haue we wyth Dauid or enheritaunce wt the sonne of Isai? let euerye man of Israel go to hys tent. And nowe Dauid se to thyne owne house. And therevpon all Israel get them to theyr tentes,
2 Chronicles 10:17 so that Rehoboam raygned ouer no moo of the children of Israell then dwelte in the cytyes of Iuda.
2 Chronicles 10:18 Then Kyuge Rehoboam sente to them Haduram that was ouer the trybute, and the chyldren of Israell stoned hym with stones that he dyed. But kinge Rehoboam made spede, and gat hym vp to hys charet to flye to Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 10:19 And so Israell departed from the house of Dauid vnto this daye.

CHAPTER: 11

2 Chronicles 11:1 And when Rehoboam was come to Ierusalem, he gathered of the house of Dauid & Beniamin to the nombre of nine skore thousande choise men of warre to fyght wyth Israel, for to brynge the kyngdome agayne to Rehoboam.
2 Chronicles 11:2 But the worde of the Lorde came to Semeiah the man of God sayinge:
2 Chronicles 11:3 speake vnto Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon kynge of Iuda & to all Israell that are in Iuda, and to Beniamin, and saye:
2 Chronicles 11:4 thus sayth the Lorde. Go not nor fyght with your brethren: But returne euery man to his house, for thys thynge is done of me. And they obeyed the wordes of the Lord and returned from goynge agaynst Ieroboam.
2 Chronicles 11:5 And Rehoboam dwelte in Ierusalem, and buylt stronge cyties in Iuda:
2 Chronicles 11:6 as Bethlehem, Etam & Thekua:
2 Chronicles 11:7 Bethzur, Socho & Odollam:
2 Chronicles 11:8 Geth, Maresah & Ziph:
2 Chronicles 11:9 Adurahim, Lachis and Asecah:
2 Chronicles 11:10 Yarah Aialon & Hebron. Which were the stronge cytyes of Iuda and Beniamin.
2 Chronicles 11:11 And when he had repayred suche strong cytyes, he put capytaynes in them and store of vitayle, and of oyle and of wyne.
2 Chronicles 11:12 And he ordened in all cytyes shyldes & speares, & made them exceadyng stronge. And so Iuda and Beniamin were vnder hym.
2 Chronicles 11:13 And the priestes & the Leuytes that were in all Israell resorted to hym, oute of all theyr coastes.
2 Chronicles 11:14 In so much that the Leuites left theyr Suburbes & possessyons, and came to Iuda & Ierusalem: for Ieroboam and his sonnes had cast them oute from mynystrynge vnto the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 11:15 And he ordeyned hym priestes of hyl aulters bothe to felde deuylles and also to the calues which he had made.
2 Chronicles 11:16 And after them ther came of all the trybes of Israel (such as theyr hertes moued them to seke the Lorde God of Israel) to Ierusalem to offer vnto the Lorde God of theyr fathers.
2 Chronicles 11:17 And so they strengthed the kyngedome of Iuda, & made Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon myghty thre yeare long for thre yeare they walked in the way of Dauid and Salomon.
2 Chronicles 11:18 And Rehoboam toke hym Mahalath the doughter of Ierimoth the sonne of Dauid to wyfe, and Abihail the doughter of Eliab the sonne of Isai,
2 Chronicles 11:19 which bare hym chyldren: Ieus, Samariah, and Zaham.
2 Chronicles 11:20 And after her he toke Maacah the doughter of Absalom which bare hym Abiah, Etha, Ziza and Salumith.
2 Chronicles 11:21 But Rehoboam loued Maacah the doughter of Absalom aboue all hys other wyues and concubines for he toke .xviij. wyues & thre skore concubynes, and begat thre skore doughters, and .xxviij. sonnes
2 Chronicles 11:22 And Rehoboam made Abiah the sonne of Maacah the chefe ruler amonge hys brethren, for to make hym kynge.
2 Chronicles 11:23 And he played wysely & skatered of al hys children thorow out all the countreyes of Iuda & Beniamin in euerye strong cyty. And he gaue them aboundaunce of vytayle, and asked manye wyues.

CHAPTER: 12

2 Chronicles 12:1 And when Rehoboam had stablyshed the kingdome, & made it stronge he forsoke the law of the Lorde, & all Israell wyth hym,
2 Chronicles 12:2 wherfore the fyft yeare of kynge Rehoboam, Sesac the kynge of Egypte came vp agaynste Ierusalem, because they had transgressed agaynst the Lord,
2 Chronicles 12:3 with twelue hundred charettes and thre skore thousande horsmen. And the people were wythout nombre that came wyth him oute of Egypte, with them of Lybia, and the Succhites and the blackemores.
2 Chronicles 12:4 And they toke the stronge cytyes that were in Iuda, and came to Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 12:5 Then came Semeiah the Prophete to Rehoboam & to the Lordes of Iuda that were gathered to Ierusalem for feare of Sesac, & saide to them: thus sayth the Lorde: ye haue left me, & therfore wyll I leue you also in the handes of Sesac.
2 Chronicles 12:6 Wherevpon the Lordes of Israel & the kyng humbled them selues and sayde: the Lorde is ryghteous.
2 Chronicles 12:7 And when the Lord saw that they submytted themselues, the worde of the Lorde came to Semeiah, sayinge: they meke them selues, and therfor I wyl not destroy them. But I wyll delyuer them somewhat, & my wrath shall not falle vpon Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 12:8 Neuerthelater they shalbe hys seruauntes, to know what dyfference is betwene my seruice and the seruyce of the kyngedomes of other landes.
2 Chronicles 12:9 And Sesac kynge of Egypte came to Ierusalem, and toke awaye the treasures of the house of the Lorde, and the treasures of the kynges house, & shortlye he toke all. And he toke also the shyldes of goulde whiche Salomon made.
2 Chronicles 12:10 In steade of whiche kynge Rehoboam made shyldes of brasse, & put them in the kepyng of the capytaynes of hys garde whiche wayted in the gate of the kynges house.
2 Chronicles 12:11 And as ofte as the kynge wente to the house of the Lorde, the garde wente, and fet them, & brought them agayne vnto the garde chambre.
2 Chronicles 12:12 And so because he humbled hym self, the wrath of the Lorde turned from hym, & destroyed not al together. And therto there were manye good thynges yet in Iuda.
2 Chronicles 12:13 And kinge Rehoboam waxed myghtye in Ierusalem, and raygned. And Rehoboam was .xli. yeare olde when he was made kynge, and he raygned .xvij. yeares in Ierusalem the citie which the Lorde had chosen out of all the trybes of Israell to put hys name there. And his mothers name was Naamah an Ammonite.
2 Chronicles 12:14 And he dyd euyll: for he prepared not hys herte to seke the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 12:15 The actes of Rehoboam fyrst and last are written in the sayinges of Semeiah the Prophete, & of Ado the sear of vysyons, so muche as hys genealogye, and the perpetuall warre that was betwene Rehoboam & Ieroboam during theyr lyfe.
2 Chronicles 12:16 And Rehoboam layd him to slepe wt his fathers, & was buried in the citie of Dauid and Abiah hys sonne raygned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 13

2 Chronicles 13:1 The .xviij. yeare of king Ieroboam began Abiah to raygne ouer Iuda,
2 Chronicles 13:2 & he raygned thre yeare in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Michaiah the doughter of Vriel of Gabaah. And there was warre betwene Abiah and Ieroboam.
2 Chronicles 13:3 And Abiah made a battel with an hoste of fyghtynge men of foure hundred thousande chosen men. And Ieroboam put in araye to fight agaynst hym, with .viij. hundred thousande pycte men and stronge.
2 Chronicles 13:4 And Abiah stode vp vpon Zemaraim an hyl in mount Ephraim, & sayd: heare me thou Ieroboam & all Israel.
2 Chronicles 13:5 Becometh it not you to knowe how that the Lorde God of Israell gaue the kyngedome of Israel to Dauid for euer, euen to him & to his sonnes, with a salted couenaunte.
2 Chronicles 13:6 But Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat the seruaunt of Salomon the sonne of Dauid, rebelled agaynste the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 13:7 And there gathered to hym lewde men and vnthryftes, and preuayled agaynste Rehoboam the sonne of Salomon: for Rehoboam was young & tender hearted, and not stronge ynough for them.
2 Chronicles 13:8 And now ye thinke to preuayle against the kyngedome of the Lorde in the hande of the sonnes of Dauid, because ye be a great multytude & haue with you the golden calues which Ieroboam made you for Gods.
2 Chronicles 13:9 And haue ye not caste out the priestes of the Lord the sonnes of Aaron, & the Leuites, & haue made you priestes lyke the nacyons of other landes: euen whosoeuer cometh, and fylleth his hand with an oxe & seuen rammes, the same is made priest to them that are no Goddes.
2 Chronicles 13:10 But with vs is the Lorde oure God whome we haue not forsaken, and the priestes of the sonnes of Aaron mynistring vnto the Lorde, & the Leuites in office,
2 Chronicles 13:11 burnyng vnto the Lorde euery morninge & euery euen burntofferinges & swete cense: & the shewbread put in ordre vpon a pure table: & the candelsticke of goulde with the lampes of the same, to be light euery euen. For we kepe the watche of the Lord oure God: but ye haue forsaken him.
2 Chronicles 13:12 Moreouer se, God is with vs in the forewarde, and his priestes, and the rorynge trompettes to crye alarum agaynst you. Ye chyldren of Israell fight not with the Lorde God of youre fathers: for it wyll not prospere wyth you.
2 Chronicles 13:13 But for all that Ieroboam sent men pryuelye aboute to come behynd vpon them: and so they were before Iuda, & the layers in wayte were behynd them.
2 Chronicles 13:14 And when Iuda turned and saw the battel behynde and before, they cryed vnto the Lorde, & the priestes blew the trompettes
2 Chronicles 13:15 & the men of Iuda gaue a shoute. And as the men of Iuda shouted, God smote Ieroboam & all Israel before Abiah and Iuda.
2 Chronicles 13:16 And the chyldren of Israel fled before Iuda, & the Lorde delyuered them into the handes of Iuda.
2 Chronicles 13:17 And Abiah and hys people slue a greate slaughter of them, so that there were strycken doune deade of Israel fiue hundred thousand chosen men.
2 Chronicles 13:18 And so the chyldren of Israel were brought vnder at that tyme, and the children of Iuda preuayled: because they leaned vnto the Lord God of their fathers.
2 Chronicles 13:19 And Abiah folowed after Ieroboam & wanne certayne cities from him. Bethel with the townes belongynge therto, and Iesanah wyth the townes that longed therto, and Ephron with her townes.
2 Chronicles 13:20 And Ieroboam recouered not strength agayne in the dayes of Abiah. And at the last the Lord plaged him, that he dyed.
2 Chronicles 13:21 And Abiah waxed myghty, and toke hym .xiiij. wyues, and begat .xxij. sonnes, and .xvi. doughters.
2 Chronicles 13:22 The rest of the actes of Abiah and his wayes and his doynges are wrytten in the storye of the Prophete Ado.

CHAPTER: 14

2 Chronicles 14:1 And when Abiah was layd to slepe wyth his fathers, they buryed hym in the citie of Dauid, and Asa his sonne raygned in his steade. In whose dayes the lande was quyet ten yeare.
2 Chronicles 14:2 And Asa did that was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God,
2 Chronicles 14:3 & toke away the aulters of straungers and the hylaulters, & brake the ymages & cut doune the groues,
2 Chronicles 14:4 and commaunded Iuda to seke the Lorde God of their fathers, & to do accordyng to the lawe and commaundement.
2 Chronicles 14:5 And he put away oute of all the cyties of Iuda, the hylaulters and the ydolles: for the kyngedom was quiet before hym.
2 Chronicles 14:6 And he buylt stronge cytyes in Iuda: because the lande was in rest, and he had no warre in those yeares. For the Lorde had geuen him reste.
2 Chronicles 14:7 And therfore he sayde to Iuda: let vs build these cyties, and compase them wyth walles and toures, gates, and barres, while we haue the lande quiet. For we haue sought the Lord oure God: & because we haue sought hym, he hath geuen vs reste on euery syde. And so they buylt and prospered.
2 Chronicles 14:8 And Asa had an Army that bare shylde and speare, out of Iuda thre hundred thousand, and out of Beniamin that bare shilde and drewe bowes two hundred and .lxxx. thousande, and were all stronge men.
2 Chronicles 14:9 And there came oute agaynst them Zarah the Morian wyth an Hoste of ten hundred thousande, and thre hundred charettes, and came as ferre of Maresa.
2 Chronicles 14:10 And Asa went out to him. And they put in araye to battel in the valeye of Zephatah beside Maresa.
2 Chronicles 14:11 And Asa cryed vnto the Lorde his God and sayd: lord it is all one wyth the to helpe them that haue no power, with few or with many: helpe vs O Lorde oure God, for we truste to the, & in thine name be come agaynst thys multitude. Thou arte the Lorde oure God, let not man preuayle agaynst the.
2 Chronicles 14:12 And the Lord smote the blacke Mores before Asa & Iuda, that they fled.
2 Chronicles 14:13 And Asa & the people that was with hym, folowed after them as ferre as Gerar. And the blacke Mores were ouerthrowen, that there bode none alyue of them, but were destroyed of the lord, and of the Hoste. And they caryed awaye a myghty greate pray.
2 Chronicles 14:14 And they smote all the cities rounde aboute Gerar. For the feare of the Lorde came vpon them. And they robbed all the cities, for there was exceadyng muche to be robbed in them.
2 Chronicles 14:15 And therto they smote the tentes of cattel, and caryed awayed plentye of shepe and camelles, and returned to Ierusalem.

CHAPTER: 15

2 Chronicles 15:1 And the spyryt of God came on Azariah the sonne of Obed.
2 Chronicles 15:2 And he went oute agaynste Asa, and sayd to hym: heare me Asa and al Iuda and Beniamin. The Lorde is wyth you, while ye be wyth hym, and yf ye shall seke hym, he wylbe founde of you: but and yf ye shal forsake him, he wil forsake you.
2 Chronicles 15:3 There wil come many daies in Israel, in whiche there shalbe no true God nor prieste that teacheth, nor any law.
2 Chronicles 15:4 And in their tribulacion they shal turne vnto the Lorde God of Israel and shall seke him, and he shalbe founde of them.
2 Chronicles 15:5 And in those daies there shalbe no peace to them that go out & in. But greate vexacyon vpon the enhabiters of all landes.
2 Chronicles 15:6 For one nacion shal destroye another, and one cytye another: for God wyl trounce them wyth aduersyte.
2 Chronicles 15:7 But plucke you vp your hertes, and let not your handes faynte, for youre workes shalbe rewarded.
2 Chronicles 15:8 When Asa hearde those wordes and the prophesye of Azariah the sonne of Obed the Prophete, he toke courage, and put away the abhomynacions oute of al the lande of Iuda and Beniamin, and oute of the cytyes which he wanne in mount Ephraim, and renued the aulter of the Lord that was before the porche of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 15:9 And he gathered al Iuda & Beniamin, and the straungers wyth them oute of Ephraim, Manasseh and Simeon. For there fel many to him out of Israel, when they sawe that God was with him.
2 Chronicles 15:10 And they assembled at Ierusalem in the thirde monethe of the fyftene yeare of the raygne of Asa.
2 Chronicles 15:11 And they offered vnto the Lord that same time of the spoyle whych they had brought .vij. hundred oxen and .vij. thousand shepe.
2 Chronicles 15:12 And they made a couenaunt to seke the Lorde God of their fathers, wyth all their hertes, & all their soules:
2 Chronicles 15:13 so that al that sought not the Lorde God of Israel, shoulde dye for it, whether he were small or great, man or woman.
2 Chronicles 15:14 And they sware vnto the Lorde wt a loude voyce and showtynge and wyth trompettes and hornes.
2 Chronicles 15:15 And all Iuda reioysed in the othe, for they hath sworne wyth all their hertes, and sought him with al their luste, & he was founde of them. And the Lorde gaue them reste rounde aboute.
2 Chronicles 15:16 And therto kynge Asa put Maacah hys mother out of auctorite, because she had made an ydole in a groue: & brake doune her ydole, & stampte it and burnt it by the broke Cedron.
2 Chronicles 15:17 But they put not the hilaulters out of Israel: neuerthelesse the herte of Asa was pure in all his lyfe.
2 Chronicles 15:18 And he brought into the house of God the dedicat gyftes whyche he and hys father had dedicate, in goulde, syluer & other Iewelles.
2 Chronicles 15:19 And there was no more warre vnto the .xxxv. yeare of the raygne of Asa.

CHAPTER: 16

2 Chronicles 16:1 In the .xxxvi. yeare of the raygne of Asa, came Baasa kyng of Israel agaynst Iuda and built Rumah, to the entent that he woulde let uone that pertayneth to Asa kynge of Iuda haue passage in and oute.
2 Chronicles 16:2 Whervpon Asa fet oute syluer and goulde oute of the treasures of the house of the Lorde, and of the kynges house, & sent it to Benhadad kynge of Siria that dwelt at Damasco, and sayde.
2 Chronicles 16:3 There is a confederacion betwene me and the, and so was betwene my father & thine, wherfore I haue sent the siluer and goulde, that thou go and breake thyne appoyntment wyth Baasa kynge of Israel, that he maye departe from me.
2 Chronicles 16:4 And Benhadad graunted vnto kyng Asa, and sent the captaynes of hys armye agaynste the cities of Israell. And they bet Aion, Dan, Abelmaim and all the store cities of Nephtali.
2 Chronicles 16:5 And when Baasa hearde that, he left buyldinge of Ramah & let his worcke cease.
2 Chronicles 16:6 And then Asa the kinge toke all Iuda, and caryed away and stones & tymbre of Ramah, wherwhyth Baasa was a buyldynge: and he buylt therwyth Gabaa and Marphah.
2 Chronicles 16:7 At that same tyme Hanani the sear, came to Asa kyng of Iuda & sayde to hym: because thou trustest in the king of Siria, and trustest not in the Lorde thy God therfore is the host of the kynge of Siria escaped oute of thyne hande.
2 Chronicles 16:8 Were not the blacke Mores, and they of Libya a great host wyth exceading many charettes and horsemen? And yet because thou trustedest in the Lorde, he delyuered them into thyne handes.
2 Chronicles 16:9 For the eyes of the Lorde beholde all the earthe, to strength the hertes of them that are hole with him. Herin thou hast done folyshly, and therfore from henceforth thou shalt haue warre.
2 Chronicles 16:10 Whervpon Asa was wrothe with the sear and put hym in the conuertynge house, for he was dyspleased wyth him because of that. Moreouer Aza oppressed certayne of the people the same ceason.
2 Chronicles 16:11 The dedes of Aza bothe fyrst and last, are written in the boke of the kynges of Iuda & Israel.
2 Chronicles 16:12 And the .xxxix. yeare of his raigne Asa fel sycke on hys fete, and that his disease exceaded. And therto in his sycknesse he asked no counsel of the Lorde, but of Physycyons.
2 Chronicles 16:13 And at the last Asa fel on slepe wyth hys fathers, and dyed when he raygned .xli. yeare.
2 Chronicles 16:14 And they buryed hym in his owne sepulchre whiche he had made in the citie of Dauid, and layde hym in the bedde whyche he had filled with swete odoures of dyuerse kyndes, made by the crafte of the potecaryes. And they dyd exceadynge greate coste aboute buryeng of hym.

CHAPTER: 17

2 Chronicles 17:1 And Iehosaphat his sonne raigned in his stead, and was mightyer then Israel.
2 Chronicles 17:2 And he put souldioures in all the stronge cities of Iuda, and set rulers bothe in the lande of Iuda, and also in the cytyes of Ephraim, whyche Asa his father had wonne.
2 Chronicles 17:3 And the Lorde was wyth Iehosaphat, because he walked in the olde wayes of his father Dauid, & sought not Baals,
2 Chronicles 17:4 but sought the Lorde God of his father, and walked in hys commaundementes, and not after doynges of Israel.
2 Chronicles 17:5 Therfore the Lorde stablyshed the kyngedome in his hande, and all Iuda brought him presentes, that he became exceadinge ryche and gloriouse.
2 Chronicles 17:6 And his herte was corageous in the wayes of the Lorde, & he put doune yet more of the hilalaulters and groued out of Iuda.
2 Chronicles 17:7 And the thirde yeare of hys raigne he sent of his Lordes: Benhail, Abdiah, Zachariah, Nathanael and Michaah to teache in the cyties of Iuda:
2 Chronicles 17:8 and with them, Semeiah, Nathaniah, Zabadiah, Asahel. Semiramoth, Iehonathan, Adoniah, Thobiah, and Thobodoniah Leuites: and with them Elisama & Ioram priestes.
2 Chronicles 17:9 And they taught in Iuda, and had the boke of the law with them, & went aboute thorowout all the cytyes of Iuda and taught the people.
2 Chronicles 17:10 And the feare of the Lorde fel vpon al the kyngedomes of the landes that were rounde aboute Iuda, that they durst not warre with Iehosaphat.
2 Chronicles 17:11 And the Philistines brought Iehosaphat gyftes and tribute siluer. And therto the Arabians brought hym of shepe, seuen thousand and seuen hundred rammes, & seuen thousande & seuen hundred he gottes.
2 Chronicles 17:12 And so Iehosaphat he prospered and grue vpon hye. And he buylt in Iuda, castels and store cities.
2 Chronicles 17:13 And he had great substaunce in the cyties of Iuda, & fyghtynge men and men of myghte in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 17:14 And this is the order in the houses of their fathers, of the capitaynes ouer thousandes in Iuda: Ednah the captayne, and with hym of fyghthynge men thre hundred thousande.
2 Chronicles 17:15 And nexte to him Iehohanan a captayne and with him two hundreth & .lxxx. thousand.
2 Chronicles 17:16 And by his side Amaziah the sonne of Zechri willynge vnto the Lord, & with him two hundred thousand myghty men.
2 Chronicles 17:17 And of the children of Beniamin, Eliada was a man of might, and had with hym armed with bowes & shyldes two hundred thousande.
2 Chronicles 17:18 And by his syde Iehosabad wyth whome were an hundred & .lxxx. thousande trimmed for warre.
2 Chronicles 17:19 These waited on the kynge, besydes those whyche the kinge had put in stronge cities thorowout al Iuda.

CHAPTER: 18

2 Chronicles 18:1 And Iehosaphat became verye ryche and gloryouse, and ioyned affinite with Ahab.
2 Chronicles 18:2 And after certayne yeares he went doune to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab slue shepe and oxen plenteously for him & for the people that came wt him, and entreated him to go vp vnto Ramoth in Galaad.
2 Chronicles 18:3 And Ahab kynge of Israel sayde to Iehosaphat kynge of Iuda: wylt thou go wyth me to Ramath in Galaad? And he answered him: I wylbe as thou, and my people shalbe as thyne, and we wylbe with the in the warre.
2 Chronicles 18:4 But Iehosaphat sayde vnto the kynge of Israell: aske I pray the, the worde of the lorde.
2 Chronicles 18:5 And the kynge of Israell gathered together of the Prophetes foure hundred men, & saide vnto them: shal we go to Ramoth in Galaad to fyght, or shall I cease? And they saide: go, the Lord shall delyuer it into the kinges hand.
2 Chronicles 18:6 And Iehosaphat sayde: is there yet here neuer a Prophete more of the Lordes, that we myght aske of hym?
2 Chronicles 18:7 And the kyng of Israell sayde to Iehosaphat: there is yet one, to aske the Lorde by hym: But I hate him, for he neuer prophesyed me good, but alwaye euyll, one Micheah the sonne of Iemla. And Iehosaphat sayde: let not the kynge saye so.
2 Chronicles 18:8 Then the kynge of Israel called one of his chambrelaines and said: fetche hether quickly Micheah the sonne of Iemla.
2 Chronicles 18:9 And the kynge of Israel and Iehosaphat kyng of Iuda sate ether of them on his seate in their apparell, in a thressynge floure besyde the gate of Samaria, and al the Prophetes prophesying before them.
2 Chronicles 18:10 And one Zedekiah the sonne of Chananah made him horne of yron, and said: thus sayth the Lord: with these thou shalt winowe Siria, vntil thou had brought them to nought.
2 Chronicles 18:11 And all the Prophetes prophesyed euen so sayinge: Go vp to Ramoth in Galaad & prospere, for the Lorde shall delyuer it into the hande of the kynge.
2 Chronicles 18:12 And the messenger that went to call Micheah, spake to him sayinge: beholde, the wordes of the Prophetes are pleasaunt to the king with one assent, let thy wordes I pray the, be lyke one of theirs, & speake that which is pleasaunt.
2 Chronicles 18:13 And Micheah sayde: as truly as the Lord lyueth, euen what my God sayeth, that wyl I speake.
2 Chronicles 18:14 And when he was come to the kynge, the kynge saide to him: Micheah, shal we go to Ramoth in Galaad to fyght, or shal I be in reste? And he answered go ye and prospere, for the lord shal deliuer it into your handes.
2 Chronicles 18:15 But the kyng sayd to him: how oftentymes shal I adiure the that thou say nothyng but truthe to me, in the name of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 18:16 Then he sayd: I se al Israel skatered in the mountaines, as shepe that haue no shepard. And the Lorde sayde: these haue no mayster, let them returne euery man to his house in peace.
2 Chronicles 18:17 Then sayde the kinge of Israel to Iehosaphat: dyd I not tel the, that he would not prophecye good vnto me, but euyll?
2 Chronicles 18:18 And he answered: therfore heare ye the worde of the Lorde. I sawe the Lorde sit vpon this seat, and all the company of heauen stanstynge on his ryght hand & on his lefte.
2 Chronicles 18:19 And the Lorde sayd: who shal deceyue Ahab king of Israel, that he maye go & be ouerthrowen at Ramoth in Galaad. And whyle one sayd thus, & another that,
2 Chronicles 18:20 there came out a spyryte and stode before the Lorde and sayde: I wyll deceyue hym. And the Lord said to him: how?
2 Chronicles 18:21 And he said: I wyll go out & wilbe a lyinge spirite in the mouthes of all his prophetes. And the Lorde sayde: thou shalt deceyue him & shalt preuayle, go out and do euen so.
2 Chronicles 18:22 And now beholde the Lorde hath put a lyinge spyryte in the mouthes of all these thy prophetes & yet the Lorde hath spoken euyl against the.
2 Chronicles 18:23 And Zedekiah the sonne of Chananah, went to & smote Micheah vpon the cheke, & said: by what way went the spirite of the Lord from me, to speake in the?
2 Chronicles 18:24 And Micheah sayd: thou shalt se the daye when thou shalt runne from chambre to chambre, for to hyde thy selfe.
2 Chronicles 18:25 Then sayde the kynge of Israel: take ye Micheah & delyuer hym to Amon the gouerner of the citie, & to Ioas the kynges sonne,
2 Chronicles 18:26 & saye: thus saith the kinge: put this felow in preson, and fede him with bread & water of tribulacion, vntyl I come agayne in peace.
2 Chronicles 18:27 And Micheah said: yf thou come agayn in peace, then hath not the Lord spoken in me. And Micheah said moreouer: herken to ye people euery one of you.
2 Chronicles 18:28 And so the kinge of Israel & Iehosaphat the kyng of Iuda went vp to Ramoth in Galaad.
2 Chronicles 18:29 Then sayd the kinge of Israel to Iehosaphat: chaunge the & get the to battel, but se that thou haue thine owne apparel vpon the. And the king of Israel chaunged hym selfe, & they went to battell.
2 Chronicles 18:30 But the kynge of Siria commaunded the captaines of his charettes sayinge: se that ye fight not against smal or great saue against the kinge of Israel onlye.
2 Chronicles 18:31 And when the captaynes of the charettes sawe Iehosaphat, they had went he had bene the king of Israel, & therfore compased about him, to fyghte. But Iehosaphat cryed out, & the Lord holpe hym, & God tised them away from him.
2 Chronicles 18:32 For when the captaynes of the charettes perceiued that it was not the king of Israel, they turned back again from him:
2 Chronicles 18:33 & a certayne man drew his bow ignorauntly & smote the kyng of Israel betwene the yointes of his habergin. And he sayde to the charet man: turne thyne hand, and carye me oute of the Hoste, for I am hurte.
2 Chronicles 18:34 And the battel arose that day. How be it, the kynge of Israel continueth standinge in hys charet agaynst the Sirians vntyll euen. And aboute the sonne goynge doune he dyed.

CHAPTER: 19

2 Chronicles 19:1 And Iehosophat kynge of Iuda returned to his house safe and sounde to Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 19:2 And Iehu the sonne of Hanani the sear, wente oute agaynst him and said to king Iehosaphat: oughtest thou to helpe the wicked, & to loue them that hate the Lorde. And thys verely is the wrathe of the Lorde vpon the.
2 Chronicles 19:3 Neuerthelater there are good thinges founde in the, in that thou hast put awaye groues out of the lande & hast prepared thyne herte to seke God.
2 Chronicles 19:4 And as Iehosaphat dwelt at Ierusalem, he went to agayne and went amonge the people from Bersabe to mount Ephraim, & brought them agayne vnto the Lorde God of their fathers.
2 Chronicles 19:5 And he sent iudges in the lande, thorow oute all the stronge cities of Iuda, cytye by cytye
2 Chronicles 19:6 and sayde to the iudges: take hede what ye do for ye be not iudges in the lawe of man, but of God, whyche is wyth you in the wordes of the law.
2 Chronicles 19:7 Wherfore let the feare of the lord be wyth you, and take hede and do it. For there is no vnryghteousnesse in the Lord our God nor regarding of persones, nor taking of rewardes.
2 Chronicles 19:8 Moreouer in Ierusalem dyd Iehosaphat set of the Leuites & of the pryestes and of the auncyent heades of Israel, ouer the customes of the Lorde & causes of stryfe. And then they returned agayn to Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 19:9 And he charged them saying: do euen so in the feare of the lord with truthe and pure herte.
2 Chronicles 19:10 And whatsoeuer come to you of youre brethren that dwell in their cytyes, betwene bloude & bloude, lawe, commaundement, ordinaunces, and customes, so that ye warne them, that they trespace not agaynst the Lorde, leste wrath come vpon you and on youre brethren. Thus do and ye shal not offende.
2 Chronicles 19:11 And se here Amariah the prieste whyche is heade ouer you in all matters of the Lorde, and Zabadiah the sonne of Ismael a ruler in the house of Iuda, he is ouer al causes concernynge the kynge, wyth offycers of the Leuites before you. Take courage to you, and go vpon it, and the Lorde shalbe wyth the good.

CHAPTER: 20

2 Chronicles 20:1 After that came the chyldren of Moab and the chyldren of Ammon and wyth them of the Ammonites agaynst Iehosaphat to battel.
2 Chronicles 20:2 And there came that told Iehosaphat saying: ther cometh a great multitude against the from the other syde the sea oute of Siria. And se they be in Hasason Thamar whyche is Engadi.
2 Chronicles 20:3 And Iehosaphat feared, & let him selfe to seke the Lorde, & proclaymed fastinge thorow out al Iuda.
2 Chronicles 20:4 And Iuda gathered them selues together for to aske counsel of the lord. And therto there came oute of al the cytyes of Iuda to seke the Lord.
2 Chronicles 20:5 And Iehosaphat stode in the congregacion of Iuda and Ierusalem in the house of the Lord before the new court
2 Chronicles 20:6 and sayde: Lorde God of oure fathers, arte not thou God in heauen, & raygnest not thou on all the kyngedomes of the Heathen? And in thyne hande is power and might, that noman can stande before the.
2 Chronicles 20:7 Art not thou oure God whiche diddest cast oute the enhabyters of this lande before thy people Israel, & gauest it to the seade of Abraham thy louer for euer?
2 Chronicles 20:8 And they dwelt therin and haue buylt the a temple therin vnto thy name, and said:
2 Chronicles 20:9 when euyll cometh vpon vs, as the swerde of iudgement, pestilence or hongre: then yf we stande before this house and before the (for thy name is in thys house) and shall crye vnto the in oure trybulacyon, thou shalt heare and helpe.
2 Chronicles 20:10 And now beholde, the children of Ammon & Moab & mount Seir, by whiche thou wouldest not let Israel go, when they came out of Egypte: but they departed from them & destroyed them not.
2 Chronicles 20:11 And se, how they reward vs, to come for to cast vs oute of thy possession whyche thou hast possessed vs with al.
2 Chronicles 20:12 O oure God, wylt thou not iudge them? for we haue no myght agaynst this great company that cometh against vs. Neyther wote we what to do: but oure eyes be vnto the.
2 Chronicles 20:13 And as all Iuda stode before the lorde wt their younge ones, their wyues and their children,
2 Chronicles 20:14 the spyryte of the Lorde came vpon Iahaziel the sonne of Zachariah the sonne of Banaiah the sonne of Ieiel the sonne of Mathaniah a Leuite of the sonnes of Asaph, euen as he was in the myddes of the congregacion:
2 Chronicles 20:15 And he sayde: herken all Iuda, and the enhabiters of Ierusalem, and also kynge Iehosaphat. Thus sayth the Lorde vnto you: be not afrayde or faynte herted by reason of thys great multitude. For the warre is not youres, but Goddes.
2 Chronicles 20:16 And to morow ye shall go doune to them: se, they come vp at Ziz, & ye shall mete them in the flagges of the broke before the wyldernesse of Ieruel.
2 Chronicles 20:17 Moreouer it belongeth not to you for to fight in this quarell: but stepe forth and stande and behold the helpe of the Lorde whiche is wyth you: feare not, nor let youre hartes fayle you, O ye of Iuda and of Ierusalem. To morow go out to them: for the Lorde is with you.
2 Chronicles 20:18 And Iehosaphat bowed hym self with his face to the citie, & al Iuda and the enhabiters of Ierusalem fell before the Lorde, to bowe them selues vnto the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 20:19 And the Leuites and the children of the Cahathites & of the Corathites stode vp, to prayse the Lorde God of Israel with a loud voyce on hye.
2 Chronicles 20:20 And so they arose erlye in the mornyng, and get them out vnto the wyldernesse of Tekua. And as they went out, Iehosaphat stode and sayde: heare me Iuda, and ye enhabyters of Ierusalem. Beleue in the Lorde youre God, and so shall ye continue: and beleue his prophetes & so shall ye prospere.
2 Chronicles 20:21 And he gaue the people counsell, & set the syngers of the Lorde, & them that praysed in holy apparel, to go out before the army and to saye: prayse the Lorde, for hys mercye lasteth euer.
2 Chronicles 20:22 And what tyme they beganne to laude & praise, then the Lord set laiers awaite agaynste the children of Ammon and Moab and mounte Seir, to destroye them vtterly & to wype them out.
2 Chronicles 20:23 And when they had made an ende of the enhabyters of Seir, then they holpe to destroye eche other.
2 Chronicles 20:24 And when Iuda came to Mazphah in the wyldernesse, they loked vnto the multitude. And beholde, they were deade carcases fallen to the earthe, and none escaped.
2 Chronicles 20:25 And Iehosaphat and hys people went to robbe awaye the spoyle of them and founde amonge them aboundaunce of goodes and rayment & of pleasaunt Iewelles, and caught from them more then they coulde carye awaye: so that they were thre dayes in gatherynge of the spoyle, it was so muche.
2 Chronicles 20:26 And the fourth daye they assembled in the valeye of blessynge, for there they blessed the Lord. And therfore they called the name of the sayd place the valeie of blessynge vnto thys daye.
2 Chronicles 20:27 And also the men of Iuda and Ierusalem returned & Iehosaphat amonge the thyckest of them, for to go again to Ierusalem wyth gladnesse: for the Lorde hath made them to reioyse of their enemyes.
2 Chronicles 20:28 And they came to Ierusalem wyth psalteries & harpes and trompettes, euen vnto the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 20:29 And the feare of God fell in the kyngedomes of all landes, when they had hearde, that the Lord fought agaynst the enemyes of Israel.
2 Chronicles 20:30 And so the reaulme of Iehosaphat was in tranquyllytie, for hys God had geuen hym rest on euery syde.
2 Chronicles 20:31 And Iehosaphat raigned vpon Iuda, and was .xxxv. yeare olde when he beganne to raygne, and raygned .xxv. yeare in Ierusalem. And his mothers name was Asuba the doughter of Silhi.
2 Chronicles 20:32 And he walked in the waye of Asa his father & bowed not therfrom, to do that was pleasaunt in the syght of the Lord.
2 Chronicles 20:33 How be it, they put not doune the hilaulters, nether did the people yet prepare their hertes vnto the God of their fathers.
2 Chronicles 20:34 The rest of the actes of Iehosaphat fyrste and laste are written in the worckes of Iehu the sonne of Hanani, which noted them in the boke of the kinges of Israel.
2 Chronicles 20:35 After this, Iehosaphat king of Iuda ioyned hym selfe with Ohoziah kynge of Israel whiche was a wycked doar.
2 Chronicles 20:36 And he coupled hym selfe with him, to make shippes to go to Tharsis. And they made the shippes in Azion Gaber.
2 Chronicles 20:37 And Eliezer the sonne of Dodonah of Maresa prophesyed agaynste Iehosaphat saynge: because thou hast ioyned thy selfe wt Ohoziah, the Lord hath broken thy workes. And the shyppes were broken that they were not able to go to Tharsis.

CHAPTER: 21

2 Chronicles 21:1 Iehosaphat layd him to reste wt hys fathers, and was buryed with his fathers in the cytie of Dauid, and Iehoram his sonne raygned in hys roume:
2 Chronicles 21:2 whiche Iehoram had other brethren, sonnes of Iehosaphat, Asariah, Iehiel, Zachariah, Asariah, Michael and Zephatiah. All these were the sonnes of Iehosaphat kynge of Iuda.
2 Chronicles 21:3 And their father gaue them many great gyftes in syluer, goulde & other preciouse thinges with stronge cytyes in Iuda: but the kingedom he gaue to Iehoram, because he was the eldest.
2 Chronicles 21:4 And when Iehoram was vpon the kingdom of his father & setelde, he slue al his other brethren with the swerde, & dyuerse of the lordes of Israel therto.
2 Chronicles 21:5 Iehoram was .xxxij. yeare olde when he beganne to raygne, & he raigned .viij. yeare in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 21:6 And he walked in the waies of the kinges of Israel, like as did the house of Ahab (for a doughter of Ahab was his wife) & he wrought euil in the eyes of the Lord.
2 Chronicles 21:7 How be it, the Lord would not destroy the house of Dauid, because of the couenaunt that he had made wt Dauid, & as he promised to geue a light to hym & to hys sonnes for euer.
2 Chronicles 21:8 In hys dayes the Edomites departed from vnder the hand of Iuda & made them a king.
2 Chronicles 21:9 And Iehoram went forth with his Lordes & all his charettes with him, & rose by nyghte & layd on the Edomites. Which compased him in, & the captaynes of his charettes.
2 Chronicles 21:10 And so Edom departed from vnder the hande of Iuda vnto thys day. That same time also dyd Cobnah departe from vnder his power, because he lefte the Lord God of his fathers.
2 Chronicles 21:11 Moreouer he made hilaulters in the mountaynes of Iuda & caused the enhabiters of Ierusalem to commit adultery, & he thrust Iuda out of the waye.
2 Chronicles 21:12 And there came a writting to him from Eliah the prophet of this tenoure. Thus saith the Lord God of Dauid thy father: because thou walkedest not in the wayes of Iehosaphat thy father, and in the waies of Asa king of Iuda,
2 Chronicles 21:13 but walkest in the waies of the kinges of Israel, & hast made Iuda & the dwellers of Ierusalem go a whoringe, like to the whoring of the house of Ahab, & had therto slaine thy brethren that were thy fathers house, which were better then thou.
2 Chronicles 21:14 Therfore behold the lord wil smyte the wyth a mightye plage in thy folke, in thy chyldren, in thy wiues and in thy goodes.
2 Chronicles 21:15 And thou shalt haue muche dysease thorowe infirmitye in thy bowelles, vntil thy bowelles fal out by reason of thy sycknesse, daye by daye.
2 Chronicles 21:16 And the Lorde stered vp agaynst Iehoram the spyryt of the Philistines & the Arabians the border on the blacke Mores.
2 Chronicles 21:17 Which came against Iuda & al to tare the lande, & caryed away al the substaunce that was found in the kinges house, & therto his sonnes & his wiues: so that there was neuer a sonne lefte him saue Iehoa has hys youngest sonne.
2 Chronicles 21:18 And after all that, the Lorde smote him in hys bowelles with an incurable disease.
2 Chronicles 21:19 And in processe of tyme, euen about the ende of two yeare hys guttes fell out by reason of his sycknesse, & so he dyed of euil diseases. But they made him no bonefire lyke the bonefires of his fathers.
2 Chronicles 21:20 When he beganne to raygne, he was .xxxii. yeare old, & raigned in Ierusalem .viij. yeare. And he walked not pleasauntly, & they buryed him in the cyty of Dauid, but not in the sepulchre of the kinges.

CHAPTER: 22

2 Chronicles 22:1 And the enhabiters of Ierusalem made Ohoziah hys youngest sonne kynge in hys steade. For the men of warre that came with the Arabians in the hoste, had slayne all hys elder sonnes. And so Ohoziah the sonne of Iehoram kynge of Iuda was made kynge.
2 Chronicles 22:2 Two & fourtie yeare olde was he when he beganne to raygne, & raygned one year in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Athaliah the doughter of Amri.
2 Chronicles 22:3 And he walked also in the wayes of the house of Ahab, for his mother was his counseler for to do euill.
2 Chronicles 22:4 Wherfore he did that displeased the lorde like the house of Ahab for they were his counselers after the death of his father, to his destruccion. And he also walked after their counsel.
2 Chronicles 22:5 And Iehoram sonne of Ahab kynge of Israel went to fyght wt Hazael kynge of Siria at Ramoth in Galaad: & they of Ramoth wounded him.
2 Chronicles 22:6 Wherfore he returned to be healed in Iezrahel of the woundes whiche were geuen him at Ramoth, when he sought wt Hazael king of Siria. And Ohoziah the sonne of Iehoram king of Iuda went doune to se Iehoram the sonne of Ahab at Iezrahel, because he was diseased.
2 Chronicles 22:7 For it was thrust into Ohoziah of God to go to Iehoram, & that when he was come, he should go out wt Iehoram against Iehu the sonne of Namsi, whome the Lorde had annoynted to destroy the house of Ahab.
2 Chronicles 22:8 And as Iehu was executinge iustice vpon the house of Ahab. He founde the Lordes of Iuda, and the sonnes of the brethren of Ohoziah that wayted on Ohoziah, and he slue them.
2 Chronicles 22:9 And he sought Ohoziah, & they caught him where he was hid in Samaria, & brought him to Iehu. And when they had slayne him, they buryed him: because (sayde thy) he was the sonne of Iehosaphat, whyche sought the Lorde with all hys hert. And there was none of the house of Ohoziah, that coulde obtayne to be kyng.
2 Chronicles 22:10 For Athaliah the mother of Ohoziah, when she saw her sonne was deade, arose & spake wt al the seade of the kingedom of the house of Iuda.
2 Chronicles 22:11 But Iehosabeath the doughter of the king toke. Iehoas the sonne of Ohoziah & stale him from among the kinges sonnes that were slayn, & put him & his nource in a sleping chambre. And so Iehosabeath the doughter of kinge Iehoram & wyfe of Iehoiada the pryeste (because she was the sister of Ohoziah) hid him from Athaliah that he slue him not.
2 Chronicles 22:12 And he was wyth them hid in the house of God syxe yeare. And Athaliah raygned ouer the lande.

CHAPTER: 23

2 Chronicles 23:1 And in the seuenth yeare Iehoiada toke hert, & made a bonde wt the capitaynes of hundredes Azariah the sonne of Iehoram, Ismael the sonne of Iohanan, Azariah the sonne of Obed, Maasiah the sonne of Adaiah and Elisaphat the sonne of Zechri.
2 Chronicles 23:2 And they went about in Iuda, and gathered the Leuites of all the cyties out of Iuda & the auncyent heades of Israel, and they came to Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 23:3 And all the congregacyon made a bonde wyth the kynge in the house of God. And Iehoiada sayde to them: behold, the kinges sonne must raygne ouer the children of Dauid, as the Lorde hath sayde.
2 Chronicles 23:4 This is it therfore that ye shal do. The third parte of you priestes & Leuites whiche come in the Saboth daye, shall kepe the dores
2 Chronicles 23:5 & another third parte shalbe in the kinges house & another thyrd parte shalbe in the gate of the foundacyon, and all the people shalbe in the courtes of the house of the Lorde
2 Chronicles 23:6 And ther shall none come into the house of the Lorde, saue the priestes & the Leuites that ministre. They shal go in, for they are holy: & al the people shal kepe the watche of the Lord:
2 Chronicles 23:7 & the Leuites shal compase the king roud about, & euery man his wepon in his hand: & whatsoeuer other man come into the house of the Lorde, he shal dye for it: and they shalbe wyth the kynge as he cometh in and as he goeth oute.
2 Chronicles 23:8 And the Leuites & al Iuda did in al thinges as Iehoiada the priestes commaunded, & toke euery man his men: both them that came in, & them that went out the saboth daye: for Iehoiada the prieste did let none of the companyes departe.
2 Chronicles 23:9 And Iehoiada the prieste delyuered to the captaynes of hundredes speares & shildes & boukelars that pertaineth to king Dauid, and were in the house of God.
2 Chronicles 23:10 And he set al the people & euery man hys wepon in hys hand, from the ryght corner of the house to the lefte corner of the house, alonge by the aulter, and the house rounde aboute the kynge.
2 Chronicles 23:11 And they brought oute the kynges sonne, and put vpon hym the croune, & the testymonye, and made hym kyng. And Iehoiada & hys sonnes annoynted hym & sayde: God saue he Kyng.
2 Chronicles 23:12 When Athaliah hearde the noyse of the people runnynge & praysynge the kynge, she went amonge the people into the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 23:13 And when she sawe the kynge stande at his pyler in the enterynge, and the Lordes and trompetes about the kynge, and all the people of the lande reioysynge and blowing wyth trompetes, and the syngers with instrumentes of musycke teachinge to prayse. Then she rent her clothes and cryed: treason treason.
2 Chronicles 23:14 And Iehoiada the preste went out with the capitaynes of hundredes that were apoynted to gouerne the hoste, and sayde to them: haue her out wythout the arayes and whosoeuer foloweth her, let hym be slayne with the swerde. For the preste sayde: sley her not in the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 23:15 And they layde handes on her, and when she was come out to the entrynge of the horsgate in the kynges house, they slue her there.
2 Chronicles 23:16 And Iehoiada made a bonde betwene him and all the people and the kynge, to be the Lordes people.
2 Chronicles 23:17 And all the people went to the house of Baal and destroyed it, and brake hys aulters and hys ymages, and slue Mathan the preste of Baall before the aulters.
2 Chronicles 23:18 And Iehoiada put the offyces of the house of the Lorde in the handes of the prestes the Leuites, which Dauid had deuyded in companyes for the house of the Lorde, to offer burntofferynges vnto the Lorde, as it is wrytten in the law of Moses, wyth reioysynge and syngynge, as it was ordeyned by Dauid.
2 Chronicles 23:19 And he set porters vnto the gates of the house of the Lorde, that none that was vncleane in anye poynte shulde entre in.
2 Chronicles 23:20 And he toke the capitaynes of hundrethes and the nobles, and the gouernoures of the people & all the folke of the lande, & brought the kyng downe out of the house of the Lord, and they went thorowe the hye gate in the kynges house, and set the kynge vpon the seate of the kyngedome.
2 Chronicles 23:21 And all the people of the lande reioysed, and the cytye was in tranquilite: but they slue Athaliah wyth the swerde.

CHAPTER: 24

2 Chronicles 24:1 Iehoas was seuen yere olde when he beganne to raygne, and he raigned fourtye yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Zebiah of Bersabe.
2 Chronicles 24:2 And Iehoas dyd that pleased the Lorde all the dayes of Iehoiada that preste.
2 Chronicles 24:3 And Iehoyada gaue hym two wyues, & he begat sonnes & daughters.
2 Chronicles 24:4 It chaunsed after that, that Iehoas was mynded to mende the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 24:5 And vpon that he gathered to gether the prestes and the Leuites and sayde to them: go out thorow the cyties of Iuda and gather of all Israel syluer, to strength the house of youre God, yere by yere, and se that ye hast the thynge: how be it the Leuites were slacke.
2 Chronicles 24:6 Then the kynge called Iehoiada that was the chefest, and sayde to him: Why requyrest thou not of the Leuytes to brynge in, out of Iuda and Ierusalem the summe apoynted by Moses the seruaunt of the Lorde, and by the congregacion of Israel, for the tabernacle of wytnesse.
2 Chronicles 24:7 For wicked Athaliah and her chyldren had broken the house of God, and had therto bestowed all the dedicat gyftes of the house of the Lorde, aboute Baals.
2 Chronicles 24:8 Wherfore at the kynges commaundement, they made a cofer, and set it at the gate of the house of the Lorde:
2 Chronicles 24:9 and made proclamacyon thorow Iuda and Ierusalem to brynge in to the Lorde the taxacion of Moses the seruaunt of God, which he set vpon Israel in the wyldernesse.
2 Chronicles 24:10 And the Lordes and all the people reioysed and brought in and cast in to the cofer vntil it was full.
2 Chronicles 24:11 And when the tyme came that the cheste shoulde be brought in by the handes of the Leuites at the apoyntment of the kynge, when they saw that there was moche moneye: then came the kynges scrybe & one apoynted by the hye preste, and powred out that was in the cofer, & then toke it & caryed it to hys place agayne, & thus they dyd daye by daye, and gathered moche moneye.
2 Chronicles 24:12 And the kynge and Iehoiada gaue it to worckemen that wrought vpon the house of the Lorde, and hyred Masons & carpenters to redresse the house of the Lorde, and so dyd they artifycers in yron and brasse, to repayre the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 24:13 And the worckemen wrought & the worcke mended thorow theyr handes: and they made the house of God as it ought to be, and strengthed it.
2 Chronicles 24:14 And when they had fynysshed it, they brought the rest of the moneye to the kynge and Iehoiada, & therwyth were made vessels for the house of the Lorde: euen vessels to mynystre with all and to serue for burntofferynges as ladelles and vessels of goulde and syluer. And they offered burntofferynges in the house of the Lorde contynuallye all the dayes of Iehoiada.
2 Chronicles 24:15 And Iehoiada waxed olde and full of yeres and dyed. An hundred and thirty yere olde was he when he dyed.
2 Chronicles 24:16 And they buryed him in the citie of Dauid amonge the kynges because he had done good in Israel, & on God and on his house.
2 Chronicles 24:17 And after the death of Iehoiada, came the Lordes of Iuda and made obeysaunce to the kynge. And then he herkened vnto them.
2 Chronicles 24:18 And so they lefte the house of the Lorde God of theyr fathers, and serued groues and Images. And then came there wrath vpon Iuda and Ierusalem, for thys theyr trespaces sake.
2 Chronicles 24:19 Not wythstandynge yet God sent Prophetes to them, to brynge them agayne vnto the Lorde. And they testifyed vnto them. But they woulde not heare.
2 Chronicles 24:20 And the spirite of God came vpon Zachariah the sonne of Iehoiada the preste, and he stept vp aboue the people and sayde to them. Thus sayth God: why transgresse ye the commaundementes of the Lorde? ye shall therfore not prospere, but as ye haue forsaken hym, so shal he forsake you
2 Chronicles 24:21 Wherupon they conspired agaynst hym and stoned hym with stones, at the commaundement of the kynge: euen in the courte of the house of the Lord.
2 Chronicles 24:22 And so Iehoas the kynge remembred not the kyndenes which Iehoiada his father had done to hym, but slue his sonne. And when he dyed, he sayde: the Lorde se and require a reconynge.
2 Chronicles 24:23 And when the yere was out, the hoste of the Siriens came agaynst hym: and they came to Iuda and Ierusalem, and destroyed al the Lordes of the people from amonge the people and sent all the spoyle of them vnto the kynge to Damasco.
2 Chronicles 24:24 And though the armie of Siria came with a smalle companye of men, yet the Lorde deliuered a very great hoste into their handes, because they had forsaken the Lorde God of their fathers. And therto they serued Iehoas accordynge.
2 Chronicles 24:25 And as sone as they were departed from hym, though they left hym in great diseases: yet his owne seruauntes conspired agaynst hym for the bloude of the chyldren of Iehoiada the preste, & slue hym on hys beed. And when he was dead, they buryed him in the cytye of Dauid: but not in the sepulchres of the kynges.
2 Chronicles 24:26 And these are they that conspired agaynst hym: Zabad the sonne of Samaath an Ammonite and Iehosabad the sonne of Simrith a Moabite.
2 Chronicles 24:27 And hys sonnes and the summe of the taxe that came to hym, and the foundacion of the house of God, are written in the storie of the booke of kynges. And Amaziah hys sonne raygned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 25

2 Chronicles 25:1 Amaziah was .xxv. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, & he raygned .xxix. yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Iehoiadan of Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 25:2 And he did that pleased the Lord: but not with the hoale hert.
2 Chronicles 25:3 And as sone as he was seteled in the kyngedome, he slue them that kylled the kynge hys father.
2 Chronicles 25:4 But he slue not theyr chyldren as it is wrytten in the lawe, euen in the boke of Moses to whome the Lord commaunded saying: the fathers shall not dye for the childrens causes, nor the chyldren for the fathers, but euery man shall dye for hys owne synne.
2 Chronicles 25:5 And Amaziah gathered Iuda to gether & made capitaynes ouer thousandes and ouer hundredes in the houses of theyr fathers thorowout all Iuda and Beniamin. And he numbred them from twentye yere & aboue, & founde them thre hundred thousande lustie men able to go to battell, and that coulde handle speare and shylde.
2 Chronicles 25:6 And he hyred therto an hundred thousande fyghtynge men out of Israel, for an hundred talentes of syluer.
2 Chronicles 25:7 But there came a man of God to him and sayde: kynge, let not the armye of Israel go with the: for the Lorde is not with Israel nether with any of the house of Ephraim.
2 Chronicles 25:8 Or elles yf thou neades wylt, then go and do it, and make thy selfe stronge to battel: and thou shalt se, that God shall make the fall before thine enemyes. For God hath power to help or to cast doune.
2 Chronicles 25:9 And Amaziah sayde agayne to the man of God, what shall we do then, for the hundred talentes whiche I haue geuen vnto the hoste of Israel? And the man of God sayde: the Lorde is able to geue the moche moare then that.
2 Chronicles 25:10 And then Amaziah seuered the armie that was come to hym out of Ephraim, to go whome agayne. Wherfore they were exceadynge wrothe with Iuda, & returned to theyr owne whome in great angre.
2 Chronicles 25:11 And Amaziah toke herte & caryed out his host and went to saltdale. Where he slue of the children of Seir ten thousande.
2 Chronicles 25:12 And other ten thousande the chyldren of Iuda toke alyue and caried them vnto the toppe of a rocke & cast them downe from the toppe of the rocke that they all to burst:
2 Chronicles 25:13 but the men of the armie which Amaziah had turned backe and wold not let go with his people to battell, ranne vpon the cities of Iuda from Samaria vnto Bethhoron and slue thre thousande of them and wanne moche spoyle.
2 Chronicles 25:14 And it chaunced, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of the Edomites, & had brought the Gods of the children of Seir, he set them vp to be his Gods, & bowed hym selfe before them & burned cense vnto them.
2 Chronicles 25:15 Wherfore the Lorde was wroth with Amaziah & sent to him a prophete, & sayde to hym: why sekest thou the Gods of the people which were not able to delyuer theyr owne people out of thyne handes?
2 Chronicles 25:16 And as the prophet spake to him, he sayde to the prohhete: haue men made the of the kynges councell? cease, leste thou be beaten. And the prophete ceased and sayde: I am sure that God hath taken councell to destroye the, because thou hast done this, and obeyest not my councell.
2 Chronicles 25:17 Then Amaziah kyng of Iuda toke aduise & sent to Ioas the sonne of Iehoahaz the sonne of Iehu kynge of Israel & sayde, come, & let vs se ether other.
2 Chronicles 25:18 And Ioas kynge of Israel sent agayne to Amaziah kynge of Iuda sayinge: a thistell in Libanon sent to a Cedar tree of Libanon sayinge: geue thy daughter to my sonne to wife. But there came the wilde beastes of Libanon and troade downe the thistell.
2 Chronicles 25:19 Thou thinkest: se, I haue beaten the Edomites, therfore thyne hert aryseth to glorifye thy selfe. Now byde at home, what neadeth the to prouoke to euell, that thou perishe and Iuda with the.
2 Chronicles 25:20 But Amaziah rested not: for it came of God, euen to delyuer them into the handes of theyr enemyes: and that because they had sought the Gods of the Edomites.
2 Chronicles 25:21 And Ioas kynge of Israel came vp: and they saw ether other, both he and Amaziah kynge of Iuda at Betsames in Iuda.
2 Chronicles 25:22 And Iuda was put to the worse before Israel, and fled euery man to hys tent.
2 Chronicles 25:23 And Ioas kynge of Israel toke Amaziah Kynge of Iuda the sonne of Iehoas the sonne of Ohoziah at Bethsames: and brought hym to Ierusalem, and tare the walle of Ierusalem from the gate of Ephraim vnto the corner gate, foure hundred cubytes longe.
2 Chronicles 25:24 And he toke all the goulde and syluer and all the Iuelles that were founde in the house of God wyth Obed Edom and the treasure of the kynges house & hostages, and returned to Samaria.
2 Chronicles 25:25 And Amaziah the sonne of Iehoas kyng of Iuda lyued after the death of Ioas sonne of Iehoahaz kynge of Israel .xv. yere.
2 Chronicles 25:26 The rest of the actes of Amaziah fyrst & last are written in the boke of the kinges of Iuda and Israel.
2 Chronicles 25:27 And after that tyme that Amaziah dyd turne awaye from the Lorde, they conspired treason agaynst hym in Ierusalem: and he fled to Lachis. Whether they sent after hym and slue hym there,
2 Chronicles 25:28 and brought hym vp wyth horsses and buryed hym wyth his fathers in the cytye of Iuda.

CHAPTER: 26

2 Chronicles 26:1 Then all the people of Iuda toke Oziah whiche was .xvi. yere olde, and made hym Kynge in the rowme of hys father Amaziah.
2 Chronicles 26:2 And he buylt Eloth and brought it agayne to Iuda after the kynge was layde to rest with his fathers.
2 Chronicles 26:3 Sixtene yere olde was Oziah when he began to raigne and he raigned .lij. yeare in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Iecaliah of Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 26:4 And he dyd that pleased the Lord, in al pointes as dyd hys father Amaziah.
2 Chronicles 26:5 And he soughte God, whyle Zachariah the teacher to se God lyued: and as longe as he sought the Lorde, God made him prospere.
2 Chronicles 26:6 And he went to battel agaynst the Philistines and brake doune the walles of Geth, and the walles of Iabneh and the walles of Asdod, and buylt cities about Asdod & among the Philistines.
2 Chronicles 26:7 And God holpe him against the Philistines & againste the Arabiens that dwelt in Gurbaal, & against the Meunites.
2 Chronicles 26:8 And the Ammonites gaue tribute to Oziah, & his name sprede abroade euen to Egipt: for he played the man exceaded.
2 Chronicles 26:9 Moreouer Oziah buylte toures in Ierusalem ouer the corner gate, & ouer the valeye gate, and ouer other corners, and made them stronge.
2 Chronicles 26:10 And he built toures in the wildernesse & digged many welles. For he had much catel, both in the valey and also in the playne: and plowmen and vinedressers in the mountaynes and in Charmel, for he loued husbandrye.
2 Chronicles 26:11 And Oziah had an host of fyghtyng men that went out to warre in the armye & were tolde & numbred by Ieiel the scrybe & Maasiah an officer, vnder the hand of Hananiah one of the kynges Lordes.
2 Chronicles 26:12 And the hoale numbre of the auncient heades of the men of might were .ij. thousande & syxe hundred
2 Chronicles 26:13 and vnder the handes of them was the armie of the hoste, thre hundred & seuen thousand, & fyue hundred that made warre wyth myght & strength, to helpe the kynge againste hys enemyes.
2 Chronicles 26:14 And Oziah prouyded them thorow oute al the host shildes, speares, helmettes, habergynnes, bowes & slinges for stones.
2 Chronicles 26:15 And he made engynes in Ierusalem by the crafte of artifycers to be on the towres & corners, to shote arowes & great stones with al. And his name spreade farre abroade, for he was wonderflye holpe, vntyl he was become myghtye.
2 Chronicles 26:16 And in his greatnesse hys hert arose, that he was marred: & transgressed against the Lord his God. For he went into the temple of the Lorde to burne cense vpon the aulter of incense.
2 Chronicles 26:17 But Asariah the prieste went in after him with foure skore priestes of the Lorde that were bolde men.
2 Chronicles 26:18 And they stepte to Oziah the kynge & sayde to him: it pertayneth not to the Oziah to burne cense vnto the Lorde, but to the priestes the children of Aaron that are consecrate for to burne incense. Come out of the sanctuarye, for thou hast trespaced, and it shalbe no worshepe to the before the Lorde God.
2 Chronicles 26:19 And Oziah was wroth and had cense in hys hande to offer, and in hys indignacyon agaynste the prieste, the leprosye sprange in his forhead the priestes in the house of the Lorde, euen besyde the incense aulter.
2 Chronicles 26:20 And Asariah the chefe priest with al the other priestes loked vpon him: and beholde he was a leper in his forhead, & they vexed him thence. And therto he was fayne to go oute, because the Lord had plaged him.
2 Chronicles 26:21 And Oziah the kynge continued a lepre vnto the daye of his death & dwelte in an house at lybertie: howe be it, he was cast out of the house of the Lord. And Ionatham his sonne had the gouernaunce of the kynges house & iudged the people of the lande.
2 Chronicles 26:22 The rest of the actes of Oziah both fyrste and last, did Isaiah the prophete the sonne of Amos write.
2 Chronicles 26:23 And when Oziah was layde to rest with his fathers, they buryed him wt his fathers in the felde of the burial of the kinges. For they sayde: he is a leper. And Ioatham his sonne raygned in his steade.

CHAPTER: 27

2 Chronicles 27:1 Ioatham was .xxv. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, & raygned .xvi. yere in Ierusalem. Hys mothers name was Ierusah the daughter of Zadoc.
2 Chronicles 27:2 And he dyd that pleased the Lorde in all poyntes as dyd hys father Oziah: saue, that he came not to the temple of the Lorde, and that the people dyd yet corrupt them selues.
2 Chronicles 27:3 He built the hie gate of the temple of the Lorde, and on the wall Ophel he buylt moche.
2 Chronicles 27:4 More ouer he built cytyes in the mountaynes of Iuda, and in the wood countre he built castelles and towres.
2 Chronicles 27:5 And he fought wyth the kyng of the children of Ammon, and preuayled agaynst them. And the chyldren of Ammon gaue him the same yere an hundred talentes of syluer, & ten thousande quarters of whete and as moche barleye. So moche also dyd the chyldren of Ammon geue hym the seconde yere and the thirde to.
2 Chronicles 27:6 And Ioatham became mightie, because he direckthe hys waye before the Lorde hys God.
2 Chronicles 27:7 The rest of the actes of Ioatham & all his warres & hys wayes are wrytten in the boke of the kynges of Israel & Iuda.
2 Chronicles 27:8 He was .xxv. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, & raygned .xvi. yere in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 27:9 And when Ioathan was layde to reste with hys fathers, they buryed hym in the cytye of Dauid: and Ahaz his sonne raygned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 28

2 Chronicles 28:1 Ahaz was .xx. yere olde when he beganne to raygne, & raygned .xvi. yere in Ierusalem. And he dyd not that pleased the Lorde, as dyd hys father Dauid:
2 Chronicles 28:2 but walked in the wayes of the kynges of Israel and made therto Baals of metall.
2 Chronicles 28:3 And he offered cense in the valeye of the children of Hennon, and burnt his children in fyre after the abhominacyon of the nacyons which the Lord cast out before the chyldren of Israel.
2 Chronicles 28:4 And he offered burnt cense in hilaulters & on mountaynes and vnder euery grene tre.
2 Chronicles 28:5 Wherfore the Lorde his God delyuered hym into the hand of the kynge of the Siriens: which bet hym & caryed awaye a great multitude of his captiue in to Damascon. And therto he was delyuered into the hande of the kynge of Israel which slue of his a myghtye slaughter.
2 Chronicles 28:6 For Phakeh the sonne of Romeliah slue in Iuda an hundred and twentye thousand in one daye, & all fyghtynge men: & that because they had forsaken the Lorde God of theyr fathers.
2 Chronicles 28:7 And Zechri a myghtye man in mount Ephraim slue Maasiah the kynges sonne, and Africam the Lord stuarde of housholde, & Elcanah that was next to the kyng.
2 Chronicles 28:8 And the children of Israel toke prysoners of theyre brethren two hundred thousand wyues, sonnes and daughters, and therto caryed awaye moche spoyle of them, and brought yt to Samaria.
2 Chronicles 28:9 But there was a prophete of the Lordes named obed which went out to the Host that came to Samaria & sayde to them: se, because the Lorde God of your fathers was wroth with Iuda, he deliuered them into youre handes. And ye haue slayne them with cruelnesse that reacheth vp to heauen.
2 Chronicles 28:10 And now ye purpose to kepe vnder the chyldren of Iuda and Ierusalem and to make them bondemen & bondwemen. What other thynge do ye (ye vnhappye) then offende the Lorde youre God.
2 Chronicles 28:11 But now heare me, & delyuer the captyues agayn whiche ye haue taken of youre brethren: for the great wrath of the Lorde is vpon you?
2 Chronicles 28:12 And certayne of the heades of the chyldren of Ephraim, as Asariah the sonne of Iohanan Barachiah the sonne of Mesimeloth, Iehezekiah the sonne of Selum & Amasa the sonne of Hadalai stode vp agaynst them that came from warre,
2 Chronicles 28:13 and sayde vnto them: ye shall not bringe in the captiues hether. For where we haue offended the Lorde all readye, ye entende to adde more to oure synnes and trespace. For oure trespace is great all readye, and there is fearce wrath vpon Israel.
2 Chronicles 28:14 And vpon that the men of armes lefte the captyues and the spoyle before the Lordes and all the congregacyon.
2 Chronicles 28:15 And there arose certayne apoynted therto by name, & toke the presoners & clothed all that were naked amonge them, of the spoyle, and arayed them and shoed them and gaue them to eate & to drinke and anoynted them, & caryed all that were feble of them vpon asses and brought them to Iericho the citie of Paulme trees fast by theyr brethren: and then returned to Samaria agayne.
2 Chronicles 28:16 And at that same tyme kynge Ahaz sent vnto the kynges of Assur to haue helpe.
2 Chronicles 28:17 And the Edomites came yet agayne and slue of Iuda and caryed awaye some captyues.
2 Chronicles 28:18 And the Philistines inuaded the cities in the lowe countreye and the south of Iuda: and toke Bethsames, Aialon, Gaderoth and Socoh with the townes longynge therto, & Thimna with the townes of the same, & Gimso wyth her townes, and dwelt therin.
2 Chronicles 28:19 For the Lorde brought Iuda lowe, because of Ahaz kynge of Iuda which made Iuda naked and transgressed agaynst the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 28:20 And Thiglath palneser kynge of Assur came vpon hym and beseged hym, but preuayled not agaynst him.
2 Chronicles 28:21 For Ahaz toke awaye out of the house of the Lorde and out of the kynges house and out of the Lordes houses, and gaue vnto the kyng of Assur, though yt holpe him not.
2 Chronicles 28:22 And therto in the very tyme of hys tribulacion dyd kynge Ahaz trespace yet moare agaynst the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 28:23 For he offered vnto the Gods of them of Damsaco whiche bette hym & sayd. because the Gods of the Siriens healpe them, therfore will I offer to them, that they maye helpe me also. But they were his destruccion & the destruccion of all Israel.
2 Chronicles 28:24 And Ahaz gathered to gether the vessels of the house of God and brake them, and shut vp the dores of the house of the Lorde, & made him aulters in al corners of Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 28:25 And in all the cities of Iuda cytye by cytye he made hylaulters to burne incense vnto other Gods, & angred the Lord God of hys fathers.
2 Chronicles 28:26 The rest of his actes & all his wayes bothe first and last are written in the boke of the kynges of Iuda & Israel.
2 Chronicles 28:27 And when Ahaz was layde to rest wt hys fathers, they buryed hym in cytye of Ierusalem: but brought hym not vnto the sepulchres of the kynges of Iuda. And Hezekiah hys sonne raygned in hys steade.

CHAPTER: 29

2 Chronicles 29:1 Hezekiah beganne to raygne when he was .xxv. yere olde, & raygned .xxix. yere in Ierusalem. And hys mothers name was Abiah the daughter of Zachariah.
2 Chronicles 29:2 And he dyd that was right in the syght of the Lorde in all poyntes as did Dauid his father.
2 Chronicles 29:3 He opened the dores of the house of the Lorde in the fyrst yere & fyrst moneth of hys raygne, & he repayred them.
2 Chronicles 29:4 And he brought in the prestes & the Leuites & geathered them together in to the easte strete:
2 Chronicles 29:5 & sayde vnto them. Heare me ye Leuites: purifye youre selues & halow the house of the Lorde God of your fathers, & bringe out the fylthinesse out of the holy place.
2 Chronicles 29:6 For oure fathers haue trespaced & done euel fauoredly in the eyes of the Lord oure God: and haue forsaken hym, and turned awaye theyre faces from the habitacion of the Lorde and turned to theyr backes.
2 Chronicles 29:7 And besyde that they haue shut vp the dores of the porche and quenched the lampes and haue nether burned cense nor offered burntofferinges in the holy place vnto the God of Israel.
2 Chronicles 29:8 Wherfore the wrath of the Lord fell on Iuda & Ierusalem: & he skatered them & made them so thynne that men hisse at yt, euen as ye se with youre eyes.
2 Chronicles 29:9 For se, oure fathers were ouer throwen with the swerde & oure sonnes oure daughters and oure wiues were caried awaye captiue for the same cause.
2 Chronicles 29:10 Now haue I in my hert to stryke a couenaunt with the Lorde God of Israel: that his wrath maye cease.
2 Chronicles 29:11 Now therfore my sonnes be not neclygent: for the Lorde hath chosen you to stande before hym, and for to minystre and burne offerynges to hym.
2 Chronicles 29:12 Then the Leuites arose: Mahath the sonne of Amasai & Ioel the sonne of Asariah beyng of the children of the Cahathites: & the sonnes of Merari, Kis the sonne of Abdi & Asariah the sonne of Iehaleleel: & of the Gersonites, Ioah the sonne of Simma & Eden the sonne of Ioah:
2 Chronicles 29:13 & of the sonnes of Elizaphan, Simri & Ieiel, & of the sonnes of Asaph, Zachariah & Mathaniah:
2 Chronicles 29:14 & of the sonnes of Heman, Iehiel and Semei: & of the sonnes of Ieduthun, Semaiah & Oziel.
2 Chronicles 29:15 And they geathered theyr brethren & purifyed them selues, & then went at the commaundement of the kynge by the worde of the Lord, for to clense the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 29:16 And the preastes went into the house of the Lorde to clense yt, and brought out all the vnclennesse that they founde in the temple of the Lord, & in the courte of the house of the Lorde. And the Leuites toke yt and caried yt out in to the broke Cedron.
2 Chronicles 29:17 They beganne the fyrst daye of the fyrst moneth to purifye, and came the eight daye to the porche of the Lord so that they had purged the house of the Lorde in eyght dayes and the .xvi. daye of the fyrste moneth they made an ende.
2 Chronicles 29:18 And then they went in to Hezekiah the kyng & sayde: we haue clensed all the house of the Lord, & the aulter of burntoffrynges wyth al hys vessels, & the shewbreede table wyth all hys apparell:
2 Chronicles 29:19 & therto all the vessels whyche kyng Ahaz dyd cast a syde when he raygned and transgressed, them we haue repayred and sanctifyed: and se, they are before the aulter of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 29:20 And Hezekiah the kynge rose erlye and geathered the Lordes of the cytye & went vp to the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 29:21 And there were brought seuen oxen, seuen rammes, seuen lambes, and seuen kyddes to be a synne offeryng for the kyngdom, for the sanctuarye and for Iuda. And he commaunded the preastes the sonnes of Aaron to offer them on the aulter of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 29:22 And they slue the oxen: & the preastes receyued the bloude & sprynkled yt on the aulter: & they slue the rammes & sprynkled the bloude vpon the aulter: and they slue the lambes & sprynkled the bloud vpon the aulter.
2 Chronicles 29:23 And then they brought forth the kyddes of the synne offeryng before the kynge & the congregacion which put theyr handes vpon them.
2 Chronicles 29:24 And the preastes slue them & offered the bloude of them vpon the aulter, to make satisfacion for all Israel: for the kynge sayde: that the burntofferynge & the synneoffryng shoulde serue for al Israel.
2 Chronicles 29:25 And they set the Leuites in the house of the Lorde with symbales, psalteries and harpes accordynge to the commaundement of Dauid & of Gad the kynges sear of visions & of Nathan the prophete. For so was the coumaundement of the Lorde thorow the hande of his prophetes.
2 Chronicles 29:26 And so the Leuites stode with the instrumentes of Dauid, & the preastes with trompettes.
2 Chronicles 29:27 And Hezekiah commaunded to offer the burntofferyng vpon the aulter. And when the burntofferyng beganne, the songe of the Lorde beganne, & the trompettes with the instrumentes of Dauid kynge of Israel.
2 Chronicles 29:28 And all the congregacyon bowed themselues, and the syngers sange, and the trompettes blew, and continued vntyll the burntofferyng was fynesshed.
2 Chronicles 29:29 And when they had made an ende of the burntofferyng, the kyng & all that were with hym kneled downe & bowed them selues and gaue prayse and thanckes.
2 Chronicles 29:30 And Hezekiah the kynge and the lordes bade the Leuites to prayse the lorde with the wordes of Dauid & of Asaph the sear of vysions. And the Leuites praysed that they reioysed agayne, and the other stowped and bowed them selues.
2 Chronicles 29:31 And Hezekiah answered & sayd: now that ye haue fylled youre handes to the Lorde, go to and brynge in the sacrefyces and thankofferynges in to the house of the Lord. And the congregacion brought in the sacrefyces and thankofferynges, and all that were wyllyng brought burntofferynges.
2 Chronicles 29:32 And the numbre of the burntofferynges which the congregacion brought in was .lxx. oxen & an hundred rammes & two hundred lambes: & all for burntofferynges to the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 29:33 And besyde that they dedicated sixe hundred oxen and thre thousand shepe.
2 Chronicles 29:34 But the preastes were to few, and were not ably to fleye all the burntoffrynges. Wherefore theyre brethren the Leuites holpe them tyll the worke was ended, and vntill the preastes were sanctifyed. For the Leuites were purer herted to sanctifie them selues then the preastes.
2 Chronicles 29:35 And therto the burntoffrynges were manye with the fatte of the peace offerynges and the drynck offerynges that belonged to the burntofferynges. And so the seruyce pertaynynge to the house of the Lorde went forward.
2 Chronicles 29:36 And Hezekiah reioysed and all the people, that God had made the folcke so readye: for the thynge was sodenly done.

CHAPTER: 30

2 Chronicles 30:1 And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Iuda: and therto wrote letters to Ephraim & Manasseh, that they should come to the house of the Lorde at Ierusalem, to offer passeouer vnto the Lorde God of Israel.
2 Chronicles 30:2 And the kynge helde a councell wyth hys Lordes and all the congregacyon at Ierusalem to kepe the feast of passeouer in the seconde moneth.
2 Chronicles 30:3 For they coulde not kepe yt at the time: for there were not preastes ynowe sanctifyed, nether was the people geathered to geather to Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 30:4 And the thynge pleased the kynge and all the congregacion.
2 Chronicles 30:5 And they decreed that yt should be proclaymed thorow out all Israel from Bersabe to Dan, that they should come and holde the feast of passeouer vnto the Lorde God of Israel at Ierusalem: for they had not often done yt, as yt is written how they shoulde.
2 Chronicles 30:6 And the messengers went wyth letters of the hande of the kynge and of his Lordes thorou out all Israel and Iuda, at the commaundement of the kyng which sayde: chyldren of Israel, turne agayne vnto the Lorde God of Abram, Isaac and Israel, and so wil he turne to the remnaunt of you that are escaped out of the handes of the kynge of Assur.
2 Chronicles 30:7 And be ye not lyke youre fathers and youre brethren which trespaced agaynst the Lorde of youre fathers, whyche therfore gaue them vp that they are wasted as ye se.
2 Chronicles 30:8 Wherfore be not styffenecked lyke vnto youre fathers, but yelde youre selues vnto the Lord, & come to hys holye place whiche he hath sanctified for euer, and serue the Lord youre God, that hys wrath maye turne from you.
2 Chronicles 30:9 For yf ye turne vnto the Lorde, then youre brethren & youre children shall fynde compassion in the presence of them that holde them captyue, that they maye come agayne vnto this lande: for the Lorde youre God is full of mercye and compassyon, and wyll not turne hys face from you, yf ye turne agayne to hym.
2 Chronicles 30:10 And the postes went from cytie to cytye thorou oute the lande of Ephraim and Manasseh and euen vnto Zabulon. But they laughed them to skorne & moked them.
2 Chronicles 30:11 Neuerthelesse yet dyuerse of Asser, Manasseh and of Zabulon meakened themselues and came to Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 30:12 And therto the hand of God was in Iuda, to make them of one accorde to do the commaundement of the kynge and the capitaynes, whiche was accordynge to the worde of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 30:13 And so there assembled to Ierusalem moche people and a myghtie great congregacion, to holde the feast of swete breade in the seconde moneth.
2 Chronicles 30:14 And they arose and put awaye the aulters that were in Ierusalem. And therto all the incense they dyd awaye and cast them into the broke Cedron.
2 Chronicles 30:15 And they slue passeouer the fourtene daye of the second moneth. And the preastes and Leuites sanctifyed them selues for shame, and brought in the burntofferynges into the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 30:16 And they stode in theyr standynge after theyre maner accordynge to the law of Moses the man of God. And the preastes sprynkled the bloude receyuynge yt of the handes of the leuites.
2 Chronicles 30:17 And because there were manye in the congregacyon that were not sanctifyed: and therfore dyd the Leuites sley passeouer for all that were not cleane to sanctifye them to the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 30:18 There was verye moche people out of Ephraim, Manasseh, Isakar and Zabulon that were not cleane, and therfore dyd eate passeouer otherwyse then wrytynge specyfyeth. But Hezekiah prayed for them & sayd: the good Lorde
2 Chronicles 30:19 be mercyfull to all that sett theyr hertes to seke the God that is the Lord God of theyr fathers, though they do yt not accordynge to the clennesse of the holy place.
2 Chronicles 30:20 And the Lorde heard Hezekiah and healed the people.
2 Chronicles 30:21 And so the chyldren of Israel that were founde at Ierusalem, helde the feast of swete breade seuen dayes wyth great gladnesse, and the Leuites and the preastes praysed the Lorde daye by daye with lowde instrumentes.
2 Chronicles 30:22 And Hezekiah spake hertely vnto the Leuites that had good vnderstandyng of the Lord. And they dyd eate that feast seuen dayes long and offered peace offerynges and thanked the Lorde God of theyr fathers.
2 Chronicles 30:23 And the hoale assemble toke councell to kepe seuen dayes mo: and they helde those seuen dayes with gladnesse.
2 Chronicles 30:24 For Hezekiah kynge of Iuda gaue for heaue offrynges to the congregacion a thousand oxen and seuen thousand shepe. And the Lorde gaue to the congregacyon for heaueoffrynges a thousand oxen and ten thousand shepe. And the preastes sanctifyed them selues, that they were ynowe.
2 Chronicles 30:25 And all the congregacion of Iuda with the preastes and Leuites, and all the congregacyon that came out of Israel and the straungers, both that came out of the lande of Israel and the dwelt in Iuda,
2 Chronicles 30:26 reioysed: and there was great ioye in Ierusalem. For sence the tyme of Salomon the sonne of Dauid kynge of Israel yt happened not so in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 30:27 And the preastes and the Leuites arose and blessed the people, and theyr voce was hearde and theyr prayer went vp vnto hys holye dwellyng place heauen.

CHAPTER: 31

2 Chronicles 31:1 And when they had fynesshed al this: then all Israell that were founde in the cyties of Iuda, went oute and brake the Images and cut downe the groues, and all to brake the hylaulteres and the other aulters thorow out all Iuda and Beniamin, Ephraim & Manasseh, vntyll they had made an ende of them. And afterwarde all the chyldren of Israel returned euery man to hys possessyon in theyr owne cyties.
2 Chronicles 31:2 And Hezekiah set the preastes and the Leuites in theyr ordre to wayte by course, euery man according to his office whether preaste or Leuite: for the burntoffringes and peace offringes, & to ministre and to thanke and to praye in the gates of the lodge of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 31:3 And the kyng gaue a porcyon of his substaunce for burntofferynges at mornynge, and euen, & for burntoffrynges on the Saboth dayes & new mones & other solempne feastes, accordynge as it is wrytten in the lawe of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 31:4 And he bade the people that dwelt in Ierusalem to geue the parte of the preastes & Leuites, that they myght be maintened in the lawe of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 31:5 And as sone as the worde came abroade the chyldren of Israel brought aboundance of fyrste fruites of corne, wyne, olye and hony, and of all maner of fruites of the feld: and the tythes of all maner of thynges brought they in plenteously.
2 Chronicles 31:6 And the chyldren of Israel and Iuda that dwelte in the cyties of Iuda, they also brought in the tythes of oxen & shepe, and tythes of dedycate thynges which were dedicated to the Lorde theyr God, and put them on heapes.
2 Chronicles 31:7 In the thirde moneth they beganne to laye the heapes, and fynesshed them the seuenth.
2 Chronicles 31:8 And when Hezekiah, and the Lordes came and saw the heapes, they blessed the Lorde and his people Israel.
2 Chronicles 31:9 And Hezekiah questioned with the priestes and the Leuites concernynge the heapes.
2 Chronicles 31:10 And Azariah the chefe prieste of the house of Zadock aunswered hym and sayde: sense they beganne to bringe the heaue offeringes into the house of the Lorde, we haue eaten and had ynough, and yet lefte aboundaunce, for the Lorde hath blessed his people, and therof is thys heape lefte.
2 Chronicles 31:11 And Hezekiah bade dresse vp the store houses aboute the house of the Lorde. And so they dyd,
2 Chronicles 31:12 and caryed in the heaue offeringes and the tythes and the dedycate gyftes euen of fydelyte. Ouer which Chonaniah the Leuite had the rule wyth Semei hys brother nexte to hym.
2 Chronicles 31:13 And Iehiel, Asariah, Nahath, Asael, Ierimoth, Iosabad, Eliel, Iesmachiah, Mahath and Bananiah were ouer sears ordeyned by Chonaniah and Semei hys brother, at the appoyntement of Hezekiah the kynge, and Asariah the ruler of the house of God.
2 Chronicles 31:14 And Chore the sonne of Iemma the Leuite porter of the East dore had the ouersyght of the frewyll offeringes of God, to geue heaueofferynges vnto the Lorde, and was ouer thynges moste holy.
2 Chronicles 31:15 And vnder hym were Eden, Miniamin, Iesua, Semeiah, Amariah and Secheniah in the cytyes of the priestes of theyr fydelyte, to geue to their brethren theyr porcyons, as well to the small as to the great.
2 Chronicles 31:16 And to the males also that were rekened from thre yeare and aboue amonge all that went into the house of the Lord day by day, to do seruice and to wayte by course.
2 Chronicles 31:17 And to the pryestes that were rekened in the housholdes of their fathers from twentye yeare and aboue, to wayte when theyr courses came.
2 Chronicles 31:18 And to them that were rekened thorow oute all theyr babes, wiues, sonnes and doughters thorow oute all the congregacyon. For to the fydelytye of them dyd men commit their sanctyfyed gyftes.
2 Chronicles 31:19 And thereto amonge the chyldren of Aaron the pryestes were men named by name in the feldes of the suburbes of all their cytyes, cytye by cytye, for to geue porcions to all the males of the priestes, and to all that were rekened amonge the Leuites.
2 Chronicles 31:20 And of this maner dyd Hezekiah thorow out all Iuda, and dyd that was good, ryght and trueth, before the Lorde hys God.
2 Chronicles 31:21 And in all the worckes that he beganne in the seruyce of the house of God, to seke hys God after the lawe and commaundemente, that dyd he wyth all his herte, and prospered.

CHAPTER: 32

2 Chronicles 32:1 After these deades & trueth Sennaherib kynge of Assur came and entred into Iuda and pitched against the stronge cytyes, and thought to drawe them to hym.
2 Chronicles 32:2 And when Hezekiah sawe the Sennaherib was come, and that he was purposed to fyght agaynst Ierusalem:
2 Chronicles 32:3 he toke councell with hys capitaynes & men of might, to stoppe the water of the fountaynes that were wythout the cytye: & they were content to helpe hym.
2 Chronicles 32:4 And so there gathered muche people together and stopte al the welles and the broke that ranne thorow the middes of the lande, entendynge that the kynges of Assur shoulde not fynde much water when they came?
2 Chronicles 32:5 And he wente to lustelye & buylt vp the walle where it was broken, and made toures aboue vpon, and yet another wall wythout, and repayred Melo the cytye of Dauid, and made many dartes & shyldes.
2 Chronicles 32:6 And he sete Capitaynes of warre ouer the people and geathered them to geather into the large strete of the gate of the citie & spake ientelye to them, saying.
2 Chronicles 32:7 Plucke vp youre hertes and be stronge. Be not afrayed or in any wyse discouraged for dreade of the kyng of Assur, and of the great multitude that is with hym: for there is one greater with vs then with him.
2 Chronicles 32:8 With him is an arme of flesh: But with vs is the Lorde oure God for to helpe vs and to fyght oure batayles. And the people were well couraged with the wordes of Hezekiah kynge of Iuda.
2 Chronicles 32:9 After that Sennaherib kynge of Assur sent of his seruauntes to Ierusalem (he hym self liinge before Lachis & all hys kyngdom with hym) vnto Hezekiah kyng of Iuda & vnto all Iuda that were at Ierusalem sayinge.
2 Chronicles 32:10 Thus sayth Sennaherib kynge of Assur: where in do ye trust, O ye that are be seged in Ierusalem?
2 Chronicles 32:11 Hezekiah deceyueth you, to delyuer you to deeth, hongre, & thrust, sayng: the Lord oure God shall rydde vs out of the hande of the kynge of Assur.
2 Chronicles 32:12 Is yt not that Hezekiah that put downe his hylaulters and his other aulters, and commaunded Iuda and Ierusalem sayinge: before one aulter ye shall bowe your selues and vpon that offer also.
2 Chronicles 32:13 More ouer haue ye not hearde what I and my fathers haue done vnto the people of all landes? were the Gods of the people of other landes able to saue theyre landes out of my hand?
2 Chronicles 32:14 which of all the Gods of those nacyons that my fathers destroyed was yt, that could delyuer his people out of myne hande, that youre God should be able to deliuer you out of myne hande?
2 Chronicles 32:15 Wherfore now lett not Hezekiah deceyue you ether perswade you of thys fashyon, nor yet beleue hym. For as no God amonge so manye nacyons and kyngdomes, was able to rydde hys people out of myne hande & the hande of my fathers: euen so moche lesse shall youre God kepe you oute of myne hande.
2 Chronicles 32:16 And yet moare dyd his seruauntes speake agaynst the Lorde God and agaynst his seruaunt Hezekiah.
2 Chronicles 32:17 And therto he wrote a letter to raile on the Lorde God of Israel & spake therin sayinge: as the Gods of the nacyons of other landes haue not delyuered theyr people out of myne hande, no moare shall the God of Hezekiah delyuer hys people out of myne hande.
2 Chronicles 32:18 And they cryed wyth a lowde voyce in the iewes speache vnto the people of Ierusalem that were on the walles to feare them and to dysmaye them, that they myght haue taken the cytye.
2 Chronicles 32:19 And they spake agaynst the God of Ierusalem, as agaynst the Gods of the nacyons of the erth, whyche are the worcke of the handes of men.
2 Chronicles 32:20 But Hezekiah the kynge and the prophete Isaiah sonne of Amoz prayed concernynge that thynge and cryed vp to heauen.
2 Chronicles 32:21 And the Lorde sent an angell & destroyed all the men of warre and the Lordes & capitaynes of the hoste of the kyng of Assur, that he turned hys face wyth shame towarde hys owne lande. And when he was come into the house of his God, he was there ouerthrowen wyth the swerde euen by them that issued oute of hys bowelles.
2 Chronicles 32:22 And so the Lorde saued Hezekiah and the enhabyters at Ierusalem oute of the handes of Sennaherib kynge of Assur and of all other, and mayntained them on all sydes.
2 Chronicles 32:23 In so muche that many brought presentes vnto the Lorde to Ierusalem and precyouse gyftes to Hezekiah kynge of Iuda: so that he was magnifyed in the sight of al nacyons from thence forth.
2 Chronicles 32:24 In those dayes Hezekiah was sycke vnto the deeth and besought the Lorde: whiche answered him and shewed hym a wonderful miracle:
2 Chronicles 32:25 But Hezekiah dyd not according to the curtesy shewed him, for his hert arose: & therfore came there wrath vpon him & vpon Iuda and Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 32:26 Not withstanding Hezekiah mekened him selfe for that a rysing of hys herte, both he and the enhabyters of Ierusalem. Wherfore the wrath of the Lord fel not vpon them in the dayes of Hezekiah.
2 Chronicles 32:27 And Hezekiah had exceadinge muche rychesse & honoure. And he gathered him treasure of syluer, golde, precyouse stones, spyces, shildes & of al maner pleasaunt Iuelles:
2 Chronicles 32:28 & made store houses for the fruites of corne, wyne & oyle: & stables for all maner of beastes, and foldes for shepe.
2 Chronicles 32:29 And he made hym tounes, because he had catel of shepe & oxen great aboundaunce. For God had geuen him substaunce exceadyng muche.
2 Chronicles 32:30 And the sayde Hezekiah stopped the vpper water sprynges of Gihon & brought them doune to the West syde of the cytye of Dauid. And Hezekiah prospered in al hys worckes.
2 Chronicles 32:31 But when the Ambassadoures of the Lordes of Babylon were sent to hym to enquyre of the wondre that chaunsed in the land, God lefte hym: to tempte hym, that all that was in hys herte myght be knowen.
2 Chronicles 32:32 The rest of the dedes of Hezekiah and hys goodnesse are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophete the sonne of Amoz in the boke of the kynges of Iuda and Israell.
2 Chronicles 32:33 And then Hezekiah layde hym to reste wyth hys fathers: and they buryed hym in the hyeste sepulchre of the sonnes of Dauid: and Iuda and the enhabiters of Ierusalem dyd him worshippe at his deeth. And Manasseh his sonne raigned in his steade.

CHAPTER: 33

2 Chronicles 33:1 Manasseh was .xij. yere olde when he was made kinge, & raigned .lv. yeare in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 33:2 And he dyd wickedlye in the syght of the Lord, lyke vnto the abhominacions of the heathen, whiche the Lorde caste out before the chyldren of Israell.
2 Chronicles 33:3 For he went to and buylt agayne the hylaulters, which Hezekiah his father had broken downe. And he rered vp aulters vnto Baals & made groues & bowed him selfe vnto all the host of heauen and serued them.
2 Chronicles 33:4 And he buylt aulters in the house of the Lorde: Of which the Lorde had sayde in Ierusalem shall my name be for euer.
2 Chronicles 33:5 And he made aulters vnto all the hoste of heauen in the two courtes of the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 33:6 And he burnt his chyldren in fyre in the valey of the sonnes of Hennon. And he obserued dysmalle dayes & occupyed wytch crafte and sorsery, and mayntened workers with spirites & fears of fortunes: & wrought moche euell in the syght of the Lorde, to angre hym wyth all.
2 Chronicles 33:7 And he put the kerued Image of an Idole which he had made, in the house of God. Of which house God sayde to Dauid and to Salomon his sonne, in this house here in Ierusalem which I haue chosen out of all the tribes, I wyll put my name for euer,
2 Chronicles 33:8 and no moare brynge the seat of Israel from of the lande whiche I haue ordeyned for youre fathers. If so be they shalbe dyligent to do all I haue commaunded by Moses in all the lawe ordinaunces and maners.
2 Chronicles 33:9 But Manasseh made Iuda and the enhabiters of Ierusalem to erre and to do worse then the heathen whiche the Lorde destroyed before the chyldren of Israel.
2 Chronicles 33:10 And when the Lorde speake to Manasseh and to hys people, they attended not to hym.
2 Chronicles 33:11 Wherfore the Lorde brought vpon them the Capitaynes of the hoste of the Kynge of Assur, which toke Manasseh in an holde and bounde him with chaynes & caryed hym to Babylon.
2 Chronicles 33:12 And when he was in trybulacyon he besonght the Lorde his God, & humbled hym selfe exceadynglye before the God of hys fathers,
2 Chronicles 33:13 & made intercessyon to hym: and he was entreated of hym and hearde hys prayer and brought hym agayne to Ierusalem into hys kyngdom. And then Manasseh knewe how that the Lorde was the very God.
2 Chronicles 33:14 After that he buylt a wall without the cytye of Dauid on the west syde of Gihon in the broke & so forth to fysh gate & rounde aboute Ophel & brougt it vp of very a great heyght, & put capitaynes of warre in all the stronge cities of Iuda.
2 Chronicles 33:15 And he toke awaye straunge Gods & the Idole out of the house of God, & all the aulters that he had buylt in the mount of the house of God & in Ierusalem, & cast them out of the cytie.
2 Chronicles 33:16 And he made an aulter vnto the Lord & sacrefyced theron peace offerynges & thankofferynges, and charged Iuda to serue the Lorde God of Israel.
2 Chronicles 33:17 Neuerthelesse the people dyd offer styll in the hylaulters, how be it vnto the Lorde theyr God onlye.
2 Chronicles 33:18 The rest of the actes of Manasseh and his prayer vnto his God, & the wordes of the sears of vysions that spake to hym in the name of the Lorde God of Israel, are written amonge the deades of the kynges of Israel.
2 Chronicles 33:19 And his prayer & how that he was hearde, & all his synne & trespace, and the places where he made hylaulters and set vp groues & kerued Images before he was mekened, are written amonge the deades of the sears of visyons.
2 Chronicles 33:20 And when Manasseh was layd to rest with his fathers they buryed him in his owne house: & Amon his sonne raygned in his roume.
2 Chronicles 33:21 Amon was .xxij. yeare olde, when he baganne to raygne, and raygned two yere in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 33:22 And he dyd that displeased the Lord lyke vnto Manasseh his father, for Amon sacrificed to all the kerued Images, which Manasseh hys father made, and serued them,
2 Chronicles 33:23 & mekened not him selfe before the Lorde as Manasseh hys father had mekened him selfe: But Amon trespaced greatly.
2 Chronicles 33:24 Wherfore hys owne seruauntes conspired against him and slue him in his owne house.
2 Chronicles 33:25 And the people of the land slue all that he conspyred agaynst kynge Amon. And therto the people of the lande made Iosiah his sonne kyng in hys roume.

CHAPTER: 34

2 Chronicles 34:1 Iosiah was made Kyng when he was .viij. yere olde, and he raigned in Ierusalem .xxxi. yere.
2 Chronicles 34:2 And he dyd that pleased the Lord, & walked in the wayes of Dauid his father bowing netherto the right hande or to the lefte.
2 Chronicles 34:3 In so much that the eight yeare of hys raygne, when he was yet a lad, he beganne to seke after the God of Dauid hys father. And in the twelueth yeare he beganne to pourge Iuda and Ierusalem of hylaulters, groues, kerued Images, & Images of metal:
2 Chronicles 34:4 so that they brake doune the aulters of Baals euen in his presence, and the ydoles that were vpon them, he caused to be destroyed. And the groues, kerued Images, & Images of metall he brake and made dust of them, and strawed it vpon the graues of them that had offered to them.
2 Chronicles 34:5 And he burnt the bones of the priestes vpon the aulters, & clensed Iuda and Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 34:6 And euen so dyd he in the cyties of Manasseh. Ephraim, Simeon & of Nephthali therto. And in the wyldernesses of them roundabout
2 Chronicles 34:7 he plucked a sondre the aulers & the groues and dyd beate them and stampe them to poudre, & bete doune the ydoles thorowout all the lande of Israell: & then returned to Ierusalem agayne.
2 Chronicles 34:8 And in the .xviij. yeare of his raigne when he had purged the land & the temple, he sente Saphan the sonne of Azaliah, & Maasiah the gouernoure of the cytye and Ioah the sonne Ioahaz the recorder, to repayre the house of the Lorde his God.
2 Chronicles 34:9 And when they came to Helkiah the hye priest, men deliuered them the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Leuites that kept the enteries had gathered of the handes of Manasseh & Ephraim & of all that yet remayned in Israel & of all Iuda & Beniamin & of the enhabiters of Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 34:10 And they put it in the handes of the worckmen that had the ouersyght of the house of the Lorde, whiche gaue yt to the labourers that wrought on the house of the Lord, to repayre & mende it,
2 Chronicles 34:11 and to masons and carpenters to bye hewed stone & timbre for to make couples and beames for the houses whiche the kynges of Iuda had destroyed:
2 Chronicles 34:12 And the men wrought in the worke of fidelite. And the ouer seares of them to courage them forwarde, were Iahath & Obadiah Leuites of the chyldren of Merari: and Secharia and Mesulam of the children of the Cahathites, and as manye other of the Leuites as coulde skille of instrumentes of Musick.
2 Chronicles 34:13 And ouer the bearers of burthens & ouer all that wrought, in what soeuer worckeman shipe it were, wete there scribes, officers and porters of the Leuites.
2 Chronicles 34:14 And as they brought out the money that was brought into the house, Helkiah the preaste founde the boke of the lawe of the Lord geuen by Moses.
2 Chronicles 34:15 And Helkiah answered and sayd to Saphan the scrybe: I haue founde the boke of the law in the house of the Lorde, and gaue the boke to Saphan.
2 Chronicles 34:16 And Saphan caryed the boke to the kynge, and brought the kynge worde agayne, saying: all that was committed to thy seruauntes, that do they.
2 Chronicles 34:17 And they haue powred out the money that was founde in the house of the Lorde and haue delyuered in to the handes of the ouer seares of the worckemen.
2 Chronicles 34:18 And then Saphan the scribe shewed the kyng, sayinge: Helkiah the preaste hath geuen me a boke, and he read it before the kynge.
2 Chronicles 34:19 And when the kyng had hearde the wordes of the lawe, he tare his clothes:
2 Chronicles 34:20 & commaunded Helkiah and Ahikam the sonne of Saphan and Abadon the sonne of Micah & the sayde Saphan the scribe & Asaia a seruaunt of the kynges, saying:
2 Chronicles 34:21 go & enquire of the Lorde for me and for them that are lefte in Israel and Iuda, concernyng the wordes of the boke that is founde. For great is the wrath of the Lord that is fallen vpon vs, because oure fathers kept not the worde of the Lorde, to do after all that is written in this boke.
2 Chronicles 34:22 And Helkiah with them that pertayned to the Kynge went to Holdah a prophetisse wyfe of Selum the sonne of Thekohath the sonne of Hasarah keper of the wardrope (which prophetisse dwelt in Ierusalem in the seconde warde) & they comuned so wt her.
2 Chronicles 34:23 And she sayde vnto them: thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel, tell ye the man that sent you to me.
2 Chronicles 34:24 Euen thus sayth the Lorde: se, I will brynge euell vpon this place and vpon the enhabiters therof, euen all the cursses that are written in the boke which they haue reade before the kyng of Iuda,
2 Chronicles 34:25 because they haue forsaken me and haue offered vnto other Gods to angre me with all maner worckes of theyre handes, therfore is my wrath set on fyre agaynst thys place & shall not be quenched.
2 Chronicles 34:26 And as for the kynge of Iuda whiche sent you to enquire of the Lorde, so shall ye saye vnto him, thus sayth the Lord God of Israel concernyng the wordes which thou hast hearde
2 Chronicles 34:27 Because thyne hert dyd melt & thou dydest meke thy selfe before God, when thou heardest his wordes agaynst this place and agaynste the enhabiters therof: & humbledest thy selfe before me, and tarest thy clothes and wepest before me, that haue I hearde also sayth the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 34:28 Beholde I will take the to thy fathers & thou shalt be put in thy graue in peace, and thyne eyes shall not se all the myscheue that I will bryng vpon this place & vpon the enhabyters of the same. And they brought the kynge worde agayne.
2 Chronicles 34:29 Then the Kynge sent & geathered to geather all the elders of Iuda & Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 34:30 And the kyng went vp in to the house of the Lorde, & all the men of Iuda and the enhabiters of Ierusalem & the Preastes & Leuites and all the people great and smalle: and reade all the wordes of the boke of the couenaunt that was founde in the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 34:31 And the kynge stode at hys standynge & made a couenaunt before the Lorde, to folowe the Lord and to kepe his commaundementes, his wytnesse and his statutes with al his herte and with all hys soule & to fulfyl the wordes of the appoyntment wrytten in the sayde boke.
2 Chronicles 34:32 And he made to come forth all that were founde in Ierusalem and Beniamin, and the enhabyters of Ierusalem promesed to kepe the couenaunt of that God whiche was the God of theyr fathers.
2 Chronicles 34:33 And Iosiah put away all maner of abhominacyons out of all landes that pertayned to the chyldren of Israel, and brought all that were founde in Israel to serue the Lorde theyr God. And they turned not a syde from after the Lorde God of theyr fathers as longe as he lyued.

CHAPTER: 35

2 Chronicles 35:1 And Iosiah helde the feast of passeouer vnto the Lorde in Ierusalem, and they slue passeouer in the .xiiij. daye of the fyrst moneth.
2 Chronicles 35:2 And he set the preastes in theyr offyces and ayded them in the seruyce of the house of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 35:3 And he sayde to the Leuites that taught thorow out all Israell and were sanctifyed vnto the Lorde: put the holy arcke in the house which Salomon the sonne of Dauid Kynge of Israel dyd builde, ye neade not to beare it vpon youre shoulders. Wherfore now serue the Lorde youre God and his people Israel.
2 Chronicles 35:4 And prepare youre selues by youre auncient housholdes and companyes, accordyng to the wrytyng of Dauid Kynge of Israel, & the wrytynge of Salomon his sonne.
2 Chronicles 35:5 And stande in the holy place accordyng to the deuysions of the auncient houshouldes of youre brethren the chyldren of the people, and after the deuysyon of the auncient housholdes of the Leuites,
2 Chronicles 35:6 and kyll passouer sanctifye and prepare youre brethren that they may do accordynge to the worde of the Lord by the hand of Moses.
2 Chronicles 35:7 And Iosiah gaue to the comen people in lambes and kyddes, for passe ouer offeringes onlye, vnto all that were present .xxx. thousande by tale, & thre thousande oxen, euen of the kynges substaunce.
2 Chronicles 35:8 And his Lordes gaue wyllynglye both vnto the people & also vnto the preastes & vnto the Leuites. Helkiah, Zachariah & Iehiel, rulers of the house of God, gaue vnto the preastes for passeouerofferynges two thousand & syxe hundred lambes & kyddes, and thre hundred oxen.
2 Chronicles 35:9 And Conaniah with semeiah & Nathaneel his brethren, and Hasabiah and Iaiel & Iosabad Lordes of the Leuites, gaue vnto the Leuites fyue thousadde passeouer offerynge, and fyue hundred oxen.
2 Chronicles 35:10 And so the seruice went forwarde, and the preastes stode in theyr places, & the Leuites in theyr companies at the kynges commaundement.
2 Chronicles 35:11 And they slue passeouer: & the preastes sprinckled the bloude receyuynge it of the Leuites, and the Leuites stripte the beastes.
2 Chronicles 35:12 And they fett awaye the burntofferynges, to geue them vnto the comen people as they were deuyded by auncient houses, for to offer vnto the Lord, lyke as it is wrytten in the boke of Moses. And so dyd they with the oxen to.
2 Chronicles 35:13 And they dressed the passeouer with fyre as the maner was. But the other halowed dedycat beastes they sodde in pottes, caulderns & pannes & deuyded them quycklye amonge all the comen people.
2 Chronicles 35:14 And afterwarde they made readye for them selues and for the preastes and for the chyldren of Aaron, which were busied in offerynge of burntofferynges and the fatt vntyll nyght. And therfore the Leuites prepared for them selues and for the preastes the sonnes of Aaron.
2 Chronicles 35:15 And the syngers the chyldren of Asaph stode in theyr standyng accordyng to the commaundement of Dauid and Asaph, Heman and Iduthun the kynges sear of visions: and the porters wayted at euery gate, and might not departe from theyr seruyce: But theyr brethren the Leuites prepared for them.
2 Chronicles 35:16 And so all the seruyce of the Lorde went forwarde the sayde daye, in offerynge passeouer of burntofferynges vpon the aulter of the Lorde, accordyng to the commaundement of kynge Iosiah.
2 Chronicles 35:17 And so the chyldren of Israel that coulde be founde, offered passeouer the same tyme & kepte the feast of swete breade seuen dayes.
2 Chronicles 35:18 And ther was no passeouer lyke to that, kept in Israel from the tyme of Samuel the prophete nether dyd anye of the kynges of Israel holde soche a passeouer feast as dyd Iosiah and the preastes and Leuites and all Iuda, and as moche of Israel as coulde be had, and the enhabiters of Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 35:19 And this passeouer was holden in the .xviij. yere of the raygne of Iosiah.
2 Chronicles 35:20 After all this, when Iosiah had finisshed the temple, Necho kyng of Egypt came vp to fight agaynst Carcamis vpon Euphrates, and Iosiah went out agaynst him.
2 Chronicles 35:21 And the other sent messengers to hym, sayinge: what haue I to do with the thou kyng of Iuda? I came not agaynst the nowe at this tyme, but agaynste an house with whom I haue warre, & God bade me haste. Leaue of therfore and medle not with God which is with me, least he destroye the.
2 Chronicles 35:22 Neuerthelesse Iosiah turned not his face from him, but made hym readye to fyght wyth him, and herkened not vnto the wordes of Necho out of the mouth of God. And when he was come to fyght in the valeye of Magedo,
2 Chronicles 35:23 the shoters shotte agaynste the kyng Iosiah. And the king sayd to his seruauntes: carie me away, for I am sore hurte.
2 Chronicles 35:24 And his seruauntes had him oute of the charet and put him in another, and brought him to Ierusalem where he dyed & was buried in the sepulchre of his fathers. And al Iuda & Ierusalem mourned for Iosiah.
2 Chronicles 35:25 And Ieremiah lamented Iosiah, and all syngynge men and singing wemen speake of Iosiah to this day, & made it an ordinaunce in Israell: and they be written in lamentacions.
2 Chronicles 35:26 The rest of the actes of Iosiah and his goodnes in folowinge the wryting of the law,
2 Chronicles 35:27 & his deades fyrste & last are written in the boke of the kynges of Israel and Iuda.

CHAPTER: 36

2 Chronicles 36:1 And the people of the land toke Iehoahaz the sonne of Iosiah & made hym kynge for hys father in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 36:2 And Iehoahaz was .xxiij. yeare olde, when he began to raigne, & he raygned thre monethes in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 36:3 For the kynge of Egypte put him doune at Ierusalem and merced the lande in an hundred talentes of syluer and a talent of gold.
2 Chronicles 36:4 And the kyng of Egypt made Eliakim his brother kyng vpon Iuda & Ierusalem, and turned hys name vnto Iehoakim, but Iehoaha; his brother Necho toke & caried hym to Egypte.
2 Chronicles 36:5 And Iehoakim was .xxv. yeare olde when he began to raigne, & he raigned a .xi. yeare in Ierusalem: & he dyd that displeased the Lorde his God.
2 Chronicles 36:6 Againste hym came Nabuchodonozor kynge of Babilon & bounde him in fetters to carye him to Babilon.
2 Chronicles 36:7 Therto the kynge Nabuchodonozor caried the vessels of the house of the Lord to Babilon and put them in hys temple at Babilon.
2 Chronicles 36:8 The rest of the actes of Iehoakim & hys Abhominacions, & that was layde to his charge are wrytten in the boke of the Kinges of Israel: and Iehoacin hys sonne raigned in hys steade.
2 Chronicles 36:9 Iehoacin was .viij. yeare olde when he beganne to raygne, and he raygned thre monethes and ten dayes in Ierusalem: and dyd that displeased the Lord.
2 Chronicles 36:10 And when the yere was out, kynge Nabuchodonozor sent & fet him to Babilon with the goodlye vessels of the house of the Lord, & made Zebekiah his brother kynge ouer Iuda and Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 36:11 And Zedekiah was .xxi. yere olde when he beganne to raigne, & raigned a .xi. yere in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 36:12 And he dyd that displeased the Lord his God, & humbled not him selfe before Ieremiah the prophete at the mouth of the Lorde.
2 Chronicles 36:13 And therto he rebelled agaynst Nabuchodonozor which had receyued on othe of hym by God, & was to styfenecked & to harde herted to turne vnto the Lord God of Israel.
2 Chronicles 36:14 Therto all the rulers of the preastes with the people trespaced a pace after all maner of abhomynacyons of the hethen & poluted the house of the Lorde which he had halowed in Ierusalem.
2 Chronicles 36:15 And the Lord God of theyr fathers sent to them by his messengers, sendynge them be tymes: for he had compassyon on hys people & on his dwellynge place.
2 Chronicles 36:16 But they mocked the messengers of God & despised theyr wordes & mysse vsed his prophetes, vntyll the wrath of the Lord so arose agaynst hys people that it was past remeadie.
2 Chronicles 36:17 And so he brought vpon them the kyng of Caldeye & slue theyr young men with the swerde in theyr holy temple, & nether spared younge man nor mayden, nether olde man, nether so moche as hym that stowped for age: But gaue all into his hande.
2 Chronicles 36:18 And all the vessels of the house of God bothe great and smalle, & the treasures of the house of God, & the treasures of the kynge & hys Lordes he caryed to Babilon euery with.
2 Chronicles 36:19 And they burnt the house of God and brake downe the walles of Ierusalem, and burnt all the palaces therof with fyre with all the goodly stoffe therof, and marred it.
2 Chronicles 36:20 And he caryed awaye them that had escaped the swerde, to Babilon, where they were seruauntes to him and his chyldren, vntill the kyngdome of Persia beganne to rule,
2 Chronicles 36:21 to fullfyll the worde of the Lorde by the mouthe of Ieremiah, vntyll the lande had her pleasure of her Sabothes: for as longe as she laye desolate, she kepte Saboth vntyll she had fullfylled .lxx. yeres.
2 Chronicles 36:22 And the fyrst yere of Cyrus kynge of Persia to fynishe the worde of the Lorde by the mouth of Ieremiah, the Lorde stered vp the spirite of Cyrus kyng of Persia that he made a proclamacion thorouout all his kyngdom, and therto sett it vp in wrytynge, sayinge.
2 Chronicles 36:23 Thus sayth Cyrus kynge of Persia, all the kyngdomes of the earthe hath the Lorde God of heauen geuen me, whiche hath charged me to buylde hym an house in Ierusalem that is in the lande of Iuda. Wherfore whosoeuer is amonge you of all his people, the Lord his God be with hym, & let hym go vp.

BOOK: Ezra

CHAPTER: 1

Ezra 1:1 In the fyrste yeare of Cyrus king of Persia (that the word of the lord spoken by the mouth of Ieremy mighte be fulfylled) the Lord stered vp the sprete of Cyrus kynge of Persia, that he caused it be proclamed thorowout al his empyre, ye and by wrytinge also, saying:
Ezra 1:2 Thus sayth Cyrus the king of Persia: The Lord God of heauen hath geuen me al the kingdomes in the land & hath commaunded me to buylde him an house at Ierusalem in Iuda.
Ezra 1:3 Whosoeuer now amonge you is of hys people, the Lord his God be with him, & let him go vp to Ierusalem in Iuda, and buylde the house of the Lorde God of Israell. He is the God that is at Ierusalem.
Ezra 1:4 And whosoeuer remayneth yet in any maner of a place (where he is a straunger) let the men of hys place helpe him with syluer & golde, wt good & cattel, beside that which they willingly offer, for the house of God at Ierusalem.
Ezra 1:5 Then gat vp the principal fathers of Iuda and Ben Iamin, & the priestes and Leuites, and all they whose sprete God had raysed to go vp, and to buylde the house of the Lord at Ierusalem.
Ezra 1:6 And al they that were aboute them, strengthed their hand with vessels of syluer and golde, with good & catel, and Iewels, besyde that whiche they gaue of their owne frewyll.
Ezra 1:7 And Kynge Cyrus broughte forth of the vessels of the house of the Lorde, whiche Nabuchodonozor had taken oute of Ierusalem, and put in the house of his God.
Ezra 1:8 But Cyrus the kynge of Persia brought them forth by Mithridates the treasurer, & numbred them vnto Selbazar the prynce of Iuda.
Ezra 1:9 And this is the numbre of them: thyrtye basens of gold, and a thousand basens of siluer, and nine and twenty knyues,
Ezra 1:10 thyrty cuppes of gold, and of other syluer cuppes foure hundred and ten, and of other vessels a thousande.
Ezra 1:11 So that all the vessels both of golde and syluer, were fyue thousand & foure hundred. Sesbazar brought them all vp, with them that came vp out of the captiuite of Babilon vnto Ierusalem.

CHAPTER: 2

Ezra 2:1 These are the children of the land that went vp oute of the captyuite (whom Nabuchodonozor the kynge of Babylon had caryed awaye vnto Babilon) and came again vnto Ierusalem and into Iuda, euery one vnto hys cyty,
Ezra 2:2 and came with Zorobabel Iesua, Nehemiah, Saraiah, Raelaiah, Mardochai, Belfan, Mesphar, Begauai, Rehum, and Baanah. This is now the nombre of the men of the people of Israel.
Ezra 2:3 The children of Phares, two thousande, an hundred, and two and seuenty:
Ezra 2:4 the chyldren of Saphatiah thre hundred and two and seuenty:
Ezra 2:5 the children of Arath, seuen hundred and fyue and seuenty:
Ezra 2:6 the children of Pahath Moab amonge the chyldren of Iesua Ioab, two thousand eyght hundred and twelue:
Ezra 2:7 the children of Elam, a thousande, two hundred and foure and fyfty:
Ezra 2:8 the chyldren of Zethua, nyne hundred, and fyue and fourtye:
Ezra 2:9 the chyldren of Sacai, seuen hundred and thre skore:
Ezra 2:10 the children of Bani, syxe hundred & two and fourty:
Ezra 2:11 the chyldren of Bebai, syxe hundred and thre and twenty:
Ezra 2:12 the chyldren of Asgad, a thousande two hundred & two and twenty:
Ezra 2:13 the children of Adonicam, syxe hundred & syxe & syxtye:
Ezra 2:14 the children of Beguai, two thousand and syxe and fyftye:
Ezra 2:15 the children of Adin, foure hundred & foure and fiftye:
Ezra 2:16 the children of Ater of Hezekiah, eight and nyntye:
Ezra 2:17 the chyldren of Bezai, thre hundred and thre and twenty:
Ezra 2:18 the children of Iorath, an hundred and twelue:
Ezra 2:19 the chyldren of Hasum, two hundred and thre & twentye:
Ezra 2:20 the chyldren of Gebar, fiue and nynety:
Ezra 2:21 the chyldren of Bethlehem, an hundred and thre & twenty:
Ezra 2:22 the men of Netopha, syxe and fyfty:
Ezra 2:23 the men of Anathoth, an hundred, and eight and twenty:
Ezra 2:24 the chyldren of Asmaueth, two and fourty:
Ezra 2:25 the children of Kariath Iarim, Cephirah & Beeroth, seuen hundred and thre and fourty:
Ezra 2:26 the chyldren of Ramah and Gabaah, syxe hundred and one & twenty:
Ezra 2:27 the men of Michmas, an hundred and two and twenty:
Ezra 2:28 the men of Bethel and Ai, two hundred and thre and twentye:
Ezra 2:29 the chyldren of Nebo, two and fyfty:
Ezra 2:30 the chyldren of Magbis, an hundred and syxe and fyfty:
Ezra 2:31 the chyldren of the other Elam, a thousande, two hundred and foure and fyfty:
Ezra 2:32 the children of Harim, thre hundred and twenty:
Ezra 2:33 the chyldren of Lodhadid and Ono, seuen hundred and fyue and twenty:
Ezra 2:34 the children of Iericho, thre hundred and fyue and fourtye:
Ezra 2:35 the chyldren of Senaah, thre thousande, syxe hundred and thyrtye.
Ezra 2:36 The pryestes. The chyldren of Iedaiah of the house of Iesua, nyne hundred and thre & seuenty:
Ezra 2:37 the chyldren of Emer, a thousand, & two and fifty:
Ezra 2:38 the children of Phashur, a thousande and two hundred, and seuen and fourty:
Ezra 2:39 the chyldren of Harim, a thousande and seuentene.
Ezra 2:40 The Leuites. The chyldren of Iesua and Cadmiel of the chyldren of Hodaniah, foure and seuenty.
Ezra 2:41 The syngers, the chyldren of Asaph, an hundred & eyght & twenty.
Ezra 2:42 The children of the dorekepers. The chyldren of Selum, the children of Ater, the chyldren of Talmon, the chyldren of Akub, the chyldren of Hatita, and the chyldren of Sobai: alltogether an hundred and nyne and thyrtye.
Ezra 2:43 The Nethinims, the chyldren of Ziba, the children of Hasupha, the chyldren of Tabaoth,
Ezra 2:44 the chyldren of Ceros, the children of Sicha, the children of Phadon,
Ezra 2:45 the chyldren of Lebanah, the chyldren of Hagabah, the chyldren of Acub,
Ezra 2:46 the children of Hagab, the children of Samlai, the children of Hanan,
Ezra 2:47 the chyldren of Gadel, the chyldren of Gahar, the chyldren of Reaiah,
Ezra 2:48 the chyldren of Razin, the chyldren of Necuba, the children of Gazan,
Ezra 2:49 the children of Osa, the chyldren of Phasseah, the chyldren of Bessai,
Ezra 2:50 the children of Asena, the chyldren of Meunim, the chyldren of Nephussim,
Ezra 2:51 the chyldren of Bacbuc, the children of Hacupha, the chyldren of Harbur,
Ezra 2:52 the chyldren of Bezelut, the chyldren of Mahira, the chyldren of Harsa,
Ezra 2:53 the children of Barcom, the chyldren of Sisara, the chyldren of Thamah,
Ezra 2:54 the chyldren of Nezian, the chyldren of Hatipha.
Ezra 2:55 The chyldren of Salomons seruauntes. The chyldren of Sotai, the chyldren of Sophereth, the chyldren of Pharuda,
Ezra 2:56 the children of Iaalah, the chyldren of Darcon, the children of Gedel,
Ezra 2:57 the children of Saphatiah, the children of Hattil, the chyldren of Pochereth of Zebalui, the children of Ami.
Ezra 2:58 Al the Nethinims and the chyldren of Salomons seruauntes were alltogether, thre hundred and two and nyntye.
Ezra 2:59 And these went vp also, Thelmelah, Thel Harsa, Cherub, Adon and Enier. But they could not shewe their fathers house nor theyr sede, whether they were of Israel.
Ezra 2:60 The chyldren of Dalaiah, the chyldren of Tobiah, the chyldren of Necoda, syxe hundred and two & fyfty.
Ezra 2:61 And of the children of the priestes. The chyldren of Hobaiah, the chyldren of Hakoz, the chyldren of Berzilai, whyche toke one of the doughters of Berzilai the Galaadite to wyfe, and was counted amonge the same names:
Ezra 2:62 these soughte the register of their byrth, and founde none, therfore were they put from the priesthode.
Ezra 2:63 And Hathirsatha sayde vnto them, that they shoulde not eate of the moste holy, til there rose vp a pryest with the light and perfectnesse.
Ezra 2:64 The whole congregacion as one man, was two and fourty thousande, thre hundred and thre skore:
Ezra 2:65 besyde their seruauntes and maydens, of whome there were seuen thousande thre hundred & seuen and thirtye. And they had two hundred syngyng men and wemen,
Ezra 2:66 seuen hundred and syxe and thyrtye horses, two hundred and fyue and fourtye Mules,
Ezra 2:67 foure hundred and fyue & thirtye Camels, & syxe thousand, seuen hundred & twentie Asses.
Ezra 2:68 And certayne of the chefe fathers, when they came to the house of the Lorde at Ierusalem, they offered wyllyngly vnto the house of God, that it shoulde be set in his place,
Ezra 2:69 and gaue after their abylyte vnto the treasure of the worcke, one and threskore thousand drammes, and fyue thousande pounde of syluer and an hundred pryestes garmentes.
Ezra 2:70 So the pryestes and the Leuites, and certayne of the people and the syngers, and the porters, and the Nethinims dwelt in their cities, and all Israell in their cyties.

CHAPTER: 3

Ezra 3:1 And when the seuenth monethe came, & the chyldren of Israell were nowe in their cytyes, the people came together euen as one man, vnto Ierusalem.
Ezra 3:2 And there stode vp Iesua the sonne of Iosedec and his brethren the priestes, & Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel & hys brethren, and buylded the aulter of the God of Israell, to offre burntofferynges theron, as it is wrytten in the law of Moses the man of God,
Ezra 3:3 & the aulter set they vpon hys sockettes (for there was a fearfulnes amonge them because of the nacions and landes) and offered burntofferynges theron vnto the Lorde in the mornyng and at euen.
Ezra 3:4 And helde the feaste of Tabernacles, as it is wrytten, and offered burntsacryfyces dayly in order, according to the custome, day by daye.
Ezra 3:5 Afterwarde the daylie burntofferinges also, and of the newe mones and of all the feaste dayes of the Lorde that were halowed, and al maner of frewyl offerynges, whych they did of their owne frewyll vnto the Lorde.
Ezra 3:6 Vpon the fyrst day of the seuenth moneth beganne they to offre burntsacryfyces vnto the Lorde. But the foundacyon of the temple of the Lorde was not yet layed.
Ezra 3:7 Neuertheles they gaue money vnto the masons and carpenters, and meate and dryncke and oyle vnto them of Zidon and of Tire, to brynge them Cedre tymbre from Libanus by Sea vnto Ioppa, accordynge to the commaundement of Cyrus the kynge of Persia.
Ezra 3:8 In the seconde yeare of their commynge vnto the house of God at Ierusalem in the seconde moneth, beganne Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of Iosedec, & the remnaunt of their brethren the pryestes and Leuites, and al they that were come oute of the captyuyte vnto Ierusalem, & appoynted the Leuites from twentye yeare old, and aboue, to se, that the worcke of the house of the Lorde went forwarde.
Ezra 3:9 And Iesua stode wyth hys sonnes and brethren, and Cadmiel wyth hys sonnes, and the children of Iuda, to forther the worckemen of the house of God, namely the children of Henadad with their children and their brethren the Leuites.
Ezra 3:10 And when the buylders layd the foundacion of the temple of the Lorde, the pryestes stode in their aray, with trompettes. And the Leuites the children of Asaph with cymbales, to prayse the Lorde after the maner of Dauid kynge of Israel.
Ezra 3:11 And they sange together, geuynge prayse and thankes vnto the Lorde, because he is gracyous, and because hys mercy endureth for euer vpon Israel. And all the people shouted loude in praysing the Lorde, because the foundacyon of the house of the Lorde was layd.
Ezra 3:12 Many also of the old pryestes and Leuites and auncyent fathers, whyche had sene the fyrst house: when the foundacion of thys house was layed before their eyes, wepte wyth a loud voice. And many shouted with ioye,
Ezra 3:13 so that the noyse gaue a great sounde, in so much that the people could not knowe the ioyfull sounde for the noyse of the weping amonge the people: for the people shouted with a loud crye, so that the noise was heard farre of.

CHAPTER: 4

Ezra 4:1 But when the aduersaries of Iuda and Ben Iamin hearde, that the children of the captiuite builded the temple vnto the Lorde God of Israel,
Ezra 4:2 they came to Zorobabel and to the principal fathers, and saide vnto them: We wyl buylde with you: for we seke the Lorde youre God lyke as ye do. And we haue done sacrifice vnto him, sence the tyme that Asor Hadon the Kinge of Assur broughte vs vp hyther.
Ezra 4:3 But Zorobabel and Iesua and the other auncient fathers of Israel answered them: It belongeth not to you, but to vs to buylde the house vnto oure God: for we oure selues wil buylde alone vnto the Lorde oure God of Israel, as Cyrus the kinge of Persia hathe commaunded vs.
Ezra 4:4 Then the folke of the lande hindered the people of Iuda, and made them afrayed to buylde,
Ezra 4:5 and hyred councelers agaynst them, and hindred their deuyce, as longe as Cyrus the Kynge of Persia lyued, vntyll the raigne of Darius kynge of Persia.
Ezra 4:6 But when Ahasuerus was kinge, in the beginnynge of hys raygne wrote they vnto him a complaynte against them of Iuda and Ierusalem.
Ezra 4:7 And in the tyme of Arthaxerses, wrote Bysellam, Midritates, Tabeel, and the other of their counsel vnto Arthaxerses the kynge of Persia. But the scripture of the letter was wrytten in the Sirians speache, and was interpretated in the language of the Sirians.
Ezra 4:8 Rehum the chaunceler, and Samsai the scrybe, wrote this letter against Ierusalem to Arthaxerses the kinge.
Ezra 4:9 We Rehum the chaunceler, and Samsai the scrybe, and other of the counsel of Dina, of Arphasat, of Tarplat, of Persia, of Arach of Babilon of Susan, of Deha, and of Elam
Ezra 4:10 & other of the people, whome the greate & noble Asenaphar broughte ouer, and set in the cytyes of Samaria, and other on this syde the water, and in Ceneeth.
Ezra 4:11 And this is the summe of the letter that they sent vnto kynge Arthaxerses. Thy seruauntes the men on thys syde the water and in Ceneeth.
Ezra 4:12 Be it knowne vnto the kynge, that the Iewes are come vp from the to vs vnto Ierusalem a cytye sedycyous and frowarde, and buylde the same, and laye the foundacyon of the walles therof, and repaire them.
Ezra 4:13 Be it knowne nowe therfore vnto the kynge that yf this cytye be buylded, and the walles made vp agayne, then shall not they geue trybute, tolle, and yearly custome, and euen vnto the kinges shal this hurt redound.
Ezra 4:14 But nowe that we al are therby, whiche destroyed the temple, we woulde no longer se the kynges dyshonoure. Therfore sent we out, & caused the kynge to be certyfyed therof.
Ezra 4:15 That it maye be soughte in the Chronycles of thy progenitours, and so shalte thou fynde in the same Chronycles, & perceyue, that thys cytye is sedicious & noysome vnto kinges & landes, & that they cause other also to rebell of olde, & for the same cause was this cyty destroyed.
Ezra 4:16 Therfore do we certyfy the king, that yf this citie be buylded, and the walles therof made vp, thou shalt kepe nothynge on this syde the water by the reason of it.
Ezra 4:17 Then sent the Kyng an answere vnto Rehum the chaunceler, and Samsai the Scribe, and to the other of their counsel that dwelt in Samaria, and vnto the other beyonde the water. Peace & salutacyon.
Ezra 4:18 The letter whiche ye send vnto vs, hath ben openly read before me,
Ezra 4:19 and I haue commaunded to make search: and it is found, that thys cyty of olde hath made insurreccyon agaynst kinges, & how the vprore & rebellion hath bene committed therin.
Ezra 4:20 There haue ben myghty kinges also at Ierusalem, whiche haue raigned ouer all that is beyonde the water, & tolle, tribute & yearly custome was geuen vnto them.
Ezra 4:21 Do ye now after thys commaundement, forbyd the same men, that the cyty be not buylded, tyl I haue geuen commaundement.
Ezra 4:22 Take hede now that ye be not neglygent herin, lest the kinge haue harme there thorow.
Ezra 4:23 Now when kynge Arthaxerses letter was read before Rehum the chaunceler and Samsai the scribe and their counsel, they went vp in al the hast to Ierusalem vnto the Iewes, & forbad them wyth vyolence and power.
Ezra 4:24 Then ceased the worck of the house of God at Ierusalem, and contynued so vnto the second year of Darius kynge of Persia.

CHAPTER: 5

Ezra 5:1 The Prophetes, Aggeus & Zachari the sonne of Ado, prophecied vnto the Iewes that were in Iuda and Ierusalem, in the name of the God of Israel.
Ezra 5:2 Then gat vp Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of Iosedec, and beganne to buylde the house of God at Ierusalem, and wyth them the Prophetes of God whyche helped them.
Ezra 5:3 At the same tyme came to them Thathanai the captayne on thys syde the water, and Starbuzanai, and their councelers, & sayde thus vnto them. Who hath commaunded you to buylde this house, and to make vp the walles therof?
Ezra 5:4 Then tolde we them the names of the men, that made this buylding.
Ezra 5:5 But the eye of their God came vpon the Elders of the Iewes, that they coulde not cause them to cease, tyl the matter was brought before Darius, and tyl they had answered by letters therunto.
Ezra 5:6 This is the copy of the letter that Thathanai the captayne on this syde the water, and Stharbuzanai, and their counselers of Apharsach (which were on thys side the water) sent vnto king Darius.
Ezra 5:7 And this is the entent of the wordes that they sent vnto hym: Vnto Darius the kynge, All peace.
Ezra 5:8 Be it knowne vnto the kynge, that we came into Iewri to the house of the great God, whyche is buylded with rouge stone, and beames are layed in the walles, and the worcke goeth fast forth and prospered in their handes.
Ezra 5:9 We asked therfore the Elders and sayde vnto them: Who hath commaunded you to buylde thys house and to make vp the walles therof?
Ezra 5:10 We asked their names also, that we might certyfye the, and haue wrytten the names of the men that were their rulers.
Ezra 5:11 But they answered vs with these wordes, and sayd: We are the seruauntes of the God of heauen and earth, & buylde the house that was buylded many yeares a go whyche a greate kynge of Israel buylded and set vp.
Ezra 5:12 And after oure fathers had prouoked the God of heauen vnto wrath, he gaue them ouer into the hand of Nabuchodonozor the kyng of Babilon the Caldee, whiche brake doune thys house, & caried the people away vnto Babilon.
Ezra 5:13 But in the fyrst yeare of Cyrus the king of Babilon, the same kynge Cyrus commaunded to build this house of God,
Ezra 5:14 for the vesselles of gould & siluer in the house of God, which Nabuchodonozor toke oute of the temple at Ierusalem, & brought them into the temple at Babilon, those dyd Cyrus the kinge take out of the temple at Babilon, & deliuered them vnto Sasbazar by name, whom he made captaine
Ezra 5:15 and said vnto him. Take these vesselles, go thy waye, and bringe them vnto the temple at Ierusalem, and let the house of God be buylded in hys place.
Ezra 5:16 Then came the same Sasbazar and layde the foundacyon of the house of God at Ierusalem. Sence that tyme hath it bene in buyldinge, and yet is it not fynyshed.
Ezra 5:17 Yf it please the kynge now, let there be search made in the kynges treasure house which is at Babylon, whether it haue bene kynge Cyrus commaundement, that the house of God at Ierusalem should be builded: & send vs the kinges minde concernynge the same.

CHAPTER: 6

Ezra 6:1 Then commaunded kyng Darius that searche shoulde be made in the lybrary of the kinges treasure house, whych lay at Babilon.
Ezra 6:2 So at Egbathanis in a castel that lieth in the lande of the Medes, there was founde a boke, and in it was there an acte wrytten after this maner:
Ezra 6:3 In the first year of kyng Cirus, commaunded the same king Cirus to buylde the house of God at Ierusalem, in the place where the sacryfyce is made, & to lay the foundacion to beare thre skore cubites height & thre skore cubytes bredth,
Ezra 6:4 & thre walles of roughe stones, and one walle of tymber, and the expences shalbe geuen of the kinges house.
Ezra 6:5 And the goulde and syluer vessel of the house of God (whiche Nabuchodonozor toke oute of the temple at Ierusalem, & brought vnto Babilon) shalbe restored agayne, that they maye be brought vnto the temple at Ierusalem to their place into the house of God.
Ezra 6:6 Get you farre from them therfore, thou Thathanai captayne beyond the water, & Stharbuzanai, & youre councelers whiche are beyonde the water, get ye awaye from them.
Ezra 6:7 Let them worcke in the house of God, that the captayne of the Iewes and their Elders maye buylde the house of God in his place.
Ezra 6:8 I haue commaunded also, what shalbe done to the Elders of Iuda for the buyldyng of the house of God, that there shall dilygently be taken of the Kinges goodes, euen of the rentes beyonde the water, & geuen vnto the men, and that they be not hindred.
Ezra 6:9 And yf they haue nede of calues, lambes, or goates, for the burntofferynge vnto the God of heauen, wheate, salt, wyne and oyle, after the custome of the pryestes at Ierusalem, there shalbe geuen tem daylie as is accordyng: & se that this be done without faute,
Ezra 6:10 that they maye offre swete sauoures vnto the God of heauen, and praye for the kinges lyfe & for his children.
Ezra 6:11 This commaundement haue I geuen. And what man soeuer he be that altereth these wordes, there shall a beame be taken from his house, & set vp, and he shalbe hanged theron, & his house shalbe prysed for the deade.
Ezra 6:12 But the God that dwelleth in heauen, destroye al kinges and people, that put to their hande to alter & to breake doune the house of God at Ierusalem. I Darius haue commaunded, that this he diligently done.
Ezra 6:13 Then Thathanai the captayne beyond the water, and Stharbuzanai with their counselers (to whom king Darius had sent) dyd theyr diligence.
Ezra 6:14 And the Elders of the Iewes builded, and they prospered thorowe the Prophesyenge of Aggeus the Prophet and Zachari the sonne of Ado: and they buylded, and set vp the worcke, accordinge to the commaundemente of the God of Israel, and after the commaundement of Cyrus, Darius & Arthaxerses kinges of Persia.
Ezra 6:15 And they perfourmed the house vnto the thirde daye of the moneth Adar, that was in the sixte year of the raigne of kinge Darius.
Ezra 6:16 And the children of Israel, the pryestes, the Leuites, & the other children of the captiuyte helde the dedicacion of the house of God with ioye,
Ezra 6:17 and offered at the dedycacion of the house of God, an hundred calues, two hundred lambes, four hundred goates: and for the synofferinge for all Israell twelue he goates, accordinge to the nombre of the trybes of Israel,
Ezra 6:18 and set the priestes in their courses and the Leuites in their offyces to minister vnto God, which is at Ierusalem, as it is wrytten in the boke of Moses.
Ezra 6:19 And the chyldren of the captyuyte helde Passeouer vpon the fourtenth daye of the fyrst moneth:
Ezra 6:20 for the preastes and Leuites had purifyed them selues, so that they were all cleane as one man, & kylled Passeouer for all the chyldren of the captyuite, and for theyr brethren the preastes, and for them selues.
Ezra 6:21 And the chyldren of Israel which were come agayne out of captyuite, & al such as had separated them selues vnto them from the filthynesse of the Heathen in the lande, to seke the Lorde God of Israel, ate
Ezra 6:22 and helde the feast of vnleuended bread seuen dayes with ioye: for the Lord had made them glad, and turned the herte of the king of Assur vnto them, so that the handes were strengthed in the worcke of the house of God, whiche is the God of Israel.

CHAPTER: 7

Ezra 7:1 After these actes in the raigne of Arthaxerses kinge of Persia, there went vp from Babilon, Esdras the sonne of Saraiah, the sonne of Asariah, the sonne of Helkiah,
Ezra 7:2 the sonne of Selum, the sonne of Zadoc, the sonne of Ahitob,
Ezra 7:3 the sonne of Amariah, the sonne of Azariah, the sonne of Maraioth,
Ezra 7:4 the sonne of Zaruiah, the sonne of Ozi, the sonne of Boki,
Ezra 7:5 the sonne of Abisua, the sonne of Phinehes, the sonne of Eleazar, the sonne of Aaron the chefe priest.
Ezra 7:6 This Esdras was a quicke scribe in the lawe of Moses, whiche the Lord God of Israel dyd geue. And the kinge gaue him al that he requireth accordynge to the hande of the Lord his God vpon him.
Ezra 7:7 And there went vp certayne of the children of Israel, & of the priestes, and of the Leuites, of the syngers, of the porters, and of the Nethinims vnto Ierusalem, in the seuenth yeare of kinge Arthaxerses.
Ezra 7:8 And they came to Ierusalem in the fyfth moneth, that is the seuenth yeare of the kinge.
Ezra 7:9 For vpon the first daye of the first moneth, deuised he to go vp from Babylon: and on the fyrste daye of the fyfte moneth came he to Ierusalem, accordynge to the good hande of God vpon hym.
Ezra 7:10 For Esdras prepared his hert to seke the law of the Lord, and to do it, and do teache the precept and iudgement in Israel.
Ezra 7:11 And this is the copy of the letter, that kinge Arthaxerses gaue vnto Esdras the pryest, the scribe, whiche was a teacher in the wordes of the Lorde & of hys statues ouer Israel.
Ezra 7:12 Vnto Esdras the priest and scribe in the lawe of the God of heauen, peace and salutacyon.
Ezra 7:13 I haue commaunded, that all they of the people of Israel, and of the priestes and Leuites in my reaulme, whyche are mynded of their owne good wil to go vp to Ierusalem, that they go wyth the,
Ezra 7:14 beynge sent of the kynge and of the seuen Lordes of the counsel, to vyset Iuda & Ierusalem, accordynge to the lawe of God, whiche is in thy hand.
Ezra 7:15 And that thou shouldest take with the, syluer and goulde, whiche the king & the Lordes of hys counsel geue of their owne good will vnto the God of Israel (whose habytacyon is at Ierusalem)
Ezra 7:16 and all the syluer and goulde that thou canst fynd in al the countre of Babilon, with it that the people and pryestes geue of their owne good wil vnto the house of God at Ierusalem.
Ezra 7:17 Take thou the same, and bye dylygently wyth the same moneye, calues, lambes, goates, & meateofferynges & drinckeofferynges, to be offered vpon the aulter of the house of youre God at Ierusalem.
Ezra 7:18 And loke what it liketh the and thy brethren to do with the remnaunt of the money, that do after the wyl of your God.
Ezra 7:19 And the vessels that are geuen the for the mynystracion in the house of thy God, those delyuer thou before God at Ierusalem.
Ezra 7:20 And whatsoeuer thynge more shalbe nedeful for thy house of thy God, whych is necessary for the to spende, let the same be geuen out of the kynges chamber.
Ezra 7:21 I kynge Arthaxerses haue commaunded al the treasures beyond the water, that loke whatsoeuer Esdras the pryeste and scrybe in the lawe of the God of heauen requyreth of you, that ye fulfyll the same dylygently,
Ezra 7:22 vntyll an hundred talentes of syluer, vntil an hundred quarters of wheat and tyll an hundred Batthes of wyne, and tyll an hundred Batthes of oyle, and salt wythoute measure.
Ezra 7:23 Whatsoeuer belongeth to the law of the God of heauen, let the same be done wyth dylygence for the house of the God of heauen, that there come no wrathe vpon the kynges reaulme and his children.
Ezra 7:24 And knowen be it vnto you, that ye shal haue no auctorite to requyre taxynge and custome, & yearly rentes vpon any of the pryestes Leuites, singers, porters, Nethinims & mynysters in the house of thys good.
Ezra 7:25 But thou Esdras (after the wysedome of the God that is in thy hand) set thou iudgers and arbiters to iudge all the people that is beyonde Iordan, euen all suche as knowe the law of thy God: and them that knowe it not, those se, that ye teache:
Ezra 7:26 & whosoeuer wyll not dylygently fulfyll the law of thy God, and the kynges law, shal haue his iudgement for the dead whether it be vnto death or to be banished or to be condemned in goodes, or to be put in preson.
Ezra 7:27 Praysed be the Lord God of our fathers which so had inspired the kinges hert to garnysh the house of God at Ierusalem:
Ezra 7:28 & hath inclined his mercy vnto me in the presence of the king, & his councelers, & before al the kinges hys estates. And I was conforted (according to the hande of the Lorde my God ouer me) & so gathered I the heades of Israel together, that they might go vp with me.

CHAPTER: 8

Ezra 8:1 These are the heades of their fathers that were named, whyche wente vp with me from Babilon, what tyme as kinge Arthaxerses raygned.
Ezra 8:2 Of the children of Phinehes, Gersom: of the children of Ithamar, Daniel: of the children of Dauid, Hatus:
Ezra 8:3 of the children of Zecaniah, of the children Pharos, Zachary, & with him were nombred an hundred and fyfty men.
Ezra 8:4 Of the children of Pahath Moab, Elioenai the sonne of Zarakiah, and with them two hundred men.
Ezra 8:5 Of the chyldren of Zechaniah, the sonne of Iahasiel, and with hym thre hundred men.
Ezra 8:6 Of the chyldren of Adin Abed the sonne of Ionathan, and with hym fyfty men.
Ezra 8:7 Of the chyldren of Elam, Isaiah the sonne of Athaliah, and wyth him seuenty men.
Ezra 8:8 Of the children of Saphatia, Zabadiah the sonne of Michael and wyth hym foure skore men.
Ezra 8:9 Of the children of Ioab, Obadiah the sonne of Iehiel, and wyth hym two hundred and eyghtene men.
Ezra 8:10 Of the children of Selomith, the sonne of Iosphiah, and with hym an hundred and thre men.
Ezra 8:11 Of the children of Bebai, Zachary the sonne of Bebai, and with hym eyght & twenty men.
Ezra 8:12 Of the children of Asgad, Iohanan the sonne of Hakatan, and with him an hundred and ten men.
Ezra 8:13 Of the last chyldren of Adonicam, and these were their names: Eliphelet, Iehiel and Samaiah, and with them thre score men.
Ezra 8:14 Of the children of Begui, Vthai, and Zabud and with them seuenty men.
Ezra 8:15 And I gathered them together by the water that runneth towarde Ahaua, and there abode we thre dayes. And when I loked among the people and the priestes, I found no Leuites there.
Ezra 8:16 Then sent I Eliezer, Ariel, Semeiah, Elnathan, Iarib, Elnathan, Nathan, Zachary, & Mosollam the rulers, and Ioiarib and Elna than the teachers,
Ezra 8:17 & those sent I vnto Edo the chefest at Casphia, that they should fetche vs mynysters for the house of oure God, and I tolde them that they should saye vnto Edo, and to hys brethren the Nethinims at Casphia.
Ezra 8:18 And (accordyng to the good hande of our God vpon vs) they broughte vs a wyse man from amonge the chyldren of Moholi the sonne of Leui the sonne of Israel, euen Sarabia, with his sonnes and brethren, eyghtene.
Ezra 8:19 And Hasabia, and with him Isaiah of the children of Merari, wyth hys brethren and their sonnes, twenty.
Ezra 8:20 And of the Nethinims, whom Dauid & the Prynces gaue to minister vnto the Leuites, two hundred and twentye all named by name.
Ezra 8:21 And euen there at the water besyde Ahaua, caused I a fastynge to be proclamed, that we myghte humble oure selues before oure God, to seke of him a ryght waye for vs, and oure chyldren and all oure substaunce.
Ezra 8:22 For I was ashamed to requyre of the kynge, soudyers and horsemen, to helpe vs agaynst the enemy in the way. For we had saide vnto the kynge. The hande of oure God is vpon all them that seke him in goodnes, and his vyolence and wrath vpon all them that forsake him.
Ezra 8:23 So we fasted, and sought thys at oure God, and he hearde vs.
Ezra 8:24 And I toke out twelue of the chefe pryestes, Sarabia and Hasabia, and ten of theyr brethren with them,
Ezra 8:25 and weyed them there the siluer and goulde and vessels for the heaueoffering vnto the house of our God, which the kinge and the Lordes of his counsell and prynces, and all Israel that were at hande, had geuen to the heaueoffering:
Ezra 8:26 & there weied I them vnder their hand syx hundred & fyfty talentes of syluer, and in syluer vessel an hundred talentes, & in gould an hundred talentes
Ezra 8:27 twentye cuppes of goulde of a thousande drammes, and two costly ornamentes of good brasse, as cleare as goulde,
Ezra 8:28 and sayde vnto them: Ye are holy vnto the Lorde, therfore are the vessels holy also, and so is the syluer and goulde that is geuen of a good wil vnto the Lorde God of your fathers:
Ezra 8:29 Watche ye therefore and kepe it tyl ye weye it doune before the chefe priestes and Leuites, and auncient fathers of Israel at Ierusalem in the chestes of the house of the Lorde.
Ezra 8:30 Then toke the priestes and the Leuites that weyed syluer & goulde and vessel, to brynge it to Ierusalem vnto the house of oure God.
Ezra 8:31 So we brake vp from the water of Ahaua on the twelueth day of the fyrst moneth, to go vnto Ierusalem: & the hande of our God was vpon vs, and delyuered vs from the hande of the enemies & preuy waytinges by the waye.
Ezra 8:32 And we came to Ierusalem, & abode there thre dayes.
Ezra 8:33 But on the fourth day was the syluer and goulde and vessell weyed in the house of oure God vnder the hande of Meremoth the sonne of Vriah the pryeste, and with him Eleazar the sonne of Phinehes, and with them Iosabad the sonne of Iesua, and Noadiah the sonne of Benoi the Leuites,
Ezra 8:34 according to the nombre & weight of euery one. And the weyght was all wrytten vp at the same tyme.
Ezra 8:35 And the children of the captyuyte, whyche were come out of preson, offered burntofferynges vnto the God of Israel: twelue bullockes for al Israel, syxe and nyntye rammes, seuen and seuentye lambes, & twelue goates for a synofferynge, al to the burntofferynge of the Lorde.
Ezra 8:36 And they delyuered the kynges commission vnto the kinges offycers, and to the captaines on this side of the water. And they promoted the people and the house of God.

CHAPTER: 9

Ezra 9:1 When all this was perfourmed, the rulers came to me, & sayde: The people of Israell, and the priestes, & Leuites are not separated from the nacions in the landes as thouchynge theyr abhomynacions, namely of the Cananites, Hethites, Pheresites, Iebusites, Ammonites, Moabites, Egypcyans, and Amorites.
Ezra 9:2 For they haue taken the doughters of the same, and their sonnes, and haue myxte the holy seade wyth the nacyons in the landes: and the hande of the prynces and rulers hath bene pryncypall in hys trespace.
Ezra 9:3 When I hearde thys, I rent my clothes and my rayment, and plucte of the hearre of my heade, and of my bearde, and sate mournyng.
Ezra 9:4 And there resorted vnto me all such as feared the worde of the Lorde God of Israell because of the greate transgression. And I sate mournynge vntyll the euenynge sacryfyce.
Ezra 9:5 And aboute the euenynge sacryfyce I rose vp from my heauynes, & rente my clothes & my rayment, and fel vpon my knees, and spred out my handes vnto the Lorde my God,
Ezra 9:6 and sayde. My God I am ashamed, and darre not lyfte vp myne eyes vnto the my God: for our wyckednesses are growne ouer our heade, & oure trespaces are waxen greate vnto the heauen.
Ezra 9:7 Sence the tyme of oure fathers haue we bene in greate trespace vnto this day, and because of oure wyckednesses haue we and oure kinges ben delyuered into the hand of the kynges of the nacyons, into the swerde, into captyuite, into spoyle, and into confusion of face as it is come to passe thys daye.
Ezra 9:8 But now is there a lytle and sodayne gracyousnes come from the Lord oure God, so that some of vs are escaped, that he may geue vs a nayle in hys holy place, that oure God may lighte oure eyes, and geue vs a lytle life in oure bondage.
Ezra 9:9 For we are bondmen, and oure God hath not forsaken vs in oure bondage, and hath enclined mercy vnto vs in the syght of the kinges of Persia, that he should geue vs lyfe, and promote the house of oure God, & to set vp the desolacyon therof, and to geue vs an hedge in Iuda and Ierusalem.
Ezra 9:10 And now O our God, what shall we say after thys? for we haue forsaken thy commaundementes,
Ezra 9:11 whiche thou hast commaunded by thy seruauntes the Prophetes, and sayde: The lande vnto whiche ye go to possesse, it is an vncleane land thorow the fylthynes of the people of the landes, in their abhominacyons, wherwyth they haue made it ful of vnclennes on euery syde.
Ezra 9:12 Therfore shall ye not geue your doughters vnto their sounes, and their doughters shal ye not take vnto your sonnes & seke not their peace & welthe for euer, that ye maye be stronge, and enioye the good in the lande, & that ye and youre chyldren may haue the enheritaunce of it for euermore.
Ezra 9:13 And after all thys that is come vpon vs (because of oure euyll deades & greate trespace) thou oure God hast spared oure wyckednesse, and hast geuen vs a delyueraunce as it is come to passe thys daye.
Ezra 9:14 As for vs, we haue turned backe, & haue let go thy commaundementes, to make contracte wyth the people of these abhomynacyons. Wylte thou then be wrothe at vs, tyl we be vtterlye consumed, so that nothing remaine and tyll there be no delyueraunce?
Ezra 9:15 O Lorde God of Israell, thou arte ryghteous, for we remayne yet escaped, as it is thys daye. Beholde in thy presence are we in oure trespace, for because of it is there no standynge before the.

CHAPTER: 10

Ezra 10:1 And when Esdras prayed after this maner, & knowledge, wept & laye before the house of God, there resorted vnto hym oute of Israel a very great congregacion of men and wemen, & chyldren: for the people wepte very sore.
Ezra 10:2 And Sechaniah the sonne of Iehiel one of the chyldren of Elam, answered, and sayde vnto Esdras: We haue trespaced agaynste the Lorde oure God, in that we haue taken straunge wyues of all the people of the land. Now there is hope yet in Israel concernyng this
Ezra 10:3 therfore, let vs make a couenaunt nowe wyth our God, that we shall put away al the wyues (and suche as are borne of them) accordynge to the councel of the Lorde, and of them that feare the commaundement of oure God, that we maye do accordyng to the law.
Ezra 10:4 Get the vp therfore, for the matter belongeth vnto the. We wyll be wyth the, be of good comforte, and do it.
Ezra 10:5 Then rose Esdras, and toke an othe of the rulers, priestes and Leuites, & of all Israell, that they shulde do accordynge to this word: and they sware.
Ezra 10:6 And Esdras stode vp before the house of God, and wente into the chamber of Iohanan the sonne of Elialib. And when he came thyther, he ate no bread, nor drancke water: for he mourned because of the transgressyon of them that had bene in captiuite.
Ezra 10:7 And they caused a proclamacyon be made thorowoute Iuda and Ierusalem, vnto al the chyldren whiche had bene in captyuite, that they shulde gather themselues together vnto Ierusalem:
Ezra 10:8 And that whosoeuer came not within thre dayes accordynge to the deuyce of the rulers and elders, all hys substaunce shoulde be forfet, and be put oute from the congregacyon of the captyue.
Ezra 10:9 Then all the men of Iuda and Beniamin gathered themselues together vnto Ierusalem in thre dayes, that is on the twentye daye of the nynth moneth: and all the people sate in the strete before the house of God, and trembled, because of the matter, and for the rayne.
Ezra 10:10 And Esdras the prieste stode vp, and sayde vnto them: Ye haue transgressed, that ye haue taken straunge wyues, to make the trespace of Israel yet more:
Ezra 10:11 confesse now therfore vnto the Lorde God of your fathers, and do hys pleasure, and separate youre selues from the people of the lande, and from the straunge wyues.
Ezra 10:12 Then aunswered all the congregacyon, and sayde wyth a loude voyce: Let it be done as thou haste sayd.
Ezra 10:13 But the people are many, & it is a rayne whether, and they can not stand here wythout, nether is this a worcke of one daye or two, for we are many that haue offended in thys transgressyon.
Ezra 10:14 Let vs appoynte oure rulers therfore in all the congregacyon, that al they which haue taken straunge wyues in oure cytyes, maye come at the tyme appoynted, and the elders of euerye cytye & theyr iudges wyth them, tyll the wrath of our God be turned awaye from vs for thys offence.
Ezra 10:15 Then were appoynted Ionathan the sonne of Asahel and Iahasia the sonne of Thekuah ouer thys matter. And Mosollam and Sabathai the Leuites holpe them.
Ezra 10:16 And the chyldren of the captiuite dyd euen so. And Esdras the priest and the auncyent heades thorow the house of theyr fathers and all that were now rehearsed by name, separated them selues, and sate them doune on the fyrst daye of the tenth moneth to examen thys matter.
Ezra 10:17 And of the first daye of the fyrste moneth they made an ende of all the men that had taken straunge wyues.
Ezra 10:18 And amonge the children of the priestes there were men founde that had taken straunge wyues, namely among the chyldren of Iesua the sonne of Iosedec and of his brethren, Maasiah, Eliezer, Iarib and Godoliah.
Ezra 10:19 And they gaue theyr handes there vpon, that they wold put awaye theyr wyues: and for theyr trespace offerynge to geue a ramme for theyr trespace.
Ezra 10:20 Amonge the chyldren of Emer, Hanani, and Zabadiah.
Ezra 10:21 Amonge the chyldren of Harim, Maasiah, Eltah, Semeiah, Iehiel, and Osiah.
Ezra 10:22 Amonge the chyldren of Phashur, Elioenai. Maasiah, Ismael Nathanael, Iosabed and Eleazah.
Ezra 10:23 Amonge the Leuites, Iosabed, Semei & Kelaiah, which same is Kalithah. Pathathiah, Iuda, & Eleazar.
Ezra 10:24 Amonge the syngers, Eliasib. Among the porters Selum, Telem and Vri.
Ezra 10:25 Of Israel. Amonge the chyldren of Pharos, Remiah, Iesiah, Melchiah, Miamin, Eleazar, Melchiah and Banaiah.
Ezra 10:26 Amonge the chyldren of Elam, Mathaniah, Zachary, Iehiel, Abdi, Ierimoth & Eliah.
Ezra 10:27 Amonge the children of Iethua, Elioenai, Eliasib, Mathaniah, Ierimoth, Zabad and Aziza.
Ezra 10:28 Amonge the chyldren of Bebai, Iehohanan, Hananiah, Zabai and Athalai.
Ezra 10:29 Amonge the chyldren of Beoni, Mosolam, Maluch, Adaiah Iasub, Saal and Ierimoth.
Ezra 10:30 Amonge the chyldren of Phahath Moab, Edna, Calal, Banaiah, Maasia, Mathaniah, Bezeleel, Benui and Manasseh.
Ezra 10:31 Amonge the chyldren of Harim, Eliezer, Iesiah, Melchiah, Semeiah, Simeon,
Ezra 10:32 BenIamin, Malluch and Samariah.
Ezra 10:33 Among the chyldren of Hasem, Mathnai, Mathatah, Zabed, Eliphelet, Ieremi, Manasseh & Semei.
Ezra 10:34 Amonge the chyldren of Bani, Madai, Amram, Ruel,
Ezra 10:35 Baneah, Cheluhi, Badaiah,
Ezra 10:36 Vaniah, Maremoth, Eliasib
Ezra 10:37 Mathaniah Mathanai, Iaasan,
Ezra 10:38 Bani, Binni Semelah,
Ezra 10:39 Salamiah, Nathan, Adaiah,
Ezra 10:40 Machnadabai, Sasai, Sarai,
Ezra 10:41 Asarael, Selemiahu, Samariah,
Ezra 10:42 Selum, Amariah, and Ioseph.
Ezra 10:43 Amonge the chyldren of Nebo, Aaiel, Matathiah, Zabed, Zabina, Iedai, Ioel and Banaiah.
Ezra 10:44 Al these had taken straunge wiues. And amonge the same wiues there were some, that had borne children.

BOOK: Nehemiah

CHAPTER: 1

Nehemiah 1:1 These are the Actes of Nehemiah the sonne of Hachalia. It fortuned in the moneth Casleu in the twentye yeare, that I was in the castell at Susan:
Nehemiah 1:2 and Hanani one of my brethren came with certayne men of Iuda, and I asked them how the Iewes dyd that were delyuered and escaped from the captyuite, and how it wente at Ierusalem.
Nehemiah 1:3 And they sayde vnto me: The remnaunt of the captiuite are there in the lande in great misfortune and rebuke. The walles of Ierusalem are broken doune, and the gates thereof are brente wyth fyre.
Nehemiah 1:4 When I hearde these wordes, I sat me doune and wepte, and mourned two dayes, & fasted and prayed before the God of heauen
Nehemiah 1:5 & sayde: O Lorde God of heauen, thou greate & terryble God, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercy for them that loue the, and obserue thy commaundementes:
Nehemiah 1:6 let thyne eares herken & thyne eyes be open, that thou mayeste heare the prayer of thy seruaunte, whiche I praye nowe before the daye and nyghte for the chyldren of Israel thy seruauntes, and knowledge the synnes of the chyldren of Israel, which we haue commytted agaynst the. And I and my fathers house haue synned also.
Nehemiah 1:7 We haue bene corrupt vnto the, in that we haue not kepte the commaundementes, statutes and lawes, which thou commaundedst thy seruaunt Moyses.
Nehemiah 1:8 Yet call to remembraunce the word that thou commaundest thy seruaunt Moses, and saydeste: Yf ye transgresse, then wyll I scater you abroade among the nacyons.
Nehemiah 1:9 But yf ye turne vnto me, and kepe my commaundementes and do them: though ye were caste oute vnto the vttermost parte of heauen yet wyll I gather you from thence, and wyll brynge you from thence, euen vnto the place, that I haue chosen for my name to dwel ther
Nehemiah 1:10 They are thy seruauntes, & thy people whom thou haste delyuered thorowe thy greate power and myghtye hande.
Nehemiah 1:11 O Lorde, let thyne eares herken to the prayer of thy seruaunte, & the prayer of thy seruauntes, whose desyre is to feare thy name, and let thy seruaunte prospere thys daye, and graunte hym mercye in the syght of thys man: for I was the kynges buttelar.

CHAPTER: 2

Nehemiah 2:1 In the moneth Nisan in the twentieth yeare of kynge Arthaxerses, when the wyne stode before him, I toke vp the wyne, & gaue it vnto the kynge & I was heauy in hys presence.
Nehemiah 2:2 Then sayd the kyng vnto me: why lokest thou so sadly? Thou arte not sick, that is not the matter, but thou arte heuy herted. Neuerthelesse I was sore afrayed
Nehemiah 2:3 & sayde vnto the kynge: God saue the kynges lyfe for euer, shulde I not loke sadly? the cytye of my fathers buryall lyeth waste & the gates thereof are consumed with fyre.
Nehemiah 2:4 Then sayde the kyng vnto me: what is then thy request? then made I my prayer to the God of heauen,
Nehemiah 2:5 and sayde vnto the king: yf it please the kyng, and yf thy seruaunte be fauoured in thy syghte, I be seke the sende me into Iuda vnto the cytye of my fathers buriall, that I maye buylde it.
Nehemiah 2:6 And the kynge sayde vnto me, & so dyd the quene that sat by him: how long shal thy iourney continue, & when wylt thou come againe? And it pleased the kinge to sende me, and I set hym a tyme,
Nehemiah 2:7 and sayde vnto the kynge: yf it please the kynge, let hym geue me letters to the capptaynes beyond the water, that they may conueye me ouer, tyll I come into Iuda:
Nehemiah 2:8 & letters vnto Asaph the Lord of the kynges wood that he may geue me wood for beames to the gates of the palace, which are hard on the house and harde on the walles of the citie, and for the house that I shall entre into. And the kynge gaue me accordynge to the good hand of God vpon me:
Nehemiah 2:9 And when I came to the captaynes beyond the water, I gaue them the kynges letters. And the kyng sent captaynes and horsmen with me.
Nehemiah 2:10 But when Sanabalat the Horonite and Tobiah the seruaunt of the Ammonites heard that, it greued them sore, that there was come a man which soughte the welth of the chyldren of Israel.
Nehemiah 2:11 And when I came to Ierusalem, & had bene there thre dayes,
Nehemiah 2:12 I gat me vp in the night season, & a fewe men wyth me: for I tolde no man what God had geuen me in my hert to do at Ierusalem: and there was not one beast wt me, saue it that I rode vpon.
Nehemiah 2:13 And I rode by nyghte vnto the valey porte before the Dragon well, and to the Donge porte, and consydered the walles of Ierusalem that were broken doune, and the portes thereof consumed with the fyre.
Nehemiah 2:14 And I went ouer vnto the welporte, and to the kynges conduyte, & there was no roume for my beaste, that it coulde go vnder me.
Nehemiah 2:15 Then went I on in the nyghte by the broke syde, & consydered the wall, and turned backe and came home agayne to the valeye porte.
Nehemiah 2:16 And the rulers knewe not whether I went or what I dyd: for hyther to had I not told the Iewes & the priestes, for the councelers and the rulers, & the other that laboured in the worcke.
Nehemiah 2:17 And I sayde vnto them: ye se the myserye that we are in, how Ierusalem lyeth waste, & how the gates thereof are brente with fyre, come let vs buylde vp the walles of Ierusalem, that we be no more a rebuke.
Nehemiah 2:18 And I tolde them of the good hande of my God whiche was vpon me: and the kynges wordes that he had spoken vnto me. And they sayde: then let vs gette vp, and buylde: and theyr handes were strenghted to good.
Nehemiah 2:19 But when Senabalat the Horonite, and Tobiah the seruaunte of the Ammonites, and Gesem the Arabian hearde it, they laughed vs to skorne, and despysed vs, & sayde: what is thys that ye do? Wyll ye fall away againe from the kynge?
Nehemiah 2:20 Then answered I them, and sayde: the God of heauen he it is that causeth vs to prospere: and we be hys seruauntes. Let vs get vp and buylde. As for you, ye haue no porcyon nor ryghte nor remembraunce in Ierusalem.

CHAPTER: 3

Nehemiah 3:1 And Eliasib the hye priest gat hym vp wyth hys brethren the priestes, and buylded the Shepegate. They repared it, & set vp the dores of it, euen vnto the toure Meah repared they it, namely vnto the toure of Hananeel.
Nehemiah 3:2 Next vnto hym buylded the men of Iericho. And beside hym builded Sachur the sonne of Amri.
Nehemiah 3:3 But the fyshport dyd the chyldren of Asanah build, they couered it, and set on the dores, lockes & barres of it.
Nehemiah 3:4 Nexte vnto hym buylded Marimoth the sonne of Vriah the sonne of Hakoz. Nexte vnto hym buylded Mosolam the sonne of Barachiah the sonne of Mesesabeel. Nexte vnto hym, buylded Zadoc the sonne of Baana.
Nehemiah 3:5 Next vnto hym buylded they of Thekua. But theyr greate men put not theyr neckes to the seruyce of theyr Lorde.
Nehemiah 3:6 The Oldegate buylded Iehoiadah the sonne of Paseah, and Masolam the sonne of Besodiah they couered it, and set on the dores lockes and barres of it.
Nehemiah 3:7 Nexte vnto them builded Malatiah of Gabaon, and Iadon of Merano, men of Gabaon and of Mazphah for the seate of the captayne on thys syde the water.
Nehemiah 3:8 Nexte vnto hym buylded Vsiel the sonne of Harhaiah the goldsmyth. Nexte vnto hym buylded Hananiah the Apotecarys sonne, & they repayred Ierusalem vnto the brode wal.
Nehemiah 3:9 Nexte vnto him builded Raphaiah the sonne of Hur the ruler of the halfe quarter of Ierusalem.
Nehemiah 3:10 Nexte vnto hym buylded Iedaiah the sonne of Haremaph ouer agaynst his house. Nexte vnto hym buylded Hatus the sonne of Hasaboniah.
Nehemiah 3:11 But Melchia the sonne of Harim, and Hasub the sonne of Pahath. Moab buylded the other pece, and the tower besyde the fornace.
Nehemiah 3:12 Nexte vnto hym buylded Selum the sonne of Halohes the ruler of the halfe quarter of Ierusalem, and hys doughters.
Nehemiah 3:13 The valeye gate buylded Hanun, and the cytesins of Zanoah. They buylded it, and set on the dores, lockes and barres thereof, and a thousand cubites on the wal, vnto the Dong porte.
Nehemiah 3:14 But the donge port buylded Melchiah the sonne of Rechab, the ruler of the fourthe parte of the vyneyardes: he buylded it, & set on the dores, lockes and barres therof.
Nehemiah 3:15 But the Wellgate buylded Selum the sonne of Cholhosah, the ruler of the fourthe parte of Masphah. He buylded it, and couered it, and set on the dores, lockes, and barres therof, & the wall vnto the pole of Siloah by the kynges garden, vnto the steppes that go doune from the cytye of Dauid.
Nehemiah 3:16 After hym builded Nehemiah the sonne of Asdok, the ruler of the half quarter of Bethzur, vntyll the other side ouer agaynste the sepulchres of Dauid, & to the pole Asuia, and vnto the house of the myghtye.
Nehemiah 3:17 After hym buylded the Leuites, Rehum the sonne of Bani. Nexte vnto hym buylded Hasabiah the ruler of the halfe quarter at Keilah in hys quarter.
Nehemiah 3:18 After him buylded theyr brethren, Bauai the sonne of Henadad, the ruler of the halfe quarter of Keylah.
Nehemiah 3:19 After hym builded Ezer the sonne of Iosua the ruler of Masphah the other pece harde ouer agaynst the harnesse corner.
Nehemiah 3:20 After hym buylded Baruch the sonne of Zabai the other pece worshipfully and costly, from the corner vnto the dore of the house of Ehasib the hye priest.
Nehemiah 3:21 After him buylded Marimoth the sonne of Vriah the sonne of Hacos the other pece, from the dore of the house of Eliasib euen as longe as the house of Eliasib extended.
Nehemiah 3:22 After hym builded the priestes, the men of the countreye.
Nehemiah 3:23 After hym builded Beniamin & Hasub ouer against theyr house. After them Asariah the sonne of Maasiah the sonne of Ananiah next vnto his house.
Nehemiah 3:24 After hym buylded Benui the sonne of Henadad the other pece from the house of Asariah vnto the turnynge, and vnto the corner.
Nehemiah 3:25 After hym buylded Phalel the sonne of Vsai ouer agaynst the corner and the hye toure, which lyeth oute ouer from the kynges house besyde the court of the preson. After hym Phadaiah the sonne of Pharos
Nehemiah 3:26 (as for the Nethinims they dwelte in Ophel, vnto the Watergate, towarde the easte where the tower lyeth oute).
Nehemiah 3:27 After hym buylded they of Thekua the other pece ouer agaynst the greate toure, that lyeth outward, and vnto the wall of Ophel.
Nehemiah 3:28 But from the Horsgate forthe buylded the priestes, euerye one ouer agaynst hys house.
Nehemiah 3:29 After them buylded Zadock the sonne of Emer ouer agaynste hys house. After hym buylded Semeiah the sonne of Sechaniah the keper of the eastgate.
Nehemiah 3:30 After hym buylded Hananiah the sonne of Selemiah, and Hanun the sonne of Zalaph the sixte, the other peace. After hym buylded Mosolam the sonne of Barachiah ouer agaynste hys cheste.
Nehemiah 3:31 After hym buylded Melchiah the goldesmythes sonne, vntyll the house of the Nethinims & of the merchauntes ouer agaynste the councel gate, and to the parler in the corner.
Nehemiah 3:32 And betwene the parloure of the corner vnto the shepegate builded the goldsmythes and the merchauntes.

CHAPTER: 4

Nehemiah 4:1 But when Sanabalat heard that we buylded the wall, he was wroth, and toke great indignacion and mocked the Iewes,
Nehemiah 4:2 and sayde before hys brethren, and the hoste of Samaria: what do the impotente Iewes? shall they be thus suffered? shall they offre? shal they perfourme it in one daye? shal they make the stones whole agayn that are broughte to dust, & brent?
Nehemiah 4:3 And Tobiah the Ammonite besyde him said: let them buyld on, yf a foxe go vp he shall breake doune theyr stonye wall.
Nehemiah 4:4 Hear O thou oure God, howe we are despysed, turne theyr shame vpon theyr owne heade, that thou mayest geue them ouer into despysynge in the land of theyr captiuite.
Nehemiah 4:5 Couer not their wickednesse, and put not oute theyr synne from thy presence: for they haue prouoked the buylders.
Nehemiah 4:6 Yet buylded we the wall, and ioyned it whole together, vnto the halfe heyght. And the people were well mynded to laboure.
Nehemiah 4:7 But when Sanabalat, and Tobiah, & the Arabians, and Ammonites, and Asdodites hearde that the walles of Ierusalem were made vp, and that they had begonne to stoppe vp the gappes they were very wroth,
Nehemiah 4:8 and conspyred all together to come & fyghte agaynste Ierusalem, and to make an hinderaunce there in.
Nehemiah 4:9 Neuertheles we made our prayer vnto our God, and set watchemen vpon the wall daye & nyght ouer agaynst them.
Nehemiah 4:10 And Iuda sayd: the strength of the bearers is to feble, & there is to muche duste, we are not able to buylde on the wall.
Nehemiah 4:11 And oure aduersaryes thoughte: they shall not knowe nether se, tyll we come in the myddes amonge them, and slaye them and hynder the worcke.
Nehemiah 4:12 But when the Iewes that dwelt besyde them, came out of al the places where they dwelt aboute vs, and tolde vs as good as ten tymes,
Nehemiah 4:13 then set I the people after theyr kinredes with their swerdes, speares and bowes beneth in the lowe places behynde the wal,
Nehemiah 4:14 and loked, and gat me vp, and sayde vnto the chefe men and rulers, & to the other people: be not ye afraied of them thinke vpon the greate Lord, which ought to be feared and fyghte for youre brethren, sonnes, doughters, wyues, and houses.
Nehemiah 4:15 Neuertheles when oure enemyes hearde, that we had gotten worde of it, God broughte their councell to nought, and we turned all agayue to the wall, euery one vnto his laboure.
Nehemiah 4:16 And from that tyme forth it came to passe, that the halfe parte of the younge men dyd the laboure, and the other halfe parte helde the speares, shyldes, bowes, and brestplates: and the rulers stode behynde all the house of Iuda,
Nehemiah 4:17 whyche buylded on the wall, and bare burthens, from those that laded them. Wyth one hande dyd they the worke, and wyth the other held they theyr weapen.
Nehemiah 4:18 And euerye one that buylded, had hys swerde gyrde by hys syde, and so buylded they. And the trompetters stode besyde me.
Nehemiah 4:19 And I sayde vnto the pryncipall men, and rulers, and to the other people: the worcke is greate and large, and we are separated vpon the wall one farre from another.
Nehemiah 4:20 Loke in what place now ye heare the noyse of the trompet, resorte ye thether vnto vs. Oure God shall fyght for vs,
Nehemiah 4:21 and we wyl be labouring in the worcke. And the halfe parte of them helde the speares from the morninge springe, tyll the starres came forth.
Nehemiah 4:22 And at the same time saide I vnto the people: euery one abyde wyth hys seruaunt at Ierusalem, that in the nyght season we maye geue attendannce to the watche, and to laboure on the daye tyme.
Nehemiah 4:23 As for me and my brethren, and my seruauntes, and the men of the watche behynde me, we put neuer of oure clothes, so muche as to washe oure selues.

CHAPTER: 5

Nehemiah 5:1 And there arose a greate complaynte of the people, and of theyr wyues agaynst their brethren the Iewes.
Nehemiah 5:2 And there were some that sayde: oure sonnes and doughters are to manye, let vs take corne for them and eate, that we maye lyue.
Nehemiah 5:3 Some sayde: let vs set oure landes, vyneyardes and houses to pledge, and take vp corne in the darth.
Nehemiah 5:4 But some sayde: let vs borowe money of the kynges trybute for oure landes and vyneyardes.
Nehemiah 5:5 Now are oure brethrens bodyes as oure owne bodyes and their children as oure chyldren: els shoulde we subdue oure sonnes and doughters vnto bondage, & some of oure doughters are subdued already, and no strength is there in oure handes, and other men shall haue oure landes and vyneyardes.
Nehemiah 5:6 But when I hearde theyr complaynte and such wordes, it displeased me sore,
Nehemiah 5:7 and I aduysed so in my mynde, that I rebuked the councelers, and the rulers, and sayde vnto them: wyll ye requyre vsury one of another? And I brought a greate congregacion against them
Nehemiah 5:8 and sayde vnto them: we (after oure abilyte) haue bought oure brethren the Iewes, which were solde vnto the heythen. And wyll ye sell youre brethren, whom we haue boughte vnto vs? Then helde they theyr peace, and coulde fynde nothynge to aunswere.
Nehemiah 5:9 And I sayde: It is not good that ye do. Oughte ye not to walcke in the feare of God because of the rebuke of the Heythen oure enemyes?
Nehemiah 5:10 I and my brethren, and my seruauntes haue lente them moneye and corne: but as for vsury, let vs leaue it.
Nehemiah 5:11 Therfore thys same day se that ye restore them theyr landes agayne, theyr vyneyardes, oyle gardens and houses, and the hundred part of the money of the corne, wyne and oyle that ye haue wonne of them.
Nehemiah 5:12 Then sayde they: we wyll restore them agayne and wyll requyre nothynge of them, and wyl do as thou haste spoken. And I called the priestes, and toke an othe of them, that they shuld do so.
Nehemiah 5:13 And I shoke my lappe, and sayde: God shake oute euerye man after the same maner from hys house and laboure, that maynteyneth not thys worde: euen thus be he shaken oute, and voyde. And all the congregacyon sayde: Amen, and praysed the Lorde. And the people dyd so.
Nehemiah 5:14 And from the tyme forth that it was commytted vnto me to be a captayne in the lande of Iuda, namely from the twentyeth year vnto the two and thyrtyeth yeare of kynge Arthaxerses (that is twelue yeare) I and my brethren lyued not of suche sustenaunce as was geuen to a captayne.
Nehemiah 5:15 For the olde capytaynes that were before me, had bene chargeable vnto the people, and had taken of them bread and wyne, and fourtye sycles of syluer: yea and theyr seruauntes had oppressed the people. But so dyd not I, and that because of the feare of God.
Nehemiah 5:16 I laboured also in the worke vpon the wall, and boughte no lande. And all my seruauntes came thither together vnto the worck.
Nehemiah 5:17 Moreouer there were at my table an hundred and fyftye of the Iewes and rulers, whiche came vnto me, from among the Heythen, that are aboute vs.
Nehemiah 5:18 And there was prepared me dayly an oxe, and syxe chosen shepe, and byrdes, and euer once in ten dayes a greate summe of wyne. Yet requyred not I the lyuynge of a captayne for the bondage was greuous vnto the people.
Nehemiah 5:19 Thyncke vpon me my God vnto the best, accordynge to all that I haue done for thys people.

CHAPTER: 6

Nehemiah 6:1 And when Sanabalat, Tobiah and Gesem the Arabian, and the other of oure enemyes hearde that I had buylded the wall, and that there were no mo gappes therein (howbeit at the same time had I not hanged the dores vpon the gates)
Nehemiah 6:2 Sanabalat & Gesem sent vnto me, sayinge: come, and let vs mete together in the vyllages vpon the playne of the cytye Ono. Neuerthelesse they thoughte to do me euyll.
Nehemiah 6:3 Notwythstandynge I sente messengers vnto them, sayinge: I haue a greate busynes to do, I can not come doune. The worcke shuld stand styll, yf I were negligent, and came doune to you.
Nehemiah 6:4 How be it they sente vnto me as good as .iiij. times after the same maner. And I gaue the same aunswere.
Nehemiah 6:5 Then sent Sanabalat hys seruaunt vnto me the fyfth tyme, wyth an open letter in hys hande,
Nehemiah 6:6 wherein was wrytten: It is tolde the Heythen, and Gesem hath sayd it, that thou and the Iewes thinke to rebell: for the whiche cause thou buyldest the wall, & wylte be theyr kynge in these matters,
Nehemiah 6:7 and haste ordeyned the Prophetes to preache of the at Ierusalem, and to saye: He is kynge of Iuda. Now shall this come to the kinges eares: come now therfore, & let vs take oure councell together.
Nehemiah 6:8 Neuertheles I sente vnto him sayinge: there is no such thyng done as thou sayest: thou haste fayned it oute of thyne owne herte.
Nehemiah 6:9 For they were all mynded to make vs afrayed and thoughte: they shall wythdrawe theyr handes from the worke, that they shall not laboure. Howbeit I strengthed my hande the more.
Nehemiah 6:10 And I came vnto the house of Semaiah the sonne of Delaiah the sonne of Mehetabeel, and he had shut hym selfe within, & sayde: let vs come together into the house of God, euen vnto the myddes of the temple, & shut the dores of the temple: for they wyll come to slaye the, yea euen in the nyght wil they come to put the to death.
Nehemiah 6:11 But I sayde: shulde any suche man as I flye? Who is that, beyng as I am, that wyll go into the temple, to saue hys lyfe? I wyll not go in.
Nehemiah 6:12 For I perceyued, that God had not sente hym: Yet spake he prophecye vpon me, neuerthelesse Tobiah & Sanabalat had hyred hym for money.
Nehemiah 6:13 Therfore toke he the moneye, that throughe feare I shulde so do, and synne: that they myght haue an euil reporte of me, to blaspheme me.
Nehemiah 6:14 My God thinke thou vpon Tobiah and Senabalat accordyng vnto these their workes, and of the Prophet Noadiah and of the other Prophetes, that wolde haue put me in feare.
Nehemiah 6:15 And the wall was fynyshed on the fyue & twentye daye of the moneth Elul, in two & fyftye dayes.
Nehemiah 6:16 And when all oure enemyes hearde thereof, all the Heythen that were about vs, were afrayed, and theyr courage fayled them: for they perceyued, that thys worke came of God.
Nehemiah 6:17 And at the same time were ther many of the chefe of Iuda, whose letters went vnto Tobiah, and from Tobiah vnto them
Nehemiah 6:18 (for there were manye in Iuda that were sworne vnto hym: for he was the sonne in lawe of Sechaniah the sonne of Arah, and hys sonne Iehohanan had the doughter of Mosolam the sonne of Barachia
Nehemiah 6:19 and they spake good of hym before me, and tolde hym my wordes, & Tobiah sente letters, to put me in feare.

CHAPTER: 7

Nehemiah 7:1 Now when we had buylded the wal I hanged on the dores, and the porters syngers and Leuites were appoynted.
Nehemiah 7:2 And I commaunded my brother Hanani, & Hananiah the ruler of the palace at Ierusalem: for he was a faithfull man, and feared God more then dyd many other)
Nehemiah 7:3 and I sayde vnto them: let not the gates of Ierusalem be opened vntil the sonne be whole. And whyle they are yet standyng in the watche, the dores shal be shut and barred. And there were certayne citesins of Ierusalem appoynted to be watchmen euerye one in hys watche, and aboute his house.
Nehemiah 7:4 As for the citie, it was large of roume, & great but the people were fewe therein, and the houses were not buylded.
Nehemiah 7:5 And my God gaue me in my herte, that I gathered together the princypall men & the people to nombre them, & I founde a regyster of the nombre of them, which came vp afore out of the captiuite:
Nehemiah 7:6 and founde wrytten therein: these are the sonnes of the lande, that wente vp from the captyuyte of the cariynge awaye (whome Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babilon had broughte awaye) and came agayne to Ierusalem and Iuda, euery one vnto his citi
Nehemiah 7:7 which came with Zorobabel: Iesua, Nehemiah, Asariah, Raamiah, Nahamani, mardochee Belsan, Mesparath, Beguai, Nahum & Baanah. This is the nombre of the men of the people of Israel.
Nehemiah 7:8 The chyldren of Pharos were two thousande, an hundred & two & seuentye:
Nehemiah 7:9 the chyldren of Saphatiah, thre hundred & two & seuentye:
Nehemiah 7:10 the chyldren of Arah, syxe hundred & two and fyfty:
Nehemiah 7:11 the children of Pahath Moab amonge the chyldren of Iesua and Ioab, two thousande, eyght hundred, & eighten:
Nehemiah 7:12 the children of Elam, a thousande, two hundred & foure & fyftye:
Nehemiah 7:13 the children of Zathua, eight hundred & fyue & fortye,
Nehemiah 7:14 the chyldren of Zachai seuen hundred & thre skore:
Nehemiah 7:15 the children of Banu sixe hundred and eyght & fortie:
Nehemiah 7:16 the chyldren of Bebai, sixe hundred and eyght & twentye:
Nehemiah 7:17 the chyldren of Asgad, two thousande .iij. hundred & two and twentye:
Nehemiah 7:18 the children of Adonicam, sixe hundred & seuen & thre skore:
Nehemiah 7:19 the chyldren of Begoai, two thousande, & seuen & thre skore:
Nehemiah 7:20 the chyldren of Adin, sixe hundred and fyue and fyftye:
Nehemiah 7:21 the children of Ater of Hezekiah, eyght and nyentye.
Nehemiah 7:22 The chyldren of Hasom, thre hundred and eyghte & twentye:
Nehemiah 7:23 the chyldren of Bezai, thre hundred and foure & twentye:
Nehemiah 7:24 the chyldren of Hariph, an hundred and twelue:
Nehemiah 7:25 the chyldren of Gabaon, fyue & nyentye:
Nehemiah 7:26 the men of Bethlehem & Nethophah, an hundred and eyght & foure skore:
Nehemiah 7:27 the men of Anathoth, an hundred & eyght and twenty:
Nehemiah 7:28 the men of Beth Asmoth two and fortye:
Nehemiah 7:29 the men of Kariath Iarim, Cephirah & Beeroth, seuen hundred & thre and fortye:
Nehemiah 7:30 the men of Ramah and Gaba, sixe hundred & one and twenty:
Nehemiah 7:31 the men of Machmas an hundred and two and twentye:
Nehemiah 7:32 the men of Bethel and Ai, an hundred and thre and twentye:
Nehemiah 7:33 the men of Nebo, an hundred and two & fyftye:
Nehemiah 7:34 the chyldren of the other Elam, a thousande, two hundred and foure & fyftye:
Nehemiah 7:35 the chyldren of Harim, thre hundred and twenty:
Nehemiah 7:36 the chyldren of Iericho: thre hundred and fyue & forty:
Nehemiah 7:37 the chyldren of Lodhadid and Ono, seuen hundred and one and twentye:
Nehemiah 7:38 the chyldren of Senaah, thre thousande, nyne hundred and thyrtye.
Nehemiah 7:39 The priestes. The chyldren of Iadaiah of the house of Iesua, nyne hundred and thre and seuentye:
Nehemiah 7:40 the chyldren of Emer, a thousande and two and fyftye:
Nehemiah 7:41 the chyldren of Pashur, a thousand, two hundred and seuen and forty:
Nehemiah 7:42 the chyldren of Harim, a thousande and seuentene.
Nehemiah 7:43 The Leuytes. The chyldren of Iesua of Cadmiel amonge the chyldren of Hoduah, foure and seuenty.
Nehemiah 7:44 The syngers. The chyldren of Asaph, an hundred and eyghte and fortye.
Nehemiah 7:45 The porters: The chyldren of Selum, the chyldren of Ater, the chyldren of Thalmon, the chyldren of Acub, the chyldren of Hatita, the chyldren of Sobai, all together an hundred & eyght and thyrtye.
Nehemiah 7:46 The Nethinims. The chyldren of Ziha, the chyldren of Hasupha, the chyldren of Tebahoth,
Nehemiah 7:47 the chyldren of Ceros, the chyldren of Sia, the chyldren of Phadon,
Nehemiah 7:48 the chyldren of Lebanah the chyldren of Hagaba, the chyldren of Salmai,
Nehemiah 7:49 the chyldren of Hanan the children of Gidel, the children of Gaher,
Nehemiah 7:50 the chyldren of Raaia, the chyldren of Razin, the chyldren of Necoda,
Nehemiah 7:51 the chyldren of Gesem, the chyldren of Vsa, the chyldren of Phaseah,
Nehemiah 7:52 the chyldren of Besai, the chyldren of Meunim, the chyldren of Nephusasim,
Nehemiah 7:53 the chyldren of Bachuc, the chyldren of Hacupha, the chyldren of Harhur,
Nehemiah 7:54 the chyldren of Bazlith, the chyldren of Mahida, the chyldren of Harsa,
Nehemiah 7:55 the children of Bercos, the chyldren of Sissera, the chyldren of Thamah,
Nehemiah 7:56 the chyldren of Neziah, the chyldren of Hatipha.
Nehemiah 7:57 The chyldren of Salomons seruauntes: The chyldren of Sotai, the chyldren of Sophereth, the chyldren of Pherida,
Nehemiah 7:58 the chyldren of Iaala, the chyldren of Darcon, the children of Gydel,
Nehemiah 7:59 the chyldren of Saphatiah, the children of Hatill, the chyldren of Pochereth of Zabaim, the chyldren of Amon.
Nehemiah 7:60 All the Nethinims and the chyldren of Salomons seruauntes, were thre hundred and two and nynetye.
Nehemiah 7:61 And these wente vp also of Thel Mela, Thel Harsa, Cherub, Adon & Emer: but they coulde not shewe theyr fathers house nor theyr sede, whether they were of Israel.
Nehemiah 7:62 The chyldren of Dalaiah, the children of Tobiah, and the chyldren of Necoda, sixe hundred and two and fortye.
Nehemiah 7:63 And of the priestes the children of Habaiah: the chyldren of Hacos, the chyldren of Bersilai, which toke one of the doughters of Bersilai the Galaadite to wyfe, and was named after theyr name.
Nehemiah 7:64 These soughte the regyster of theyr generacion, & when they founde it not, they were put from the priestehode.
Nehemiah 7:65 And Hathirsatha sayde vnto them, that they shulde not eate of the mooste holye, tyll there came vp a Prieste with the lyghte and perfectnesse.
Nehemiah 7:66 The whole congregacyon as one man was two and fortye thousande, thre hundred, and thre skore:
Nehemiah 7:67 besyde theyr seruauntes and maydens, of whome there were seuen thousande, thre hundred and seuen and thyrtye. And they had two hundred and seuen and fortye syngynge men and wemen,
Nehemiah 7:68 seuen hundred and syxe and thyrtye horses, two hundred & fyue and fortye Mules, foure hundred and fyue and thyrty
Nehemiah 7:69 Camels: syxe thousande, seuen hundred and twentye asses.
Nehemiah 7:70 And certayne of the auncyent fathers gaue vnto the worcke. Hathirsatha gaue to the treasure a thousande drammes, fyfty basens, fyue hundred and thyrtye Priestes garmentes.
Nehemiah 7:71 And some of the chefe fathers gaue vnto the treasure of the worcke, twentye thousande drammes, two thousande and two hundred pounde of syluer.
Nehemiah 7:72 And the other people gaue twentye thousande drammes, and two thousande pounde of syluer, & seuen and thre skore prestes garmentes.
Nehemiah 7:73 And the prestes and Leuites, the Porters, the syngers, and the other of the people, and the Nethinims, and all Israel dwelt in theyr cytyes. Nowe when the seuen moneth drue nye, and the chyldren of Israel were in theyr cytyes,

CHAPTER: 8

Nehemiah 8:1 al the people gathered themselues together as one man vpon the strete before the Watergate, and sayde vnto Esdras the scrybe, that he shulde fetche the boke of the lawe of Moses, whiche the Lorde commaunded to Israell.
Nehemiah 8:2 And Esdras the prieste broughte the lawe before the congregacyon bothe of men and wemen, and of all that coulde vnderstande it, vpon the fyrste daye of the seuenthe moneth,
Nehemiah 8:3 and red therein in the strete that is before the watergate, from the mornynge vntyll the noone daye before men and wemen, and suche as coulde vnderstand it: and the eares of all the people were inclined vnto the boke of the lawe.
Nehemiah 8:4 And Esdras the scrybe stode vpon an hye pulpyte of woode, whiche they had made for the preachyng, and besyde hym stode Mathathiah, Sema, Ananiah, Vriah, Helkiah, and Maaseiah, on hys ryghte hande: and on hys lefte hande stode Phadaiah, Misael, Melchiah, Hasum, Hasebadanah, Zachary and Mosolam.
Nehemiah 8:5 And Esdras opened the boke before all the people, for he stode aboue all the people. And when he opened it, all the people stode vp.
Nehemiah 8:6 And Esdras praysed the Lorde the greate God. And all the people answered Amen, Amen, with theyr handes vp, & bowed them selues, & worshipped the Lorde with theyr faces to the grounde.
Nehemiah 8:7 And Iesua, Baani, Serabiah, Iamin, Acuba, Sebathai, Hodaiah, Maasiah, Celita, Azariah, Iozabed, Hanan, Phalaiah, and the Leuites, caused the people to geue hede vnto the law, & the people stode in theyr place.
Nehemiah 8:8 And they red in the boke of the lawe of God distinctly & planely, so the men vnderstode the thinge that was red.
Nehemiah 8:9 And Nehemiah (whyche is Hathirsatha) & Esdras the prest and scrybe, and the Leuites that caused the people to take hede, sayde vnto all the people: thys daye is holy vnto the Lord youre God: be not ye sory therfore, & wepe not. For all the people wepte when they hearde the wordes of the lawe.
Nehemiah 8:10 Therfore sayde he vnto them: go youre waye, and eate the fat, and dryncke the swete, and sende parte vnto them also that haue not prepared them selues: for this daye is holye vnto our Lorde, be not ye sory therfore: for the ioye of the Lorde is youre strength.
Nehemiah 8:11 And the Leuites stilled al the people, and sayde: holde youre peace for the daye is holye, vexe not ye youre selues.
Nehemiah 8:12 And all the people wente theyr waye to eate and drincke, and to sende parte vnto other, and to make great myrth, because they had vnderstande the wordes that were declared vnto them.
Nehemiah 8:13 And on the nexte daye were geathered together the chefe fathers amonge all the people and the prestes and Leuites, vnto Esdras the scrybe, that he shulde teach them the wordes of the lawe.
Nehemiah 8:14 And they founde written in the lawe how that the Lorde had commaunded by Moses that the chyldren of Israel shulde dwell in bothes in the feaste of the seuenth moneth.
Nehemiah 8:15 And so they caused it be declared and proclaimed in all theyr cytyes, and at Ierusalem, sayinge: go vp vnto the mount and fetche Olyue braunches, Pynebraunches, Myrtbraunches, Palmebraunches, & braunches of thicke trees, to make bothes as it is wrytten.
Nehemiah 8:16 And the people wente vp, and fet them, & made them bothes, euerye one vpon the rofe of hys house, and in theyr courtes, and in the courtes of the house of GOD, and in the strete by the Watergate, and in the strete by porte Ephraim.
Nehemiah 8:17 And all the congregacyon of them that were come agayne oute of the captyuyte, made bothes, and dwelte therin: for sence the tyme of Iosua the sonne of Nun vnto thys daye, had not the chyldren of Israell done so, and there was verye greate gladnesse.
Nehemiah 8:18 And euerye daye from the fyrste daye vnto the last, red he in the boke of the lawe of God. And seuen dayes helde they the feaste, & on the eyght daye of the gatherynge together, accordynge vnto the maner.

CHAPTER: 9

Nehemiah 9:1 In the foure & twentye daye of thys moneth came the children of Israell together wyth fastynge sack clothes, and earthe vpon them,
Nehemiah 9:2 & separated the sede of Israell from all the straunge chyldren, and stode & knowleged theyr synnes, and the wyckednesses of theyr fathers
Nehemiah 9:3 & stode vp in theyr place, & red in the boke of the lawe of the Lord theyr God foure tymes on the day, and they knowleged & worshypped the Lorde theyr God foure tymes on the daye.
Nehemiah 9:4 And the Leuytes stode on hye, namely Iesua, Bani, Cadmiel, Sabaniah, Buni, Serebiah, Bani & Chanani, & cryed loude vnto the Lorde theyr God.
Nehemiah 9:5 And the Leuites, Iesua, Cadmiel Bani, Hasabniah, Serebiah, Hodiah, Sebaniah, Phathahiah, sayde: stande vp, prayse the Lorde youre God for euer, & let thankes be geuen vnto the name of thy glorye, which excelleth all thankesgeuing & prayse.
Nehemiah 9:6 Lorde, thou alone haste made heauen, & the heauen of al heauens, with all theyr host the earth & all that is therein, the sea and all that is therein: thou geuest lyfe vnto all, & the host of heauen bowe them selues vnto the.
Nehemiah 9:7 Thou arte the Lorde God, thou haste chosen Abram, & broughtest hym oute of Vr in Chaldea, & calledst hym Abraham,
Nehemiah 9:8 & foundest hys herte faythfull before the, & madest a couenaunte wyth hym to geue vnto hys sede the lande of the Cananites, Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Iebusytes & Gergesytes, and haste made good thy wordes: for thou arte ryghteous,
Nehemiah 9:9 & haste consydered the mysery of oure fathers in Egypte, & hearde theyr complaynte by the read sea,
Nehemiah 9:10 & shewed tokens and wonders vpon Pharao, & on all hys seruauntes, and on al the people of his land: for thou knewest that they were presumptuous & cruell agaynst them, & so madest thou the a name as it is this daye.
Nehemiah 9:11 And the reed sea dyddest thou deuyde in sunder before them, so that they wente thorowe the myddes of the sea drye shoed: and theyr persecuters threwest thou into the depe as a stone, in the myghtye waters,
Nehemiah 9:12 and leddest them on the daye tyme in a cloudy pyler, and on the nyghte season in a pyler of fyre, to shew them lyghte in the waye that they wente.
Nehemiah 9:13 Thou camest doune also vpon mount Sinai, and spakest vnto them from heauen, and gaueste them ryght iudgementes, true lawes good commaundementes and statutes,
Nehemiah 9:14 and declaredeste vnto them thy holye Sabboth, & commaundedst them preceptes, ordinaunces, and lawes, by Moses thy seruaunte:
Nehemiah 9:15 and gaueste them breade from heauen when they were hongrye, and broughtest forthe water for them out of the rock when they were thyrstye: and promysedest them, that they shulde go in, and take possessyon of the lande, ouer whiche thou haddest lyfte vp thyne hande for to geue them.
Nehemiah 9:16 But oure fathers were proude and hardnecked, so that they folowed not the commaundementes,
Nehemiah 9:17 and refused to heare, and were not myndefull of the wonders that thou dyddeste for them: but became obstynate & heady in so muche that they turned backe to theyr bondage in theyr disobedience. But thou my God forgauest, and wast gracyous, mercyfull, pacyente, and of greate goodnesse, and forsokest them not.
Nehemiah 9:18 And thoughe they made a moulten calfe (and sayde: Thys is thy God, that brought the oute of the lande of Egypte) & dyd greate blasphemyes,
Nehemiah 9:19 yet forsokeste thou them not in the wyldernes, accordynge to thy great mercye. And the cloudye pyler departed not from them on the daye tyme to leade them the way neyther the pyler of fyre in the nyght season, to shewe them lyghte in the waye that they wente.
Nehemiah 9:20 And thou gaueste them thy good spryte to enforme them, & withheldest not thy Manna from theyr mouthe, and gauest them water when they were thyrstye.
Nehemiah 9:21 Fortye yeares longe madest thou prouysyon for them in the wyldernesse, so that they lacked nothynge: theyr clothes waxed not olde, and theyr fete swelled not.
Nehemiah 9:22 And thou gauest them kyngedomes and nacyons, and partedst them accordynge to theyr porcyons, so that they possessed the lande of Sehon kynge of Hesebon, and the lande of Og the kynge of Basan.
Nehemiah 9:23 And theyr chyldren multyplyedst thou as the starres of heauen, and broughtest them into the lande whereof thou haddest spoken vnto their fathers, that they shulde go into it, and haue it in possessyon.
Nehemiah 9:24 And the chyldren wente in, and possessed the lande, and thou subdudest before them the inhabyters of the lande, euen the Cananites, & gauest them into theyr hande, & theyr kynges and the people of the lande, that they myghte do with them what they wolde.
Nehemiah 9:25 And they wanne theyr stronge cytyes, & a fat lande, and toke possession of houses that were ful of al maner goodes, welles digged oute, vyneyardes, oylegardens, and manye frutefull trees: & they ate & were fylled, & became fat, and lyued in welthe thorow thy great goodnesse.
Nehemiah 9:26 Neuerthelesse they were disobedient, & rebelled against the, and caste thy lawe behynde their backes, and slewe thy Prophetes (which exhorted them so earnestlye, that they shulde conuerte vnto the) and dyd greate blasphemyes.
Nehemiah 9:27 Therfore gauest thou them ouer into the hande of theyr enemyes that vexed them. And in the tyme of theyr trouble they cried vnto the, and thou hardest them from heauen and thorowe thy greate mercye thou gaueste them sauyours, which helped them oute of the hande of theyr enemyes.
Nehemiah 9:28 But when they came to reste, they turned backe agayne to do euyll before the: therefore lefteste thou them in the hande of theyr ennemyes, so that they had the domynyon ouer them. So they conuerted, and cryed vnto the, and thou heardeste them from heauen, and manye tymes haste thou delyuered them accordynge to thy greate mercye,
Nehemiah 9:29 and testyfyest vnto them, that they should turne agayne vnto thy lawe. Notwythstandyng they were proude, and herkened not vnto thy commaundementes, but synned in thy lawes (whiche a man shuld do, & lyue in them) & turned the shoulder awaye & were styfnecked, and wolde not heare.
Nehemiah 9:30 And manye yeares dyddest thou forbeare them, & testifyedst vnto them thorowe thy spryte, euen by the offyce of thy Prophetes, and yet wold they not heare Therfore gauest thou them into the hande of the nacyons in the landes.
Nehemiah 9:31 But for thy greate mercyes sake thou haste not vtterlye consumed them, nether forsaken them: for thou arte a gracyous and mercyfull God.
Nehemiah 9:32 Nowe oure God, thou great God, mightye and terryble, that thou kepest couenaunte and mercy, regarde not a lytle of the trauaile that hath happened vnto vs, and our kynges prynces, priestes, prophetes, fathers and all thy people, sence the tyme of the kynges of Assur vnto thys daye.
Nehemiah 9:33 Thou arte ryghteous in all that thou haste broughte vpon vs, for thou haste done ryghte.
Nehemiah 9:34 As for vs, we haue bene vngodly, and oure kynges, princes priestes and fathers haue not done after thy lawe, nor regarded thy commaundementes, & thy earnest exhortacyons wherewith thou hast exhorted them,
Nehemiah 9:35 and haue not serued the in their kyngedome, and in thy greate goodes that thou gauest them, and in the large and plenteous lande whiche thou gauest them, and haue not conuerted from theyr wycked workes.
Nehemiah 9:36 Beholde, therfore are we in bondage thys daye: yea euen in the lande that thou gaueste vnto oure fathers, to enioye the frutes and goodes thereof, beholde there are we bondemen.
Nehemiah 9:37 And greate is the increase of it vnto the kynges, whome thou haste set ouer vs because of oure synnes, and they haue domynyon ouer oure bodyes and cattell, and we are in great trouble.
Nehemiah 9:38 And in all thys make we a sure couenaunt, and wryte it, and let oure prynces, Leuites, & priestes seale it.

CHAPTER: 10

Nehemiah 10:1 These sealers were: Nehemiah (that is) Hathirsatha the sonne of Hachaliah & Zedekiah,
Nehemiah 10:2 Saraiah, Asariah, Ieremye,
Nehemiah 10:3 Phashur, Amariah, Malchiah,
Nehemiah 10:4 Hatus, Sebaniah, Malluch,
Nehemiah 10:5 Harim, Merimoth, Obadiah,
Nehemiah 10:6 Daniel Ienthon, Baruch,
Nehemiah 10:7 Mosolam, Abiah, Miamin,
Nehemiah 10:8 Maasiah, Belgai and Semeiah: these were priestes.
Nehemiah 10:9 The Leuites were: Iesua the sonne of Azariah, Benui amonge the chyldren of Henadad & Cadmiel.
Nehemiah 10:10 And theyr brethren: Sechaniah, Hodiah, Celita, Phalaiah, Hanan,
Nehemiah 10:11 Micha, Rohob, Hasabiah,
Nehemiah 10:12 Sachur, Serebiah, Sabaniah,
Nehemiah 10:13 Hodiah Bani and Baninu.
Nehemiah 10:14 The heades of the people were Phares, Pahath Moab, Elam, Zathua, Bani,
Nehemiah 10:15 Boni, Asgad, Bebai,
Nehemiah 10:16 Adoniah, Begoai, Adin,
Nehemiah 10:17 Ater, Hezekiah, Asur,
Nehemiah 10:18 Hodiah, Hasum, Bezai,
Nehemiah 10:19 Hariph, Anathoth, Nebai,
Nehemiah 10:20 Magphias, Mosolam, Hesir,
Nehemiah 10:21 Mesesabel, Zadoc, Iaddua,
Nehemiah 10:22 Phalatia, Hanan, Anaiah,
Nehemiah 10:23 Hosea, Hananiah, Hasub;
Nehemiah 10:24 Halohes, Phaleha, Sobek,
Nehemiah 10:25 Rehum, Hasebnah, Maasiah,
Nehemiah 10:26 Ahiah, Hanan, Anan,
Nehemiah 10:27 Malluch, Harim and Baanah.
Nehemiah 10:28 And the other people, the priestes, Leuytes, Porters, syngers, Nethinims, and al they that had separated them selues from the people in the landes vnto the lawe of God, with theyr wyues sonnes and doughters, as many as coulde vnderstande it,
Nehemiah 10:29 and theyr Lordes that had rule of them, receyued it for theyr brethren. And they came to sweare, and to bynde them selues wyth an othe to walke in Gods lawe, whiche was geuen by Moses the seruaunte of God, that they wolde obserue and do accordynge vnto all the commaundementes, iudgementes, and statutes of the Lorde oure GOD:
Nehemiah 10:30 and that we wolde not geue oure doughters vnto the people in the lande, nether to take theyr doughters for oure sonnes.
Nehemiah 10:31 And yf the people of the lande broughte ware on the Saboth, and all maner of vytayles to sell, that we wolde not take it of them on the Saboth and on the holye dayes. And that we wolde let the seuenth yeare be fre concernynge all maner of charge.
Nehemiah 10:32 And we decreed a statute vpon our selues, to geue yearlye the thyrde parte of a sycle to the mynystracyon in the house of oure God,
Nehemiah 10:33 namelye to the shewebreade, to the daylye meateofferynge, to the daylye burntoffering of the Sabothes, of the newe mones & feaste dayes, and to the thynges that were sanctyfyed, and to the synofferynges, to reconcyle Israel wythall, and to all the busynes in the house of oure God.
Nehemiah 10:34 And we caste the lot amonge the pryestes, Leuytes and the people, for offerynge of the woode to be broughte vnto the house of oure God from yeare to yeare, after the houses of oure fathers, that it myghte be brente at tymes appoynted, vpon the aultare of the Lord oure God, as it is wrytten in the lawe:
Nehemiah 10:35 and yearelye to brynge the fyrstlinges of oure land and the fyrstlynges of oure frutes of al trees yeare by yeare, vnto the house of the Lorde,
Nehemiah 10:36 & the fyrstlynges of oure sonnes, and of our catell, as it is wrytten in the lawe and the fyrstlynges of oure oxen and of our shepe, that we shulde brynge all thys to the house of oure God vnto the pryestes that mynyster in the house of oure God:
Nehemiah 10:37 and that we shulde bryng the fyrstlynges of oure dowghe, and of oure heaueofferynges, and the frutes of all maner trees, of wyne also and of oyle, vnto the priestes to the chestes of the house of oure God. And the tythes of oure lande vnto the Leuytes, that the Leuytes myghte haue the tithes in all the cytyes of oure mynystracyon.
Nehemiah 10:38 And the prieste the sonne of Aaron shall wt the Leuytes haue also of the tythes of the Leuytes, so that the Leuytes shall brynge vp the tythes of theyr tythes vnto the house of oure God to the cheste in the treasure house.
Nehemiah 10:39 For the children of Israel & the chyldren of Leui shall brynge vp the heaueofferynges of the corne, wine and oyle vnto the chestes. And ther shal be the vessels of the sanctuarye, & the priestes that minyster, and the porters and syngers, that we forsake not the house of oure God.

CHAPTER: 11

Nehemiah 11:1 And the rulers of the people dwelt at Ierusalem. But the other people cast lottes therfor, so that amonge ten one parte wente to Ierusalem into the holy citie to dwell, and nyne partes in the cytyes.
Nehemiah 11:2 And the people thanked al the men that were wylling to dwell at Ierusalem.
Nehemiah 11:3 These are the heades of the lande that dwelte in Ierusalem and in the cities of Iuda. And euery one dwelt in hys possession, & in their cyties of Israel, the priestes, Leuites, the Nethinims, and the chyldren of Salomons seruauntes.
Nehemiah 11:4 And at Ierusalem dwelte certayne of the chyldren of Iuda and Beniamin. Of the chyldren of Iuda: Athaiah the sonne of Vsiah the sonne of Zachary, the sonne of Amariah, the sonne of Saphatiah, the sonne of Mahalaleel, of the children of Phares.
Nehemiah 11:5 And Maasiah the sonne of Baruch, the sonne of Chal Hose, the sonne of Hasoi, the sonne of Adaia, the sonne of Ioiarib, the sonne of Zachary the sonne of Siloni.
Nehemiah 11:6 And the children of Phares that dwelt at Ierusalem, were four .C. and eight and thre score valeaunt men.
Nehemiah 11:7 These are the children of BenIamin: Sallu the sonne of Mesullam, the sonne of Ioeb, the sonne of Phadaiah, the sonne of Colaiah the sonne of Masiah, the sonne of Ithiel, the sonne of Isaiah.
Nehemiah 11:8 And after hym Abai, Selai nyne hundreth and eyght and twentye.
Nehemiah 11:9 And Ioel the sonne of Zechri had the ouersyght of them: and Iuda the sonne of Senuah ouer the seconde parte of the cytye.
Nehemiah 11:10 Of the priestes there dwelte: Iedaiah the sonne of Ioiarib, Iachin.
Nehemiah 11:11 Saraiah the sonne of Helkiah the sonne of Mosolam, the sonne of Zadoc, the sonne of Meraioth, the sonne of Ahitob, was prince in the house of God:
Nehemiah 11:12 and his brethren that perfourmed the worke in the house: of whom there were .viij.C. and .xxij. And Adaiah the sonne of Ieroham, the sonne of Plalahel, the sonne of Amazi, the sonne of Zachary, the sonne of Phashur the sonne of Melchia
Nehemiah 11:13 and hys brethren, chefe among the fathers: of whome there were two hundreth and two and fortye. And Amasai the sonne of Asarael the sonne of Ahasai the sonne of Mosolamoth, the sonne of Emer:
Nehemiah 11:14 and hys brethren were valeaunt men, of whom there were an hundreth & eyght & twentye. And theyr ouersear was Zabdiel the soune of Hagdolim.
Nehemiah 11:15 Of the Leuites: Semeiah the sonne of Hasub, the sonne of Aserikam, the sonne of Hasabiah the sonne of Boni,
Nehemiah 11:16 and Sabathai and Iosabad of the chefe of the Leuytes, in the outewarde busynes of the house of GOD.
Nehemiah 11:17 And Mathaniah the sonne of Micha, the sonne of Zabdi, the sonne of Asaph, whiche was the pryncypall to begynne the thankesgeuyng vnto prayer. And Bakbukiah the seconde amonge hys brethren, and Abda the sonne of Sammua, the sonne of Galal, the sonne of Iduthun.
Nehemiah 11:18 All the Leuytes in the holye cytye were two hundreth and foure and foure skore.
Nehemiah 11:19 And the porters Acub and Talmon and theyr brethren that kepte the portes, were an hundreth and two and seuenty.
Nehemiah 11:20 As for the residue of Israel, the priestes and Leuytes, they were in all the cytyes of Iuda, euerye one in hys inheritaunce.
Nehemiah 11:21 And the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Ziha and Gaspha belonged vnto the Nethinims.
Nehemiah 11:22 The ouersear of the Leuites at Ierusalem, was Vsi the sonne of Baani, the sonne of Hasabiah, the sonne of Mathaniah, the sonne of Micha. Of the chyldren of Asaph there were syngers aboute the busynes in the house of God:
Nehemiah 11:23 for it was the kynges commaundemente concernyng them, that the syngers shulde deale faythfullye euerye daye as accordynge was.
Nehemiah 11:24 And Pathaiah the sonne of Mesesabel of the chyldren of Zarah the sonne of Iuda next the kynge in all matters concernyng the people and theyr vyllages, thorowoute all theyr regyons.
Nehemiah 11:25 And the children of Iuda that were without in the tounes of theyr lande, dwelte some at Kariath Arbe, & in the vyllages there of, and at Dibon, and in the vyllages there of:
Nehemiah 11:26 and at Cabzeel, & in the vyllages thereof: & at Iesua, Moladah, Bethphalet,
Nehemiah 11:27 Hazersuall, Bersabe and in theyr vyllages:
Nehemiah 11:28 and at Sikelag and Moconah, & in theyr vyllages:
Nehemiah 11:29 And at Euremon, Zarah, Ierimuth,
Nehemiah 11:30 Zonoah, Odollam and in theyr vyllages: At Lachys, and in the feldes there of. At Asekah, and in the vyllages thereof: and dwelt from Bersabe vnto the valleye of Hennom.
Nehemiah 11:31 The children of Beniamin of Gaba, dwelt at Machmas, Aia, Bethel and in theyr vyllages.
Nehemiah 11:32 And at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
Nehemiah 11:33 Hazor, Ramah, Gethaim,
Nehemiah 11:34 Hadid Zeboim, Nabalat
Nehemiah 11:35 Lod, Ono & in the carpenters valleye.
Nehemiah 11:36 And certayne of the Leuites that had porcyons in Iuda, dwelte in BenIamin.

CHAPTER: 12

Nehemiah 12:1 These are the priestes & Leuytes that wente vp with Zorobabell the sonne of Salathiell & wyth Iesua: Saraiah, Ieremye, Esdras,
Nehemiah 12:2 Amariah, Meluth, Hatus
Nehemiah 12:3 Sechaniah, Rehum, Merimoth,
Nehemiah 12:4 Ado, Genthoi, Abiah,
Nehemiah 12:5 Miamin, Maadiah, Belgah,
Nehemiah 12:6 Semaiah, Ioiarib, Iadaiah,
Nehemiah 12:7 Salu, Amok, Helkiah and Iadaiah. These were the heades amonge the priestes and their brethren in the tyme of Iesua.
Nehemiah 12:8 The Leuites were these: Iesua, Bennui, Cadmiel, Sarabiah, Iuda and Mathaniah ouer the offyce of thankesgeuyng, they and theyr brethren:
Nehemiah 12:9 Backbukiah and Vni and theyr brethren, were about them in the watches.
Nehemiah 12:10 Iesua begat Ioakim. Ioakim begat Eliasib. Eliasib begat Ioiada.
Nehemiah 12:11 Ioiada begat Ionathan. Ionathan begat Iadua.
Nehemiah 12:12 And in the tyme of Ioakim were these the chefe fathers amonge the priestes: vnder Saraiah Maraiah, vnder Ieremy Hananiah,
Nehemiah 12:13 vnder Esdras Mosolam, vnder Amariah Iehoanan,
Nehemiah 12:14 vnder Milico Ionathan, vnder Sebaniah Ioseph,
Nehemiah 12:15 vnder Harim Edna, vnder Maraioth Helcai,
Nehemiah 12:16 vnder Adia Zachari, vnder Genthon Mosolam,
Nehemiah 12:17 vnder Abia Zechri, vnder Miniamin & Moadia Peltai,
Nehemiah 12:18 vnder Belgah Samua, vnder Semeiah Iehonathan,
Nehemiah 12:19 vnder Ioiarib Mathnai, vnder Iadaiah Vsi,
Nehemiah 12:20 vnder Selai Kelai, vnder Amok Eber,
Nehemiah 12:21 vnder Helchiah Hasabiah, vnder Iadaiah Nathanael.
Nehemiah 12:22 And in the tyme of Eliasib. Ioiada, Iohanan & Iadua were the cheif fathers amonge the Leuytes, and the prestes wrytten vnder the raygne of Darius the Persian.
Nehemiah 12:23 The chyldren of Leui the princypall fathers were written in the Cronycles, vntyll the tyme of Ionathan the sonne of Eliasib.
Nehemiah 12:24 And these were the chefe amonge the Leuytes, Hasabiah, Serebiah and Iesua the sonne of Cadmiel, and theyr brethren ouer agaynste them, to geue prayse and thankes, according as Dauid the man of God had ordeyned it, one watche ouer agaynst another
Nehemiah 12:25 Mathania, Balbukiah, Obadiah, Mosolam, Talmon and Abub were porters in the watche at the thresholdes of the gates.
Nehemiah 12:26 These were in the tyme of Ioiakim the sonne of Iesua the sonne of Iosedec, and in the tyme of Nehemiah the captayne and of the prieste Esdras the scrybe.
Nehemiah 12:27 And in the dedycacyon of the wall at Ierusalem, were the Leuytes soughte oute of all theyr places, that they myghte be broughte to Ierusalem, to kepe the dedicacyon and gladnesse, with thankesgeuynges, wyth syngyng with Cymbales, Psalteries and harpes.
Nehemiah 12:28 And the chyldren of the syngers gathered them selues together from the playne countreye aboute Ierusalem, and from the vyllages of Nethophathi,
Nehemiah 12:29 and from the house of Galgal, and out of the feldes of Geba and Asmaueth: for the syngers had buylded them vyllages aboute Ierusalem.
Nehemiah 12:30 And the priestes and Leuytes puryfyed them selues, and clensed the people, the gates and the wall.
Nehemiah 12:31 And I caused the princes of Iuda to go vp vpon the wall, and appoynted two greate queers of thankesgeuynge, whiche wente on the ryghte hande of the wall towarde the Dong gate,
Nehemiah 12:32 and after them wente Hosaiah, and half of the princes of Iuda,
Nehemiah 12:33 & Asaria, Esdras, Mosolam
Nehemiah 12:34 Iuda, Ben Iamin, Semeiah and Ieremy,
Nehemiah 12:35 and certayne of the priestes chyldren wyth trompettes, namely Zachary the sonne of Ionathan, the sonne of Semeiah, the sonne of Mathaniah, the sonne of Michaiah, the sonne of Zecur, the sonne of Asaph,
Nehemiah 12:36 and hys brethren, Semeiah, Asarael, Melalai, Galalai, Maai Nathanael and Iuda and Hanani, wyth the musicall instrumentes of Dauid the man of God. And Esdras the Scrybe before them,
Nehemiah 12:37 towarde the wellgate, and they went vp ouer agaynste them vpon the steppes of the cytie of Dauid at the goynge vp of the wall to the house of Dauid, vnto the watergate Eastewarde.
Nehemiah 12:38 The other queer of thankesgeuynge went ouer agaynste them, and I after them, & the halfe parte of the people vpon the wall, towarde the Fornacegate vpwarde, vntyll the brode wall,
Nehemiah 12:39 and to the porte of Ephraim, and to the oldegate, and to the Fyshgate, and to the tower of Hananeel, and to the tower of Meah, vntyll the shepegate. And in the presongate stode they styll,
Nehemiah 12:40 and so stode the two queers of thankesgeuynge of the house of God, and I and the halfe of the rulers wyth me,
Nehemiah 12:41 and the priestes, namelye Eliakim, Maasiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioenai, Zachary, Hananiah with trompettes,
Nehemiah 12:42 and Maasiah Semeiah, Eleasar, Vrsi, Iehohanan, Melchiah, Elam and Ser. And the syngers sang loud & Iestahiah was the ouerseer.
Nehemiah 12:43 And the same daye were there greate sacrifyces offered, and they reioysed: for God had geuen them greate gladnesse, so that both the wyues & chyldren were ioyfull, & the myrthe of Ierusalem was hearde farre of.
Nehemiah 12:44 At the same tyme were there men appoynted ouer the treasure chestes (wherein were the heaueofferynges, the fyrste lynges and the tythes) that they shulde gather them oute of the feldes aboute the cytyes, to destrybute them vnto the pristes and Leuytes accordynge to the lawe: for Iuda was glad of the priestes, and Leuytes, that they stode and wayted
Nehemiah 12:45 vpon the offyce of theyr God, and the offyce of the purificacion. And the singers and porters stode after the commaundement of Dauid and of Salomon hys sonne:
Nehemiah 12:46 for in the tyme of Dauid and Asaph, were the chefe syngers founded, and the songes of prayse and thankesgeuynge vnto God.
Nehemiah 12:47 In the tyme of Zorobabel and Nehemiah, dyd all Israel, geue porcyons vnto the syngers and porters, euerye daye his porcyon, and they gaue thynges halowed vnto the Leuytes, and the Leuites gaue thinges that were sanctyfyed, vnto the chyldren of Aaron.

CHAPTER: 13

Nehemiah 13:1 And what tyme as the boke of Moses was read in the eares of the people there was found wryten therein, that the Ammonytes and Moabites shulde neuer come into the congregacyn of God,
Nehemiah 13:2 because they met not the chyldren of Israel with bread and water, and hyred Balaam agaynste them, that he shulde curse them: neuerthelesse oure GOD turned the curse into a blessynge.
Nehemiah 13:3 Nowe when they hearde the lawe, they separated from Israell euerye one that had myxte hym selfe therein.
Nehemiah 13:4 And before this had the prieste Eliasib delyuered the cheste of the house of oure God vnto hys kynsman Tobiah:
Nehemiah 13:5 for he had made hym a greate cheste, and there had they afore tyme layed the meatofferynges, frankencense vessel, and the tythes of corne, wyne and oyle (accordynge to the commaundement geuen to the Leuytes, syngers & porters) and the heaueofferynges of the priestes.
Nehemiah 13:6 But in all thys was not I at Ierusalem: for in the two and thyrthyeth year of Arthaxerses kynge of Babilon, came I vnto the king, and after certayne dayes obtayned I lycence of the king
Nehemiah 13:7 to come to Ierusalem. And I gat knowledge of the euyll that Eliasib byd vnto Tobiah, in that he had made hym a chest in the courte of the house of God,
Nehemiah 13:8 and it greued me sore, and I cast forthe all the vessels of the house of Tobiah out of the chest,
Nehemiah 13:9 and commaunded them to clense the cheste. And thyther broughte I agayn the vessels of the house of God, the meateofferynge and the incense.
Nehemiah 13:10 And I perceyued, that the porcyons of the Leuites were not geuen them, for the whiche cause the Leuytes & syngers were fled, euerye one to hys lande for to worke.
Nehemiah 13:11 Then reproued I the rulers, and sayde: why forsake we the house of God. But I gathered them together & set them in theyr place.
Nehemiah 13:12 Then brought al Iuda the thythes of corne, wyne and oyle vnto the treasure.
Nehemiah 13:13 And I made treasures ouer the treasure, euen Selemiah the prieste, and Zadoc the scrybe, and of the Leuytes Phadaiah & vnder theyr hande Hanan the sonne of Zacur the sonne of Mathaniah: for they were counted faythfull, and theyr offyce was to dystrybute vnto theyr brethren.
Nehemiah 13:14 Thyncke vpon me O my God herein, and wype not oute my mercye, that I haue shewed on the house of my God, and on the offycers thereof.
Nehemiah 13:15 At the same tyme sawe I some tredynge wynepresses on the Saboth, and bryngynge in clusters, and asses laden wyth wyne, grapes, fygges, and bryngynge al maner of burthens vnto Ierusalem, vpon the Saboth day. And I rebuked them earnestlye the same daye that they solde the vytayles.
Nehemiah 13:16 There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, whiche brought fyshe & all maner of ware, and solde on the Sabboth vnto the chyldren of Iuda, and Ierusalem.
Nehemiah 13:17 Then reproued I the rulers in Iuda, and sayd vnto them: what euyll thynge is thys that ye do, & breake the Saboth day?
Nehemiah 13:18 Dyd not our fathers euen thus, and oure GOD brought all thys plage vpon vs & vpon thys cytye? And ye make the wrathe more yet vpon Israel, in that ye breake the Saboth.
Nehemiah 13:19 And it fortuned, that when the porters of Ierusalem made shadowe before the Saboth, I commaunded to shut the gathes, & charged, that they shulde not be opened tyl after the Saboth & some of my seruauntes set I at the gates, that here shulde no burthen be broughte in on the Saboth daye.
Nehemiah 13:20 Then remayned the chapmen and marchauntes ones or twyce ouer nyghte wythoute Ierusalem wyth all maner of wares.
Nehemiah 13:21 Then reproued I them sore, and sayd vnto them: why tarye ye all nyghte aboute the wall? If ye do it ones agayne, I wyll lay handes vpon you. From that tyme forthe came they no more on the Saboth.
Nehemiah 13:22 And I sayde vnto the Leuytes whiche were cleane, that they shulde come and kepe the gates, to halowe the Saboth daye. Thynke vpon me (O my God) concernynge this also, and spare me according to thy greate mercy.
Nehemiah 13:23 And at the same tyme sawe I Iewes, that maryed wyues of Asdod, Ammon & of Moab,
Nehemiah 13:24 and theyr chyldren spake halfe in the speache of Asdod, and could not speake in the Iewes language, but by the tonge myghte a man perceyue euerye people.
Nehemiah 13:25 And I reproued them, & cursed them, and smote certaine men of them, and pluckte them vp, and toke an othe of them by God: Ye shall not gene youre doughters vnto theyr sonnes, neyther shal ye take theyr doughters vnto youre sonnes, or for your selues.
Nehemiah 13:26 Dyd not Salomon the king of Israel synne there in? & yet among many Heythen was there no kynge lyke hym, and he was deare vnto hys God, and God made hym kynge ouer al Israel, and yet neuertheles outlandyshe wemen caused hym to synne?
Nehemiah 13:27 And shall we then obeye vnto you, to do all thys greate euyll, & to transgresse agaynst oure God, and marye straunge wyues?
Nehemiah 13:28 And one of the chyldren of Iehoiada the sonne of Eliasib the hye prieste, had made a contracte wyth Sanabalat the Horonite: but I chaced him from me.
Nehemiah 13:29 O my God, thinke thou vpon them that are quyte of the priesthode, & haue defyled the couenaunte of the priesthode and of the Leuites.
Nehemiah 13:30 Thus clensed I them from all suche as were outlandyshe, and appointed the courses of the priestes and Leuites, euerye one to hys offyce,
Nehemiah 13:31 and to offre the wood at times appoynted, & the fyrste frutes. Thinke. thou vpon me (O my God) for the beste.

BOOK: Esther

CHAPTER: 1

Esther 1:1 In the tyme of Ahasuerus which raygned from Iudia vnto Ethiophia ouer an hundred & seuen and twentye landes,
Esther 1:2 what tyme as he sate on hys seate royal in the castel of Susan
Esther 1:3 in the thyrde yeare of hys raygne, he made a feaste vnto all his princes and seruauntes, namely vnto the myghty men of Persia and Media, to the captaynes and rulers of hys countrey
Esther 1:4 that he might shewe the noble riches of hys kyngdome, and the gloryous worshippe of his greatnesse, many dayes longe, euen an hundreth and foure skore dayes.
Esther 1:5 And when these dayes were expired, the kinge made a feaste vnto all the people that were in the castel of Susan, bothe vnto great and small, seuen dayes longe in the courte of the garden by the kynges palace,
Esther 1:6 were there hanged whyte, reed and yalowe clothes, fastened wyth coardes of lynnen and scarlet in syluer rynges, vpon pylers of Marble stone. The benches were of goulde and syluer made vpon a pauement of grene, whyte, yalow, and black Marble.
Esther 1:7 And the drynke was caried in vessels of goulde, & there was euer chaunge of vessell. And the kinges wine was muche accordinge to the power of the kynge.
Esther 1:8 And no man was appoynted what he should drynke: for the kinge hath commaunded all the officers of his house, that euery one should do as it liked him.
Esther 1:9 And the quene Vasthi made a feaste also for the wemen in the palace of Ahasuerus.
Esther 1:10 And on the seuenth daye when the kynge was mery of the wine, he commaunded Mehuman, Bartha, Harbona, Bagatha, Abagatha, Zathar & Carcas, the seuen chamberlaynes (that dyd seruice in the presence of king Ahasuerus)
Esther 1:11 to fetche the quene Vasthi, wt the crowne regal, that he myght shewe the people and princes her fairnesse: for she was bewtiful.
Esther 1:12 But the quene Vasthi woulde not come at the kynges worde by his chamberlaynes. Then was the kinge very wroth, and his indignacion kindled in him.
Esther 1:13 And the king spake to the wyse men that hath vnderstanding in the ordynaunces of the land for the kinges matters must be handled before all suche as haue knowledge of the lawe and iudgement:
Esther 1:14 and the nexte vnto hym were Carsena, Sethar, Admatha, Charsis, Mares, Marsana and Mamucan, the seuen princes of the Persians, and Medes, which sawe the kinges face, and sat aboue in the kingedom.
Esther 1:15 What law should be execute vpon the quene Vasthi, because she dyd not accordynge to the worde of the kynge by his chamberlaynes.
Esther 1:16 Then sayde Mamucan before the kynge and the princes: the quene Vasthi hath not onely done euyl agaynst the kinge but also agaynst al the prynces and all the people in al the landes of king Ahasuerus,
Esther 1:17 for this deed of the quene shal come abroad vnto all the wemen, so that they shall despise their husbandes before their eyes, and shall saye: the kyng Ahasuerus commaunded Vasthi the quene to come before him, but she woulde not.
Esther 1:18 And so shall the princesses in Persia and Media saye lykewise vnto all the kynges prynces, when they heare of this deede of the quene, thus shal there aryse despitefulnes and wrath ynough.
Esther 1:19 Yf it please the kynge, let there go a commaundement from him, and let it be wrytten accordynge to the lawe of the Persians and Medians (and not to be transgressed) that Vasthi come no more before the kynge Ahasuerus, and let the king geue the kyngedome vnto another that is better then she.
Esther 1:20 And that this writtinge of the king which shalbe made, be publyshed thorowe oute all his empyre (whiche is greate) that all wyues maye holde their husbandes in honoure, both amonge greate and small.
Esther 1:21 This pleased the kinge and the princes, and the kynge dyd accordynge to the worde of Mamucan.
Esther 1:22 Then were there letters sent forthe in all the kynges landes, into euery lande, accordynge to the wryttinge therof, & to euery people after their language, that euery man should be Lord in hys own house. And this caused he be spoken after the language of hys people.

CHAPTER: 2

Esther 2:1 After these actes when the displeasure of king Ahasuerus was laied, he thought vpon Vasthi, what she had done, and what was concluded concernynge her.
Esther 2:2 Then sayd the kynges seruauntes: Let there be fayre young virgins soughte for the king,
Esther 2:3 and let the king appoynte ouersears in all the landes of hys empyre, that they maye brynge together all fayre younge virgins vnto the castell of Susan to the wemens buyldynge, vnder the hand of Hagei the kynges chamberlayne, that kepeth the Wemen, and let hym geue them their apparell.
Esther 2:4 And loke whiche Damosell pleaseth the kyng, let her be quene in Vasthis steade. This pleaseth the kyng, and he did so.
Esther 2:5 In the castel of Susan there was a Iewe, whose name was Mardocheus, the sonne of Iair, the sonne of Semei, the sonne of Cis the sonne of Iemini,
Esther 2:6 whyche was caryed awaye from Ierusalem, when Iekoniah the kinge of Iuda was led awaye (whom Nabuchodozor the kinge of Babilon caryed awaye)
Esther 2:7 and he noryshed Hadasah (that is Esther) hys vncles doughter: for she had neither father nor mother, and she was a fayre and beutiful Damosel. And when her father and mother dyed, Marchodeus receyued her as hys own doughter.
Esther 2:8 Now when the kynges commaundement and commission was publyshed, and many Damoselles were broughte together vnto the castel of Susan, vnder the hande of Hagei, Esther was taken also vnto the kinges house vnder the hand of Hagei the keper of the wemen,
Esther 2:9 and the damosel pleased him, & she found grace in hys sighte. And he caused her oyntment to be geuen her, and her gyftes, & gaue her seuen notable gentyl wemen of the kynges house, and arayed bothe her and her gentyll wemen very richely in the house of the wemen.
Esther 2:10 But Esther shewed not her people nor her kynred: for Mardocheus had charged her that she shoulde no tell it.
Esther 2:11 And Mardocheus walked euery daye before the courte of the wemens buyldynge, that he myghte knowe howe Esther dyd, and what shoulde become of her.
Esther 2:12 And when the appoynted tyme of euery damosell came that she shoulde come to the kynge Ahasuerus, after that she had ben twelue monethes in the deckynge of the wemen (for their deckynge most haue so muche tyme, namely sixe monethes wyth Balme & Mirre, & syxe Monethes with good spices, so were the wemen beutyfyed)
Esther 2:13 then wente one damosell vnto the kinge, and whatsoeuer she required, that must be geuen her to go wyth her out of the wemens buylding vnto the kinges palace.
Esther 2:14 And when one came in the euenynge, that same went from hym on the morowe into the seconde house of wemen, vnder the hande of Sasagas the kynges chamberlain, whyche kepte the concubynes. And she must come vnto the kynge no more, excepte it pleased the kynge, and that he caused her to be called by name.
Esther 2:15 Now when the tyme came of Esther the doughter of Abihail Mardocheus vncle (whom he had receyued as hys owne doughter) that she shoulde come to the kyng, she desyred nothynge but what Hagei the kinges chamberlayne the keper of the wemen sayde. And Esther founde fauoure in the syghte of all them that loked vpon her.
Esther 2:16 And Esther was taken vnto kynge Ahasuerus into the house royall, in the tenth moneth whyche is called Tebeth, in the seuenth yeare of hys raygne.
Esther 2:17 And the kinge loued Esther aboue all the wemen, and she founde grace and mercy in his syghte before all the virgins: and he sette the quenes croune vpon her heade, and made her quene in steade of Vasthi.
Esther 2:18 And the kinge made a great feaste vnto all hys prynces and seruauntes (whyche feaste was because of Esther) and let the landes be in quyetnes, & gaue royall gyftes.
Esther 2:19 And when the virgins were gathered together the seconde tyme, Mardocheus sat in the kinges gate.
Esther 2:20 And as yet had not Esther shewed her kinred & her people, according as Mardocheus had bidden her: for Esther dyd after the worde of Mardocheus, like as when he was her tutoure.
Esther 2:21 At the same tyme whyle Mardocheus sat in the kynges gate, two of the kinges chamberlaynes Bagathan and Thares whiche kepte the dore, were wroth, & sought to laye their handes on the kynge Ahasuerus:
Esther 2:22 wherof Mardocheus gat knoweledge, & tolde it vnto quene Esther, & Esther certyfied the kinge therof in Mardocheus name.
Esther 2:23 And when inquisicion was made, it was founde so. And they were bothe hanged on tre: and it was written in the Chronycles before the kinge.

CHAPTER: 3

Esther 3:1 After these actes dyd the kynge promote Haman the sonne of Amadatha the Agagite, and set him hye, & set hys seate aboue all the princes that were wt hym.
Esther 3:2 And all the kinges seruauntes that were in the gate, bowed their knees, & dyd reuerence vnto Haman: for the kinge had so commaunded. But Mardocheus bowed not the knee, and worshipped him not.
Esther 3:3 Then the kinges seruauntes whiche were in the kinges gate, sayde vnto Mardocheus: why transgressest thou the kynges commaundement?
Esther 3:4 And when they spake this dayly vnto him, & he folowed them not, they tolde Haman, that they might se whether Mardocheus matters woulde endure: for he had tolde them, that he was a Iewe.
Esther 3:5 And when Haman sawe, that Mardocheus bowed not the knee vnto hym, nor worshipped him, he was full of indignacyon
Esther 3:6 and thought it to littell to laye handes onely on Mardocheus: for they had shewed hym the nacyon of Mardocheus, but he soughte to destroye all the Iewes the nacion of Mardochens, that were in the whole empyre of Ahasuerus.
Esther 3:7 In the fyrste moneth (that is the monethe Nisan) in the twelueth yeare of kynge Ahasuerus they cast Phur (that is a lot) before Haman, on what day & what moneth this should be done: & it went oute the twelueth monethe that is the moneth Adar.
Esther 3:8 And Haman sayde vnto kyng Ahasuerus: There is a people scatered abroade & dispersed amonge all people in all the landes of thyne empire, & their lawe is contrary vnto all people, & they do not after the kynges lawes, nether is it the kinges profet to suffre them after this maner.
Esther 3:9 Yf it please the kinge let hym wrytte, that they maye be destroyed, & so will I weye doune ten thousande talentes of siluer, vnder the handes of the workmen, to be brought into the kinges chamber.
Esther 3:10 Then toke the kinge his ryng from his hande, & gaue it vnto Haman the sonne of Amadatha the Agagite the Iewes enemy.
Esther 3:11 And the kynge sayde vnto Haman: Let the syluer be geuen the, and that people also, to do with all what pleaseth the.
Esther 3:12 Then were the kinges scribes called on the thirtenth daye of the fyrst moneth, and there was wrytten (accordyng as Haman commaunded) vnto the kinges princes and to the captiues euery where in the landes, and to the rulers of euery people in the countreyes on euery syde, accordynge to the wryttinge of euery nacyon, and after their language in the name of kynge Ahasuerus, and sealed wyth the kynges rynge.
Esther 3:13 And the writtinges were sent by postes into all the kinges landes, to rote out, to kyll, and to destroye all Iewes, both younge and olde, chyldren and wemen in one daye (namely vpon the thyrtenth daye of the twelueth moneth, which is the moneth Adar) & to spoyle theyr goodes.
Esther 3:14 Thys was the summe of the writtynge, that there shoulde be a commaundement geuen in all landes, to be publyshed vnto all people, that they shoulde be ready agaynst the same daye.
Esther 3:15 And the postes wente in all the hast according to the kinges commaundement. And in the castell of Susan was the commaundement deuised. And the kynge and Haman sate and drancke. But the cyty of Susan was disquyeted.

CHAPTER: 4

Esther 4:1 When Mardocheus perceiued al that was done, he rente his clothes, and put on sacke clothe, & asshes, and went out into the middes of the citie & cried loud and lamentably,
Esther 4:2 and came before the kinges gate: for there myghte no man entre wythyn the kynges gate, that hath sacke clothe on.
Esther 4:3 And in all landes and places, as farre as the kynges worde and commaundement extended there was greate lamentacyon among the Iewes, and many fasted, wepte, mourned, & laye in sacke clothes & in ashes.
Esther 4:4 So Esthers Damosels & her chamberlaynes, came & told it her. Then was the quene exceadingly astonyed. And she sent rayment, that Mardocheus shoulde put them on, and laye the sacke clothe from hym. But Mardocheus woulde not take them.
Esther 4:5 Then called Esther Hathath one of the kynges chamberlaynes (whyche stode before her) and gaue hym a commaundement vnto Mardocheus, that he myghte knowe what it were, & wherfore he dyd so.
Esther 4:6 So Hathath went forth to Mardocheus vnto the strete of the citye, whyche was before the kynges gate.
Esther 4:7 And Mardocheus told him of all that had happened vnto him, and of the summe of siluer that Haman had promysed to weye doune in the kinges chamber because of the Iewes for to destroy them:
Esther 4:8 and he gaue him the copy of the commaundement, that was deuised at Susan to destroy them, that he might shewe it vnto Esther, and to speake to her, and charge her, that she shoulde go into the kynge and make her prayer and supplicacion vnto hym for her people.
Esther 4:9 And when Hathath came in, & told Esther the wordes of Mardocheus,
Esther 4:10 Esther spake vnto Hathath, and commaunded hym to saye vnto Mardocheus:
Esther 4:11 all the kynges seruauntes, and the people in the landes of the king know that whosoeuer commeth within the courte vnto the king, whether it be man or woman, which is not called, the commaundement is that the same shall dye immediatly, excepte the kinge holde oute the goulden scepter vnto him, that he maye lyue. As for me, I haue not bene called to come into the kyng, now this thirty dayes.
Esther 4:12 And when Mardocheus was certifyed of Esthers worde
Esther 4:13 Mardocheus bad say again vnto Esther: thynke not to saue thyne owne lyfe, whyle thou arte in the kynges house before all Iewes:
Esther 4:14 for yf thou holdest thy peace at this tyme, then shall the Iewes haue helpe and delyueraunce out of another place, and thou and thy fathers house shalbe destroied. And who knoweth wheter thou art come to the kyngedome, for this tymes sake?
Esther 4:15 Esther bad geue Mardocheus this answere:
Esther 4:16 Go thou thy waye then, and gather together all the Iewes that are founde at Susan, and fast ye for me, that ye eat not & drinke not in thre dayes, nether day nor nyght. I & my Damosels wil fast lykewise, and so wil I go into the kynge contrary to the commaundement: yf I perish I peryshe.
Esther 4:17 So Mardocheus wente his way, and dyd all that Esther had commaunded him.

CHAPTER: 5

Esther 5:1 And on the thyrde daye put Esther on her royall apparell, & stode in the courte of the kynges palace within ouer agaynst the kynges house. And the kinge sat vpon his royal seate in the kynges palace ouer agaynst the gate of the house.
Esther 5:2 And when the Kyng sawe Esther the quene standynge in the courte, she founde grace in his sighte. And the kynge helde out the goulden scepter in his hand towarde Esther. So Esther stept forth, and touched the toppe of the scepter.
Esther 5:3 Then sayde the Kynge vnto her: What wylt thou quene Esther? and what requyrest thou? aske euen the halfe of the empyre, and it shalbe geuen the.
Esther 5:4 Esther saide: Yf it please the Kynge, let the Kyng and Haman come this day vnto the bancket that I haue prepared.
Esther 5:5 The Kyng sayd: cause Haman to make hast, that he may do, as Esther hath sayde. Now when the Kynge & Haman came to the bancket that Esther had prepared,
Esther 5:6 the kyng said vnto Esther at the bancket of wyne: Esther what is thy peticion? and it shalbe geuen the. And what requyrest thou? Yf it be euen the halfe of the empyre, it shalbe done.
Esther 5:7 Then answered Esther & sayde: my peticyon & desyre is,
Esther 5:8 yf I haue founde grace in the syght of the Kinge, & yf it please the kinge to geue me my petycion, and to fulfyll my request, then let the Kynge & Haman come to the bancket, that I shall prepare for them, and so wil I do to morow as the kynge hath sayde.
Esther 5:9 Then wente Haman forthe the same daye ioyfull and mery in his mynde. And when he sawe Mardocheus in the kinges gate, that he stode not vp and kneled before him, he was ful of indygnacyon at Mardocheus.
Esther 5:10 Neuertheles he refrayned him selfe, and when he came home, he sent, & called for his frendes and Zares hys wyfe,
Esther 5:11 & tolde them of the glory of hys ryches, & the multitude of hys chyldren all together how the king had promoted him so greatly, and howe that he was taken aboue the princes and seruauntes of the kynge.
Esther 5:12 Haman said moreouer: Ye, and Ehster the quene let no man come with the king vnto the bancket that she had prepared, except me, & to morowe am I bidden vnto her also with the king.
Esther 5:13 But in all this am I not satisfyed as longe as I se Mardocheus the Iewe syttynge at the kynges gate.
Esther 5:14 Then sayde Zares hys wyfe & al hys frendes vnto hym: Let them make a galowes of fyfty cubytes hye, and to morow speake thou vnto the king that Mardocheus may be hanged theron, yf thou commest merely wyth the kynge vnto the bancket. Haman was well content wyth all, and caused a galowes to be prepared.

CHAPTER: 6

Esther 6:1 The same nyght could not the king slepe, & he commaunded to bring the Chronicles & storyes: which when they were read before the kinge,
Esther 6:2 they happened vnto the place where it was wrytten, howe Mardocheus had tolde, that the kinges two chamberlaynes (which kepte the thressholdes) sought to laye handes on kynge Ahasuerus.
Esther 6:3 And the king said: what whorshippe & good haue we done to Mardocheus therfore? Then said the kinges seruauntes that ministred vnto hym: There is nothing done for him.
Esther 6:4 And the king sayde: Who is in the courte? (for Haman was gone into the courte without before the kinges house, that he might speake vnto the king to hange Mardocheus on the tre, that he had prepared for him)
Esther 6:5 And the kinges seruauntes sayd vnto hym: beholde, Haman standeth in the courte. The kinge sayde: let him come in.
Esther 6:6 And when Haman came in, the king sayd vnto him: what shalbe done vnto the man, whom the kyng would fayne bryng vnto worship? But Haman thought in his herte: Whome shoulde the kynge els be glad to brynge vnto worshippe, but me?
Esther 6:7 And Haman sayde vnto the kynge: Let the man vnto whome the king woulde be glad in do worshippe, be broughte hyther,
Esther 6:8 that he maye be araied with the royall garmentes whyche the kinge vseth to weare: and the horse that the kynge rydeth vpon, and that the croune royall maye be set vpon hys heade.
Esther 6:9 And let this raiment & horse be delyuered vnder the hande of one of the kinges prynces, that he maye araye the man withall (whome the kinge woulde fayne honoure) and carie hym vpon the horse thorow the strete of the citie, & cause it to be proclamed before him: thus shall it be done to euery man, whom the kyng woulde fayn honoure.
Esther 6:10 The kinge saide: make haste, and take as thou hast sayde, the rayment and the horse: & do euen so with Mardocheus the Iewe that sytteth before the kynges gate, & let nothinge fayle of all that thou hast spoken.
Esther 6:11 Then toke Haman the rayment and the horse, & arayed hym, and brought him on horsbacke thorowe the streate of the cytye, and proclamed before him: Euen thus shall it be done vnto euery man whom the king is dysposed to honoure.
Esther 6:12 And Mardocheus came agayn to the kinges gate, but Haman gat him home in al the haste mournynge with bare heade,
Esther 6:13 and told Zares his wyfe & all his frendes, euery thyng that had happened him. Then sayde his wise men & Zares his wyfe vnto him: Yf it be Mardocheus of the sede of the Iewes, before whom thou hast begonne to fall, thou canst do nothynge vnto hym, but shalt fall before hym.
Esther 6:14 Whyle they were yet talkynge with him, came the kynges chamberlaynes, and caused Haman to make haste to come vnto the bancket that Esther had prepared.

CHAPTER: 7

Esther 7:1 And when the kynge and Haman came to the bancket that quene Esther had prepared,
Esther 7:2 the king sayde vnto Esther on the second day at the bancket of wyne: what is thy petycyon quene Esther, that it may be geuen the. And what requyrest thou? Yea, aske euen halfe of the empyre, & it shalbe done.
Esther 7:3 Esther the quene answered & sayd: Yf I haue founde grace in thy syghte (O Kinge) & yf it please the kinge, then graunte me my lyfe at my desire & my people for my peticions sake:
Esther 7:4 for we are sold I & my people bothe to be destroyed, to be slayne & to perish: & would god we were solde to be bondmen & bondwemen, then would I hold my tonge, so should not the enemye be so hye to the kynges harme.
Esther 7:5 The kinge Ahasuerus spake and sayde vnto quene Esther: what is he that? Or where is he that darre presume in hys mynd to do such a thynge after that maner?
Esther 7:6 Esther sayde: the enemy and aduersarye is this wicked Haman. As for Haman, he was exceadingly afrayed before the Kynge & the quene.
Esther 7:7 And the Kyng arose from the bancket & from the wine in his dyspleasure, and wente into the palace garden. And Haman stode vp, and besought quene Esther for his life: for he sawe that there was a myschefe prepared for hym of the king all ready.
Esther 7:8 And when the Kynge came agayne oute of the palace garden into the parler, where they had eaten, Haman had layed hym vpon the bed that Esther sat vpon. Then sayde the Kynge? will he force the quene also besyde me in the house? As sone as that worde wente out of the kynges mouthe, they couered Hamans face.
Esther 7:9 And Harbonah one of the chamberlaynes that stode before the kynge, sayde: Behold, there standeth a galowes in Hamans house fyfty cubytes hye, which he had made for Mardocheus, that spake good for the king. The Kynge saide: hange him theron.
Esther 7:10 So they hanged Haman on the galowes that he had made for Mardocheus. Then was the Kynges wrath pacyfyed.

CHAPTER: 8

Esther 8:1 The same daye dyd Kynge Ahasuerus geue the house of Haman the Iewes enemye, vnto quene Esther. And Mardocheus came before the kynge: for Esther told howe that he belongeth vnto her.
Esther 8:2 And the king put of his finger ring, which he had taken from Haman, & gaue it vnto Mardocheus. And Esther set Mardocheus ouer the house of Haman.
Esther 8:3 And Esther spake yet more before the king, & fel doune at his fete, & besought hym, that he would put away the wickednes of Haman the Agagite, and his deuice that he had ymagened agaynst the Iewes.
Esther 8:4 And the king helde oute the goulden scepter vnto Esther. Then rose Esther and stode before the kinge,
Esther 8:5 and sayd: Yf it please the Kynge, & yf I haue found grace in his syght, & yf I be conuenient for the King, and yf it be accepted in his sight then let it be wrytten, that the letters of the deuyce of Haman the sonne of Hamadatha, the Agagite, may be called agayne: which letters he wrote, to destroy the Iewes in all the kinges landes.
Esther 8:6 For how can I se the euil that shal happen vnto my people? and how can I loke vpon the destruccyon of my kinred.
Esther 8:7 Then sayde kinge Ahasuerus vnto quene Esther, & to Mardocheus the Iewe: Behold, I haue geuen Esther the house of Haman, & hym haue they hanged vpon a tre, because he layed hand vpon the Iewes.
Esther 8:8 Wryte ye nowe therfore for the Iewes, as it lyketh you in the kinges name, and seale it wyth the kynges ringe (for the wryttinges that were wrytten in the kinges name, and sealed wyth the kinges ringe, durst no man dysanulle.)
Esther 8:9 Then were the kinges scribes called at the same tyme in the thirde moneth, that is the moneth Siuan, on the thre and twentyeth daye. And it was wrytten, as Mardocheus commaunded vnto the Iewes and to the princes, to the debities and captaynes in the landes from India vntil Ethiopia, namely an hundred & seuen & twenty landes, vnto euery one according to the wryttyng therof, vnto euery people after their speche, and to the Iewes accordyng to their wryttynge and language.
Esther 8:10 And it was written in the king Ahasuerus name, and sealed with the kinges ringe. And by postes that rode vpon swyft yong mules sent he the writtinges,
Esther 8:11 wherin the king graunted the Iewes (in what cities soeuer they were) to gather them selues together, & to stand for their lyfe, and for to rote oute, to slaye, and to destroy all the power of the people & land that woulde trouble them, with children and wemen, & to spoyle their good
Esther 8:12 vpon one day in all the landes of king Ahasuerus namely vpon the thyrtenth daye of the twelueth moneth whiche is the moneth Adar.
Esther 8:13 The summe of the writting was, how there was a commaundement geuen in al landes to be publyshed vnto al the people, that the Iewes shoulde be ready against that day to auenge them selues on their enemies:
Esther 8:14 & the postes that rode vpon the mules, made haste with al spede according to the kinges word: & the commaundement was deuysed in the castel of Susan.
Esther 8:15 As for Mardocheus, he went out from the king in royal apparel of yelow & whyte, and with a great croune of gould, beynge arayed wt a garment of linnen & purple, & the cyty of Susan reioysed & was glad:
Esther 8:16 but vnto the Iewes there was come light & gladnesse, & ioye & worshyppe.
Esther 8:17 And in all landes & cyties, into what places soeuer the kinges worde & commaundement reached, there was ioy & myrth prosperite & good dayes amonge the Iewes, in so muche that many of the people in the land became of the Iewes belefe, for the feare of the Iewes came vpon them.

CHAPTER: 9

Esther 9:1 In the twelueth moneth, that is the moneth Adar, vpon the thirtenth day, which the kinges word & commaundement had appointed that it should be done, euen vpon the same day that the enemies should haue destroyed the Iewes to haue oppressed them, it turned contrary wise, euen that the Iewes should subdue their enemies.
Esther 9:2 Then gathered the Iewes together in their cytyes within al the landes of kinge Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as woulde do them euill, & noman could withstand them: for the feare of them was come ouer all people.
Esther 9:3 And all the rulers in the landes, & prynces and Debites, & officers of the kinge promoted the Iewes: for the feare of Mardocheus came vpon them.
Esther 9:4 For Mardocheus was great in the kinges house, and the reporte of him was noysed in all landes, how he encreased and grewe.
Esther 9:5 Thus the Iewes smote all their enemies with a sore slaughter, & slewe & destroyed, & dyd after their wyll vnto suche as were their aduersaries.
Esther 9:6 And at the castel of Susan slue the Iewes & destroyed fyue hundreth men:
Esther 9:7 & slewe Pharsandatha, Delphon, Asphatha,
Esther 9:8 Phoratha, Adalia, Aridatha,
Esther 9:9 Pharmastha, Arisai, Aridai, Daizatha,
Esther 9:10 the ten sonnes of Haman the sonne of Hamadatha the enemy of the Iewes: but on hys goodes they layed no handes.
Esther 9:11 At the same tyme was the kynge certified of the nombre of those that were slaine at the castel of Susan.
Esther 9:12 And the Kynge sayde vnto quene Esther: The Iewes haue slayne & destroyed fyue hundreth men at the castell of Susan, & the ten sonnes of Haman: What shall they do in the other landes of the kinge? What is thy peticion, that it maye be geuen the? & what requirest thou more to be done?
Esther 9:13 Esther sayde: Yf it please the kynge, let hym suffre the Iewes to morow also to do accordynge vnto thys dayes commaundemente, that they maye hange Hamans ten sonnes vpon the tree.
Esther 9:14 And the Kyng charged to do so, & the commaundement was deuysed at Susan, & Hamans ten sonnes were hanged.
Esther 9:15 And the Iewes gathered them selues together at Susan, vpon the fourtenth day of the moneth Adar, & slue thre hundreth men at Susan, but on their goodes they layed no handes.
Esther 9:16 And for the other Iewes in the kinges landes, they came together, & stode for their lyues & gat reste from their enemies: and slewe of their enemies fiue & seuenty thousand, how be it, they laye no handes on their goodes.
Esther 9:17 This was done on the thirtenth daye of the moneth Adar, & on the fourtenth daye of the same moneth rested they, whiche daye they ordeyned to be a day of feasting & gladnesse.
Esther 9:18 But the Iewes at Susan were come together bothe on the thirtenth daye and on the fourtenth, and on the fyftenth daye they rested, & the same daye ordeyned they to be a daye of feastynge & gladnes.
Esther 9:19 Therfore the Iewes that dwelt in the vyllages and vnwalled tounes ordeyned the fourtenth daye of the monethe Adar, to be a daye of feastinge and gladnes, and one sent gyftes vnto another.
Esther 9:20 And Mardocheus wrote these actes, and sent these writtinges vnto all the Iewes that were in all the landes of Kynge Ahasuerus, both nye & farre,
Esther 9:21 that they shoulde yearly receyue & holde the fourtenth & fyftenth day of the moneth Adar,
Esther 9:22 as the daies wherin the Iewes came to rest from their enemies, & as a moneth wherin their payne was turned to ioye, & their sorow into prosperite: that they should obserue the same as dayes of wealth & gladnes, and one to sende gyftes vnto another, & to distribute vnto the pore.
Esther 9:23 And the Iewes receyued it that they had begonne to do, and that Mardocheus wrote vnto them:
Esther 9:24 howe that Haman the sonne of Hamadatha al the Iewes enemy, had deuysed to destroy all the Iewes, & caused to cast Phur (that is Lot) for to put them in feare, and to brynge them to naught:
Esther 9:25 and how Hester went and spake to the king, that thorow letters his wycked deuice (which he ymagined agaynst the Iewes) myght be turned vpon his owne heade, and howe he & hys sonnes were hanged on the tree.
Esther 9:26 For the whiche cause they called this day Phurim after the name of Phur, accordynge to all the wordes of this wryttinge and what they them selues had sene, and what had happened vnto them.
Esther 9:27 And the Iewes set it vp, and toke it vpon them and their sede, & vpon al such as ioyned them selues vnto them, that they woulde not mysse to obserue these two dayes yearly, accordinge as they were written and appoynted,
Esther 9:28 how that these daies are not to be forgotten, but to be kepte of childers children among all kinredes, in all landes & cytyes. They are the dayes of Phurim, whiche are not to be ouerslipte amonge the Iewes, and the memoryall of them oughte not to peryshe from their sede.
Esther 9:29 And quene Esther the doughter of Abihail & Mardocheus the Iewe wrote wyth al auctorite, to confirme this seconde wryttinge of Phurim,
Esther 9:30 and sent the letters vnto all the Iewes in the hundreth & seuen and twentye landes of the empyre of Ahasuerus, wyth frendly and faythfull wordes,
Esther 9:31 to confirme these dayes of Phurim, in their tyme appointed, accordinge as Mardocheus the Iew and Hester the quene had ordeyned concernynge them, lyke as they vpon their soule and vpon their sede had confirmed the actes of the fastynges and of their complaynt.
Esther 9:32 And Hester commaunded to stablyshe the actes of thys Phurim, and to wryte them in a boke.

CHAPTER: 10

Esther 10:1 And the kynge Ahasuerus laied tribute vpon the lande, & vpon the Iles of the sea.
Esther 10:2 As for al the worcke of his power and auctoryte, and the great worshippe of Mardocheus, whiche the kinge gaue him, beholde it is wrytten in the Chronicles of the Kinges of Media and Persia.
Esther 10:3 For Mardocheus the Iewe was the second next vnto the kinge Ahasuerus, and greate amonge the Iewes, and accepted amonge the multitude of hys brethren, as one that seketh the welth of his people and speaketh the beste for all hys seade.

BOOK: Job

CHAPTER: 1

Job 1:1 In the lande of Nus there was a man called Iob: an innocent & vertuous man, soche one as feared God exchued euell.
Job 1:2 This man had .vij. sonnes, & .iij. daughters.
Job 1:3 Hys substaunce was .vij.M. shepe .iij.M. camels .v.C. youck of oxen .v.C. she asses, & a very greate housholde: so that he was one of the moste principall men amonge all them of the east countre.
Job 1:4 And his sonnes went, and made banckettes: one daye in one house, another daye in another, and sent for their .iij. systers to eate and drincke with them.
Job 1:5 So when they had passed ouer the tyme of their banckettynge rounde aboute, Iob sent for them, and clensed them agayne, and gat vp early, & offered for euery one a brentofferynge. For Iob thought thus: peraduenture my sonnes haue done some offence, and haue bene vnthankfull to God in their hertes. And thus dyd Iob euery daye.
Job 1:6 Now vpon a tyme, when the seruauntes of God came & stode before the Lord, Sathan came also amonge them.
Job 1:7 And the Lorde sayde vnto Sathan: From whence commest thou? Sathan answered the Lorde, and sayd: I haue gone aboute the lande and walcked thorow it.
Job 1:8 Then sayde the Lorde vnto Sathan: hast thou not consydered my seruaunt Iob, how that he is an innocent & vertuous man: soch one as feareth God, & extrueth euel, & that there is none lyke hym in the lande?
Job 1:9 Sathan answered, & sayde vnto the Lord: Doeth Iob feare God for nought?
Job 1:10 hast thou not preserued him, his house, and all hys substaunce on euery syde? hast thou not blessed the worckes of his handes? Is not his possessyon encreased in the lande?
Job 1:11 But laye thyne hande vpon him a lytle, touche ones all that he hath, and (I holde) he shall curse the to thy face.
Job 1:12 And the Lorde sayd vnto Sathan: lo all that he hath, be in thy power: only vpon hym self se that thou laye not thyne hande. Then went Sathan forth from the Lorde.
Job 1:13 Now vpon a certayne daye when his sonnes and daughters were eatynge, and drinckinge wyne in their eldeste brothers house,
Job 1:14 there came a messenger vnto Iob, & sayde: Whyle the oxen were a plowynge, & the Asses going in the pasture besyde them:
Job 1:15 the Sabees came in violently, and toke them all awaye: ye they haue slayne thy seruauntes with the swearde and I only ranne my waye, to tell the.
Job 1:16 And whyle he was yet speakynge, there came another, and sayde: The fyre of God is fallen from heauen, it hath consumed, and brent vp all thy shepe and seruauntes: and I only ranne my waye, to tell the.
Job 1:17 In that meane season whyle he was yet speakynge there came another, and sayde: The Caldees made thre armies, & fell in vpon thy camels, which they haue caried awaye, yee and slayne thy seruauntes with the swearde: and I only am gotten awaye, to tell the:
Job 1:18 Whyle he was speakynge, there came yet another, & sayde: Thy sonnes and daughters were eatyng & drynckynge wyne in their eldest brothers house,
Job 1:19 & sodenly there came a mightie greate wynde out of the South, and smote the .iiij. corners of the house, which fell vpon thy chyldren, so that they are deed: and I am gotten awaye alone, to tell the.
Job 1:20 Then Iob stode vp, and rente hys clothes shaued his heade, fell doune vpon the ground, worshipped,
Job 1:21 and sayde: Naked came I out of my mothers wombe, & naked shall I turne thether agayne. The Lorde gaue, and the Lord hath taken awaye now blessed be the name of the Lorde.
Job 1:22 In all these thynges dyd Iob not offende, ner murmured folyshye agaynst God.

CHAPTER: 2

Job 2:1 It happened also vpon a tyme, that when the seruauntes of God came & stode before the Lorde, Sathan came amonge them, and stode before hym.
Job 2:2 And the Lorde sayde vnto Sathan: From whence commest thou? Sathan answered & sayde: I haue gone aboute the lande, & walked thorow it.
Job 2:3 Then sayde the Lorde vnto Sathan: hast thou not consydered my seruaunt Iob, how that he is an innocent and vertuous man soch one as feareth God, and extrueth euel, and that there is none lyke hym in the land? But thou mouedest me agaynst hym, to punyshe hym: yet is it in vayne, for he contynueth still in his godlynesse.
Job 2:4 Sathan answered the Lorde, and sayde: Skynne for skynne? yee a man will geue all that euer he hath, for his lyfe.
Job 2:5 But laye thyne hande vpon him, touche hym ones vpon the bone and fleshe, and (I holde) he shall curse the to thy face.
Job 2:6 Then sayde the Lorde vnto Sathan: lo, there hast thou hym in thy power, but spare his lyfe.
Job 2:7 So went Sathan forth from the Lorde, and smote Iob with maruelous sore byles, from the sole of the fote vnto hys crowne:
Job 2:8 so that he sat vpon the grounde in the asshes and scraped of the fylth of hys sores wyth potsherde.
Job 2:9 Then sayd his wyfe vnto him: Doest thou contynue in thy perfectnes? curse God, and dye.
Job 2:10 But Iob sayde vnto her: Thou speakest lyke a folysh woman. Seynge we haue receyued prosperite at the hand of God, wherfore shuld we not be content with aduersyte also? In all these thynges, dyd not Iob synne with his lyppes.
Job 2:11 Now when Iobs frendes herde of all the trouble, that happened vnto hym, there came thre of them, euery one from hys owne place: namelye, Eliphas the Thamanite, Baldad the Suhite, and Zophar the Naamathite. For they were agreed together to come, to shewe theyr compassyon vpon him, and to comforte hym.
Job 2:12 So when they lyfte vp theyr eyes a farre of, they knewe hym not. Then they cryed, and wepte: then euerye one of them rente hys clothes, and sprynckled dust vpon theyr heades in the ayre.
Job 2:13 They sat them doune by hym also vpon the grounde .vij. dayes and .vij. nightes. Nether was there eny of them that spake one worde vnto hym, for they sawe that hys payne was verye greate.

CHAPTER: 3

Job 3:1 After thys opened Iob hys mouth, and, cursed his day
Job 3:2 and sayde:
Job 3:3 loste be that daye, wherin I was borne: and the nyght, in that which it was sayde: there is a man chylde conceyued.
Job 3:4 The same daye be turned to darcknesse, & not regarded of God from aboue, nether be shyned vpon with lyght:
Job 3:5 but be couered with darcknesse, & the shadowe of death. Let the dymme cloude fall vpon it, & let it be lapped in with sorow.
Job 3:6 Let the darck storme ouercome that nyght, let it not be reckened amonge the dayes of the yeare, ner counted in the monethes.
Job 3:7 Despysed be that night, & discommended: let them that curse the daye,
Job 3:8 euen those that be ready to rayse vp mourninge geue it also theyr cursse.
Job 3:9 Let the starres be dymme thorow darcknesse of it. Let it loke for lyght, but let it se none, nether the rysyng vp of the fayre mornynge,
Job 3:10 because it shut not vp the wombe that bare me, ner hyd these sorowes from myne eyes.
Job 3:11 Alas, why dyed I not in the byrth? Why dyd not I perysh, as sone as I came oute of my mothers wombe?
Job 3:12 Why set they me vpon their knees? Why gaue they me suck wyth their brestes?
Job 3:13 Then shulde I now haue lyen styll, I shulde haue slepte, & bene at rest:
Job 3:14 like as the kynges & lordes of the erth, which buyld them selues specyall places:
Job 3:15 As the prynces that haue greate substaunce of gould, & theyr houses full of syluer.
Job 3:16 O that I vtterlye had no beynge, or were as a thynge borne out of tyme (that is put asyde) ether as yonge chyldren, which neuer sawe the light.
Job 3:17 There must the wycked ceasse from their tyranny, there soch as are ouerlaboured be at rest:
Job 3:18 there are those let out fre, whych haue bene in preson, so that they heare nomore the voyce of the oppressour:
Job 3:19 There are small and greate: the bonde man, and he that is fre from his mayster.
Job 3:20 Wherfore is the lyght geuen to hym that is in miserye? and lyfe vnto them, that haue heuy hertes?
Job 3:21 Whyche longe for death, yf it come not: and search for it more then for treasure
Job 3:22 which also would be exceding glad, & reioyce yf they found their graue.
Job 3:23 That should be ioye to the man whose way is hyd, which God kepeth backe from him.
Job 3:24 For my sighes come before I eate, and my roarynges fall oute lyke flowynge water.
Job 3:25 For the thynge that I feared, is come vpon me: and the thing that I was afraied of, is happened vnto me?
Job 3:26 Was I not happye? Had I not quyetnesse? Was I not in rest? And now commeth such misery vpon me.

CHAPTER: 4

Job 4:1 Then answered Eliphas the Themanyte and said vnto him:
Job 4:2 Yf we beginne to commen with the peraduenture thou wilt be dyscontent, but who can withhold him selfe from speakinge?
Job 4:3 Behold, thou hast bene a teacher of manye, and hast comforted the wery handes.
Job 4:4 Thy wordes haue set vp those that were fallen, thou haste refreshed the weake knees.
Job 4:5 But nowe that the plage is come vpon the thou shrenkest awaye: now that it hath touched thy self, thou arte faynt harted.
Job 4:6 Is not this thy feare, thy stedfastnesse, thy pacience, and the perfectnesse of thy wayes?
Job 4:7 Consydre (I praye the) whoeuer peryshed beynge an innocent? Or, when were the godly destroied?
Job 4:8 As I haue sene them that plowe vanity and sowe malicie reape the same.
Job 4:9 With the blast of God dyd they perysh, & with the breth of his anger consumed they awaye.
Job 4:10 The roarynge of the lyon, the voyce of the lyonesse, and the teeth of the lyons whelpes are broken
Job 4:11 The lyon perissheth, for lacke of praye & the lyons whelpes are scatered abrode.
Job 4:12 And vnto me was the worde hydde, and myne eare hathe receyued a lytell therof.
Job 4:13 In the phantasyes and thoughtes of the vysyons of the nyght, when slepe cometh on men:
Job 4:14 feare came vpon me and drede & made my bones to shake.
Job 4:15 And when the wynd passed by before my presence it made the heares of my flesshe stande vp.
Job 4:16 He stode there and I knew not his face, an ymage there was before me & there was stylnes, so that I heard thys voyce.
Job 4:17 Shall man be moare iust then God? Or shall man be purer then his maker?
Job 4:18 Behold there is no trust to his seruauntes, and in his aungelles hath he founde frowardnes.
Job 4:19 How moche moare in them that dwell in houses of claye whose foundacion is but earth, which shalbe consumed by the Moth.
Job 4:20 They shalbe smytten from the mornynge vnto the euenyng yee they shall perysh euerlastynglye, and no man thincke theron.
Job 4:21 Is not their dignitie taken awaye with them, they shall dye and not in wysdome.

CHAPTER: 5

Job 5:1 Name me one els, yf thou canst fynde eny: yee loke aboute the, vpon eny of the holye men.
Job 5:2 As for the folyshe man, displeasure kylleth hym, and anger slayeth the ignoraunt.
Job 5:3 I haue sene my selfe, when the folishe was depe roted, that hys bewty was sodenly destroied,
Job 5:4 that his chyldren were without prosperite or healt: that they were slayne in the dore, and no man to delyuer them:
Job 5:5 that hys haruest was eaten vp of the hungrye: that the weapened man had spoyled it, and that the thurstye had droncke vp his riches. It is not the earth that bringeth forth trauayle,
Job 5:6 neither commeth sorow out of the grounde:
Job 5:7 but is man, that is borne vnto mysery, lyke as the byrde for to fle.
Job 5:8 But now wyll I speake of the Lorde, and talke of God:
Job 5:9 which doeth thinges, that are vnsearcheable, and marueles without nombre:
Job 5:10 Which geueth rayne vpon the earth, and poureth water vpon all thinges:
Job 5:11 whiche setteth vp them of lowe degre, and sendeth prosperite, to those that are in heuinesse:
Job 5:12 Which destroyeth the deuyces of the sotyll, so that they are not able to performe the thinges that they take in hande:
Job 5:13 whyche compasseth the wyse in theyr owne craftynesse, and ouerthroweth the councell of the wycked?
Job 5:14 In so much that they runne into darcknesse by fayre daye, & grope aboute them at the none daye, lyke as in the nyght.
Job 5:15 And so he delyuereth the poore from the swearde, from their mouth, and from the hande of the cruell,
Job 5:16 that the poore maye haue hope, and that the mouth of the oppressoure maye be stopped.
Job 5:17 Beholde, happye is the man, whom God punisheth: therfore, despyse not thou the chastenynge of the Almyghty.
Job 5:18 For though he make a wound, he geueth a medicine againe: though he smyte, hys hande maketh whole agayne.
Job 5:19 He delyuereth the oute of syxe troubles so that in the seuenth there can no harme touch the.
Job 5:20 In the middest of honger he saueth the from death: and when it is warre, from the power of the swearde.
Job 5:21 He shal kepe the from the perlous tonge that so when trouble commeth, thou shalt not nede to feare.
Job 5:22 In destruccion & derth thou shalt be mercy, & shalt not be afrayed for the beastes of the earth:
Job 5:23 But the castels in the land shal be confederate with the, & the beastes of the felde shall geue the peace.
Job 5:24 Ye thou shalt knowe, that thy dwellinge place shalbe in reste: thou shalt beholde thy substaunce, & be nomore punished for synne
Job 5:25 Thou shalt se also, that thy sede shall encrease, and that thy posteryte shalbe as the grasse vpon the earth.
Job 5:26 Thou shalt come to thy graue in a fayre age, lyke as the corne sheeues are brought into the barne in due season.
Job 5:27 Lo, this is the matter, as we oure selues haue proued by experience. Therfore now that thou hearest it, take better hede to thy selfe.

CHAPTER: 6

Job 6:1 Iob answered, and sayde:
Job 6:2 O that my mysery were weyed, and my punishmente layed in the balaunces:
Job 6:3 for then should it be heuyer, then the sande of the sea. This is the cause, that my words are so soroufull.
Job 6:4 For the arowes of the almyghty are in me, whose indignacyon hath droncke vp my sprete, and the terrible feares of GOD fyghte agaynste me.
Job 6:5 Doeth the wylde asse roare when he hath grasse? Or cryeth the oxe, when he hath foder ynoug?
Job 6:6 That which is vnsauery, shall it be eaten wythoute salte, or is there any taste in the whyte of an egge:
Job 6:7 The thynges that some tyme I myghte not awaye wythall, are nowe my meate for very sorowe.
Job 6:8 O that I myghte haue my desyre: O that GOD woulde graunte me the thynge, that I longe for.
Job 6:9 That he woulde begynne And smyte me: that he woulde let hys hande go, and hewe me doune.
Job 6:10 Then shoulde I haue some comforte: ye I woulde desyre him in my payne, that he shoulde not spare, for I wyll not be agaynst the wordes of the holy one.
Job 6:11 What power haue I to endure? Or, what is myne end, that my soule myghte be pacyente?
Job 6:12 Is my strength the strength of stones? Or, is my fleshe made of brasse?
Job 6:13 Is it not so that there is in me no helpe: and that my substaunce is taken from me.
Job 6:14 He that is in trybulacyon oughte to be comforted of hys neyghbour: but the feare of the Lord is cleane awaye:
Job 6:15 Myne owne brethren passeouer by me as the water broke, that hastelye runneth thorow the valleyes.
Job 6:16 But they that feare the hore frost, the snowe shall fall vpon them.
Job 6:17 When theyr time commeth, they shalbe destroyed and perishe: and when they be set on fyre, they shalbe remoued oute of theyr place,
Job 6:18 for the pathes that they go in, are croked: they haste after vayne thinges, and shal perysh.
Job 6:19 Consydre the pathes of Theman, & the wayes of Saba, wherin they haue put their trust.
Job 6:20 Confounded are they, that put eny confydence in them: For when they came to opteyne the thinges that they loked for, they were brought to confusion.
Job 6:21 Euen so are ye also come vnto me: but now that ye se my misery, ye are afrayed.
Job 6:22 Dyd I desyre you, to come hether? Or, to geue me eny of youre substaunce?
Job 6:23 To delyuer me from the enemyes hande, or to saue me from the power of the myghtye?
Job 6:24 Teach me and I wil holde my tonge: and yf I do erre, shewe me wherin.
Job 6:25 Wherfore blame ye then the wordes, that are wel and truely spoken?
Job 6:26 which of you can reproue them? Sauynge onlye that ye are sotyll to check mens sayinges, and can speake many wordes in the wynde.
Job 6:27 Ye fall vpon the fatherlesse, & go aboute to ouerthrowe youre owne frende.
Job 6:28 Wherfore loke not onely vpon me, but vpon youre selues: whether I lye, or no.
Job 6:29 Turne into youre owne selues (I praye you) be indifferent iudges, and considre mine vngyltynesse:
Job 6:30 whether there be eny vnryghtuousnesse in my tonge, or vayne wordes in my mouth.

CHAPTER: 7

Job 7:1 Is not the lyfe of man vpon earth a verye batayl? Are not hys daies lyke the daies of an hired seruaunte?
Job 7:2 For lyke as a bonde seruaunt desyreth the shadowe, and as an hyrelynge woulde fayne haue an ende of hys worcke:
Job 7:3 Euen so haue I laboured whole monethes longe (but in vayne) and manye a carefull nyght haue I tolde.
Job 7:4 When I layed me downe to slepe, I sayde: O when shall I ryse? Agayne, I longed sore for the night. Thus am I full of sorowe, tyll it be darcke.
Job 7:5 My fleshe is clothed wyth wormes, fylthynesse and dust: my skynne is wythered, and crompled together:
Job 7:6 my dayes passe ouer more spedelye, then a weeuer can weeue out his webbe: and are gone, or I am a warre.
Job 7:7 O remembre, that my lyfe is but a wynde, and that myne eye shall nomore se the pleasures
Job 7:8 therof, ye & that none other mans eye shall se me eny more. For yf thou fasten thyne eyes vpon me, I come to naught lyke
Job 7:9 as a cloude is consumed & vanisshed a waye euen so he that goeth downe to hell, commeth nomore vp,
Job 7:10 ner turneth agayne into hys house, nether shall hys place knowe him eny more.
Job 7:11 Therfore I wyll not spare my mouth, but will speake in the trouble of my sprete, in the bytternesse of my mynde wyll I talke.
Job 7:12 Am I a see or a whalfysh, that thou kepest me so in preson?
Job 7:13 When I thynke: my bed shall comforte me. I shall haue some refresshynge by talckinge by my self vpon my couche:
Job 7:14 Then troublest thou me with dreames, and makest me so afrayed thorowe visions,
Job 7:15 that my soule wyssheth rather to be strangled, and my bones to be deed.
Job 7:16 I can se no remedy, I shall loue nomore: O spare me then, for my dayes are but vayne
Job 7:17 What is man, that thou hast hym in soch reputacyon, and settest somoch by hym?
Job 7:18 Thou takest diligent care for hym, & sodenly doest thou trye hym.
Job 7:19 Why goest thou not from me, ner lettest me alone, so longe tyll I swalowe doune my spetle?
Job 7:20 I haue offended, what shall I do vnto the, O thou preseruer of men? Why hast thou made me to stande in thy way, and am so heuy a burden vnto my selfe?
Job 7:21 Why doest thou not forgeue me my synne? Wherfore takeste thou not awaye my wyckednesse. Beholde, now must I slepe in the dust: & yf thou sekest me to morow in the morning, I shalbe gone.

CHAPTER: 8

Job 8:1 Then answered Baldad the Suhyte, and sayd:
Job 8:2 How long wilt thou talke of such thynges? how longe shall thy mouth speake so proude words?
Job 8:3 Doth God peruerte the thynge that is laufull? Or doth the Almyghtye destroye the thynge that is ryght?
Job 8:4 When thy sonnes synned agaynst hym, dyd not he punish them for theyr wyckednesse?
Job 8:5 If thou woldest now resorte vnto God by tymes, & make thyne humble prayer to the Almyghtye:
Job 8:6 yf thou woldest lyue a pure and a godly lyfe: shulde he not wake vp vnto the immediatly, & geue the, the bewtie of rightuousnesse agayne?
Job 8:7 In so moch, that where in soeuer thou haddest lytle afore, thou shuldest now haue greate aboundaunce.
Job 8:8 Enquere of them that haue bene bofore the, search dylygently amonge thy forefathers:
Job 8:9 Namelye, that we are but of yester daye, and consydre not, that oure dayes vpon earth are but a very shadowe.
Job 8:10 They shall shewe the, they shall tell the, ye they wyll gladly confesse the same.
Job 8:11 Maye a rysshe be grene wythout moystnesse? maye the grasse growe wythout water?
Job 8:12 No: but (or euer it be shot forth, and or euer it be gathered) it withereth, before eny other herbe.
Job 8:13 Euen so goeth it with all them, that forget God: and euen thus also shall the ypocrytes hope come to naught.
Job 8:14 His confydence shalbe destroyed, for he trusteth in a spyders webbe.
Job 8:15 He leaneth hym vpon hys house, but he shal not stande: he holdeth hym fast by it, yet shall he not endure.
Job 8:16 Oft tyme a thynge doth floryshe, and men thynke that it maye abyde the Sonne shynynge: it shuteth forth the braunches in hys garden,
Job 8:17 it taketh many rotes, in so moche that it is lyke an house of stones.
Job 8:18 But yf it be taken out of hys place, euery man denyeth it, saying: I knowe the not.
Job 8:19 Lo, thus is it wt him, that reioyseth in hys owne doynges: and as for other, they growe oute of the earth.
Job 8:20 Beholde, God wyll not cast awaye a vertuous man, nether wyl he helpe the vngodly.
Job 8:21 Thy mouth shall he fyll with laugynge, and thy lyppes wyth gladnesse.
Job 8:22 Thy that hate the, shalbe confounded, and the dwellynges of the vngodly shall come to naught.

CHAPTER: 9

Job 9:1 Iob answered, & sayde:
Job 9:2 As for that, I know it is so of a trueth, that a man compared vnto God, can not be iustified.
Job 9:3 If he wyll argue with him, he shall not be able to auswere hym vnto one among a thousande.
Job 9:4 He is wyse of hert, and myghtie in strength. Who euer prospered, that toke parte against hym?
Job 9:5 He translateth the mountaynes, or euer they be a ware, & ouerthroweth them in hys wrath.
Job 9:6 He remoueth the earth oute of her place, that her pylers shake with all.
Job 9:7 He commaundeth the Sonne, and it ryseth not she closeth vp the starres, as it were vnder a sygnet.
Job 9:8 He him selfe alone spredeth out the heauens, and goeth vpon the waues of the see.
Job 9:9 He maketh the vaynes of heauen, the Orions, the .vij. starres and the secrete places of the south.
Job 9:10 He doth greate thynges, soch as are vnsearcheable, ye and wonders without nombre.
Job 9:11 If he came by me, I myght not loke vpon hym: yf he went his waye, I shulde not perceaue it.
Job 9:12 If he be hasty to take enye thynge awaye, who will make hym restore it agayne? Who wyll saye vnto hym: what doest thou?
Job 9:13 He is God, whose wrath no man maye withstande: but the proudest of all muste stoupe vnder hym.
Job 9:14 How shulde I then answere him? or what wordes shulde I fynde out agaynst hym?
Job 9:15 Ye though I be rightuous, yet wyll I not geue him one worde agayne, but mekely submytte my self to my iudge.
Job 9:16 All be it that I call vpon him, and he heare me, yet am I not sure, that he hath herde my voce:
Job 9:17 he troubleth me so with the tempest, and woundeth me out of measure without a cause.
Job 9:18 He wyll not let my sprete be in reste, but fylleth me with bytternesse.
Job 9:19 If men wyll speake of strength, he is the strongest of all: yf men wyll speake of ryghtuousnes, who darre be my recorde.
Job 9:20 If I will iustifye my self, my awne mouth shall condemne me: yf I wyll put forth my selfe for a perfecte man, he shall proue me a wycked doer:
Job 9:21 For that I shulde be an innocent, my conscyence knoweth it not, ye I my selfe am werry of my lyfe.
Job 9:22 This one thyng wyll I saye: He destroyeth both the ryghtuous & vngodly.
Job 9:23 And though he slaye sodenly wyth the scourge, yet laugheth he at the punyshment of the innocent.
Job 9:24 As for the world, he geueth it ouer in to the power of the wycked, soch as the rulers be, wherof al landes are full. Is it not so? where is there eny, but he is soch one?
Job 9:25 My dayes haue bene more swyfte then a runner: they are gone sodenly, and haue sene no good thynge.
Job 9:26 They are passed awaye, as the shippes that be good vnder sayle, and as the Aegle that hasteth to the praye.
Job 9:27 When I am purposed to forget my complayninges to chaunge my countenaunce, & to conforte my selfe,
Job 9:28 then am I afrayed of all my workes, for I knowe, thou fauourest not an euell doer.
Job 9:29 If I be then a wycked one, why haue I laboured in vayne?
Job 9:30 Though I washed my self with snowe water, & made myne handes neuer so clene,
Job 9:31 yet shuldest thou dyppe me in the myer, and myne awne clothes shulde defyle me.
Job 9:32 For he that I must geue answere vnto, and with whom I go to lawe, is not a man as I am.
Job 9:33 Nether is there eny dayesman to reproue both the partes, or to laye hys hande betwixte vs.
Job 9:34 Let him take hys rod awaye from me, ye let him make me no more a frayed of hym,
Job 9:35 and then shall I answere hym wythout enye feare. For as longe as I am in suche fearfulnesse, I can make no answere: And why?

CHAPTER: 10

Job 10:1 it greueth my soule to lyue. Neuerthelesse, nowe wyll I put forth my wordes: I will speake out of the very heuinesse of my soule,
Job 10:2 and wyl saye vnto God: O do not condempne me, but shewe me the cause, wherfore thou iudgeste me on thys maner.
Job 10:3 Thynkeste thou it well done, to oppresse me, to caste me of (beinge a worke of thy handes) and to manteyne the councell of the vngodly?
Job 10:4 Hast thou fleshye eyes then, or doest thou loke as man loketh?
Job 10:5 Are thy dayes as the dayes of man, and thy yeares as mans yeares?
Job 10:6 that thou makest suche inquisicion for my wyckednesse, and searchest out my synne?
Job 10:7 where as (notwithstandynge) thou knowest that I am no wycked person, and that there is no man able to delyuer me out of thyne hande.
Job 10:8 Thy handes haue made me, and fashoned me altogether roundabout wilt thou then destroye my sodenlye?
Job 10:9 O remembre (I beseke the) how that thou madest me of the mould of the earth, and shalt bring me to earth agayne.
Job 10:10 Hast thou not milked me, as it were milck: and turned me to cruddes lyke chese?
Job 10:11 Thou hast couered me wyth skynne and fleshe, and ioyned me together wyth bones & synowes.
Job 10:12 Thou hast graunted me life, & done me good and the diligent hede that thou tokeste vpon me, hath preserued my sprite.
Job 10:13 Though thou hidest these thinges in thine hert, yet am I sure, that thou remembrest them all.
Job 10:14 Wherfore dydest thou kepe me, when I synned, and haste not clensed me from myne offence?
Job 10:15 Yf I do wickedlye, wo is me therfore: Yf I be righteous, yet darre I not lyfte vp my heade: so full am I of confusion, and se myne owne mysery.
Job 10:16 Thou huntest me out (being in heuynesse) as it were a Lyon, and troubleste me oute of measure.
Job 10:17 Thou bringeste fresh wytnesses against me, thy wrath increaseste thou vpon me, very many are the plages that I am in.
Job 10:18 Wherfore hast thou broughte me oute of my mothers wombe? O that I had peryshed, and that no eye had sene me.
Job 10:19 Yf they had caryed me to my graue, as sone as I was borne, then shoulde I be nowe, as though I had neuer bene.
Job 10:20 Shall not my shorte lyfe come sone to an ende? O holde the from, let me alone, that I maye ease my self a lytle
Job 10:21 afore I go thether, from whence I shall not turne agayne. Namely, to that lande of darcknesse & shadowe of death:
Job 10:22 ye into that darck clowdy lande & deadly shadow, where as is no ordre, but terrible feare as in the darcknesse.

CHAPTER: 11

Job 11:1 Then answered Sophar the Naamathyte, and sayde:
Job 11:2 Should not he that maketh many words, be answered? Shoulde he that bableth much, be commended therin?
Job 11:3 Should men geue eare vnto the only? Thou wylt laugh other men to scorne, and shal no body mocke the agayne?
Job 11:4 Wylt thou saye vnto God: The thynge that I take in hande is perfecte, and I am clene in thy syght?
Job 11:5 O that God woulde speake, and open hys lyppes agaynst the,
Job 11:6 that he myght shewe the (out of his secrete wysdome) howe manyfolde his Lawe is: then shuldest thou knowe, that God had forgotten the, because of thy synnes.
Job 11:7 Wylt thou fynde out God with thy sekinge? wilt thou attayne to the perfectnesse of the almyghtye?
Job 11:8 He is hyer then heauen, what wilt thou do? Deper then the hell, howe wylt thou then know him?
Job 11:9 Hys length exceadeth the length of the erth, & his bredth the bredth of the sea.
Job 11:10 Though he turne all thynges vp syde downe, close them in, or thrust them to gether who darre check hym therfore?
Job 11:11 For it is he that knoweth the vanyte of men: he seyth theyr wickednesse also, shulde he not then considre it?
Job 11:12 A vayne body exalteth hym selfe, & the sonne of man is lyke a wyld asses foale.
Job 11:13 Yf thou haddest now a righte herte, and lyftedst vp thyne handes towarde hym:
Job 11:14 yf thou woldest put awaye the wyckednesse which thou hast in hande, so that no vngodlynesse dwelt in they house:
Job 11:15 Then myghtest thou lyft vp thy face without shame, then shuldest thou besure and haue no nede to feare.
Job 11:16 Then shuldest thou forget thy mysery, and thyncke nomore vpon it, then vpon the waters that runne by.
Job 11:17 Then shuld thy lyfe be as cleare as the noone daye, and sprynge forth as the mornynge.
Job 11:18 Then myghtest thou haue comforth, in the hope that thou haste: & slepe quyetly, when thou art buryed.
Job 11:19 Then shuldest thou take thy reste, and no man to make the afrayed, ye many one shuld set moch by the.
Job 11:20 As for the eyes of the vngodly, they shalbe consumed, and not escape: theyr hope shalbe mysery and sorow of mynde.

CHAPTER: 12

Job 12:1 So Iob answered, and sayde:
Job 12:2 Then (no doute) ye are the men alone, and wysdom shall perysh wyth you.
Job 12:3 But I haue vnderstandyng as well as ye, and am no lesse then ye. Ye who knoweth not these thinges?
Job 12:4 Thus he that calleth vpon God, & whom God heareth, is mocked of hys neyghboure: the godlye and innocent man is laughed to scorne.
Job 12:5 Godlynesse is a light despysed in the hertes of the ryche, and is set for them to stomble vpon.
Job 12:6 The houses of robbers are in wealth & prosperite, and they that maliciously medle agaynst God, dwell without care: ye God geueth all thinges rychely with hys hande.
Job 12:7 Aske the catell, & they shall infourme the: the fowles of the ayre, and they shall tell the:
Job 12:8 Speake to the earth, & it shall shewe the: Or to the fysshes of the sea, and they shall certifie the.
Job 12:9 What is he, but he knoweth that the hande of the Lorde made all these?
Job 12:10 In whose hande is the soule of euery lyuynge thinge, & the breth of all men.
Job 12:11 Haue not the eares pleasure in hearinge, & the mouth in tastinge the thinge that it eateth?
Job 12:12 Amonge olde personnes there is wysdome, & amonge the aged is vnderstandinge.
Job 12:13 Ye with God is wysdome and strength, it is he that hath councell and forknowlege.
Job 12:14 If he breake downe a thinge, who can set it vp agayne? If he shut a thing, who wyll open it?
Job 12:15 Beholde, yf he witholde the waters, they drye vp: Yf he let them go, they destroye the earth.
Job 12:16 With hym is strength and wysdome: he knoweth bothe the disceyuer & hym that is disceyued.
Job 12:17 He caryeth awaye the wyse men, as it were a spoyle, and bringeth the iudges out of their wyttes.
Job 12:18 He lowseth the gyrdle of kynges, and gyrdeth theyr loynes with a bonde.
Job 12:19 He ledeth awaye the Preastes in to captyuyte, and turneth the myghtye vpsyde downe.
Job 12:20 He taketh the verite from out of the mouth, & disapoynteth the aged of their wysdome.
Job 12:21 He poureth out confusyon vpon Princes, and comforteth them that haue bene oppressed.
Job 12:22 Loke what lyeth hyd in darcknesse, he declareth it openly: and the very shadowe of death bringet he to lyght.
Job 12:23 He bothe increaseth the people, and destroyeth them: He maketh them to multiplye and driueth them awaye.
Job 12:24 He chaungeth the herte of the Princes and Kynges of the earth and disapoynteth them: so that they go wandringe out of the waye,
Job 12:25 & grope in the darcke without light, stackeringe to and fro lyke droncken men.

CHAPTER: 13

Job 13:1 Lo, all this haue I sene with myne eye, hearde with myne eare, & vnderstand it.
Job 13:2 Loke what ye knowe, that same do I knowe also, nether am I inferior vnto you.
Job 13:3 Neuerthelesse I am purposed to talke with the almyghtie, & my desyre is to comen with God.
Job 13:4 As for you, ye are worckmaisters of lyes, and vnprofytable Physicians all together.
Job 13:5 Woulde God ye kepte youre tonge, that ye myght be taken for wyse men.
Job 13:6 Therfore heare my wordes, & pondre the sentence of my lyppes.
Job 13:7 Wyll ye make answere for God wyth lyes, and maynteyne hym with disceate?
Job 13:8 Wyll ye accepte the persone of God, and intreate for hym?
Job 13:9 Shall that helpe you, when he calleth you to rekoning. Thynke ye to begyle him, as a man is begyled?
Job 13:10 He shall punysh you, & reproue you, yf ye do secretly accepte any persone.
Job 13:11 Shall he not make you afrayed, when he sheweth hym selfe? Shall not his terrible feare fall vpon you?
Job 13:12 Youre remembraunce shalbe lyke vnto the dust, and youre pride shalbe turned to claye.
Job 13:13 Holde youre tonges now, and let me speake, for there is some thinge come into my mynde.
Job 13:14 Wherfore do I beare my flesh in my teth, and myne soule in myne handes?
Job 13:15 Lo, there is nether conforte nor hope for me, yf he wyll slaye me. But yf I shewe and reproue myne owne wayes in his syght,
Job 13:16 he is euen the same that maketh me whole: and why? there maye no hypocrite come before hym.
Job 13:17 Heare my wordes, and pondre my sayinges with youre eares.
Job 13:18 Beholde, now haue I prepared my iudgement, and knowe that I shalbe founde ryghtwes.
Job 13:19 What is he, that wyll go to lawe with me? For yf I holde my tonge, I shall dye.
Job 13:20 Neuerthelesse graunte me two thinges, and then wyll I not hyde my selfe from the.
Job 13:21 Withdrawe thyne hande from me, and let not the fearfull drede of the make me afrayed.
Job 13:22 And then sende for me to the lawe, that I maye answere for my selfe: or els, let me speake, and geue thou the answere.
Job 13:23 Howe greate are my mysdedes and synnes? Let me knowe my transgressions and offences.
Job 13:24 Wherfore hydest thou thy face, and holdest me for thyne enemye?
Job 13:25 Wilt thou be so cruel and extreme vnto a flyinge leafe, and folowe vpon drye stubble?
Job 13:26 That thou layest so sharpely to my charge, and wilt vtterlye vndo me, for the synnes of my youth?
Job 13:27 Thou hast put my fote in the stockes: thou lokest narowly vnto all my pathes, & markest the steppes of my fete:
Job 13:28 were as I (notwithstandynge) must consume lyke as a foule carion, and as a cloth that is moth aten.

CHAPTER: 14

Job 14:1 Man that is borne of a woman, hath but a shorte tyme to lyue, and is full of diuerse miseries.
Job 14:2 He commeth vp and falleth awaye lyke a floure. He flyeth as it were a shadowe, and neuer continueth in one state.
Job 14:3 Thynkest thou it now well done to open thyne eyes vpon soche one, and to brynge me before the in iudgement?
Job 14:4 Who can make it cleane, that commeth of an vncleane thynge? No body.
Job 14:5 The dayes of man are shorte, the nombre of his monethes are knowne only vnto the. Thou hast apoynted hym his boundes, he can not go beyond them.
Job 14:6 Goo from him, that he maye rest a lytle: vntyll hys daye come, whiche he loketh for, lyke as an hyrelynge doth.
Job 14:7 If a tre be cut downe, there is some hope yet, that it wyll sproute and shute forth the braunches agayne:
Job 14:8 For though a rote be waxen olde and deed in the grounde, yet when the stocke
Job 14:9 getteth the sent of water, yt wyll budde, and brynge forth bowes, lyke as whent it was fyrst planted.
Job 14:10 But as for man, when he is deed, perysshed and consumed awaye, what becommeth of hym?
Job 14:11 The floudes when they be dryed vp, and the ryuers when they be emptie, are fylled agayne thorowe the flowynge waters of the sea:
Job 14:12 but when man slepeth, he ryseth not agayne, vntyll the heauen perish: he shall not wake vp ner ryse out of his slepe.
Job 14:13 O that thou woldest kepe me, and hyde me in the hell, vntyll thy wrath were stylled: and to appoynte me a tyme, wherin thou myghtest remembre me.
Job 14:14 Maye a deed man lyue agayne? All the dayes of thys my pilgremage am I lokynge, when my chaunginge shall come.
Job 14:15 If thou woldest but call me, I shulde obeye the, only despyse not the worke of thyne owne handes.
Job 14:16 For thou hast nombred all my goynges, yet be not thou to extreame vpon my synnes.
Job 14:17 Thou haste sealed vp myne offences, as it were in a bagge: but be mercyfull vnto my wyckednesse.
Job 14:18 The mountaynes fall awaye at the last, the rockes are remoued out of theyr place,
Job 14:19 the waters pearse thorow the very stones by lytle & litle, the floudes wasshe away the grauell & earth: Euen so destroyest thou the hope of man in lyke maner.
Job 14:20 Thou preuaylest agaynst hym, so that he passeth awaye: thou chaungest his estate, & puttest hym from the.
Job 14:21 Whether his chyldren come to worshippe or no, he can not tell: And yf they be men of lowe degre, he knoweth not.
Job 14:22 While he liueth his flesh must haue trauayle: and whyle the soule is in hym, he must be in sorowe.

CHAPTER: 15

Job 15:1 Then answered Eliphas the Themanite, and sayde:
Job 15:2 Shulde a wyse man answer as the scyence of the winde, and fyll hys bely wyth the wynde of the easte?
Job 15:3 Thou reprouest with wordes, that are nothinge worth: & speakest the thinges, whiche can do no good.
Job 15:4 As for shame, thou hast set it a syde, els woldest thou not make so many words before God:
Job 15:5 but thy wyckednesse teacheth thy mouth, and so thou hast chosen the a craftie tonge.
Job 15:6 Thyne owne mouth condemneth the, and not I: ye thyne owne lyppes shape the an answere.
Job 15:7 Art thou the first man, that euer was borne? Or, wast thou made befoore the hilles?
Job 15:8 hast thou hearde the secrete councel of God, that all wysdome is to lytle for the?
Job 15:9 What knowest thou, that we knowe not? What vnderstandest thou, but we can the same?
Job 15:10 Wyth vs are olde and aged men, ye suche as haue lyued longer then thy forfathers.
Job 15:11 Thynkest thou it a small thynge of the consolacions of God? and are they wyth the lyinge worde.
Job 15:12 Why doeth thyne herte make the so proude? Why standeste thou so greatly in thyne owne conceate? Where vnto loke thyne eyes,
Job 15:13 that thy mynde is so puft vp against God & lettest such wordes go out of thy mouth?
Job 15:14 What is man, that he shoulde be cleane? what hath he (whiche is borne of a woman) wherby he myght be knowne to be ryghtuous?
Job 15:15 Beholde there is no trust to hys sanctes: ye the very heauens are not cleane in hys syght.
Job 15:16 How much more then an abhominalbe and vyle man, which drincketh wickednesse lyke water?
Job 15:17 I will tell the, heare me: I wyll shewe the a thinge, that I know,
Job 15:18 which wyse men haue tolde, & hath not bene hyd from their fathers:
Job 15:19 vnto whom only the lande was geuen, that no straunger shoulde come amonge them.
Job 15:20 The vngodly despayreth all the dayes of his lyfe, & the nombre of a tyrauntes yeares is vnknowne.
Job 15:21 A fearfull sounde is euer in hys eares, and when it is peace: yet feareth he destruccion:
Job 15:22 He beleueth neuer to be delyuered out of darcknesse, the swearde is alwaye before his eyes.
Job 15:23 When he goeth forth to get his lyuing, he thincketh planely, that the daye of darcknesse is at hande.
Job 15:24 Sorowe and carefulnesse make hym afrayed, and compasse hym roundeaboute, lyke as it were a kynge with hys hoost redy to the battayl.
Job 15:25 For he hath stretched out hys hande agaynste God, and armed him selfe agaynst the Almyghtye.
Job 15:26 He rounneth proudly vpon him, and with a stiff necke fyghteth he agaynst him:
Job 15:27 where as he couereth his face wyth fatnesse, and maketh his body well lykynge.
Job 15:28 Therfore shall hys dwellynge be in desolate cytyes, and in houses which no man inhabiteth, but are become heapes of stones.
Job 15:29 He shal not be ryche, nether shall hys substaunce contynue, ner encrease vpon earth.
Job 15:30 He shall neuer come oute of darcknesse, the flame shall drye vp hys braunches, wyth the blast of the mouth of God shall he be taken awaye.
Job 15:31 He wyll nether applye hym selfe to faythfulnes ner trueth, so sore is he disceiued wyth vanyte.
Job 15:32 He shall perysh, afore his tyme be worne out, and his hand shal not be greene.
Job 15:33 He shall be pluckte of as an vntymely grape from the vyne, and shal let his floure fal, as the olyue doeth.
Job 15:34 For the congregacyon of ypocrites is vnfrutefull, and the fyre shall consume the houses of suche, as are gredy to receyue gyftes.
Job 15:35 He conceyueth trauayle, he beareth myschefe, and hys bodye bryngeth forth disceate.

CHAPTER: 16

Job 16:1 Iob answered, and sayde:
Job 16:2 I haue oft times heard such thinges. Miserable geuers of comforte are ye, al the sorte of you.
Job 16:3 Shall not thy vayne wordes come yet to an ende? Or, hast thou yet eny more to saye?
Job 16:4 I coulde speake, as ye do also. But woulde God, that youre soule were in my soules steade: then shoulde I heape vp wordes agaynst you, and shake my heade at you.
Job 16:5 I shoulde comforte you wyth my mouth, and release youre payne wyth the talkyng of my lyppes.
Job 16:6 But what shal I do? For all my wordes, my sorow wyl not cease: and though I holde my tonge, yet wyll it not departe from me,
Job 16:7 And now that I am full of paine, and al that I haue destroyed
Job 16:8 (wherof my wryncles beare wytnesse) there standeth vp a dyssembler to make me aunswere wyth lyes to my face.
Job 16:9 He is angrye at me, he hateth me, & gnasheth vpon me with hys teth. Myne enemy skouleth vpon me with his eyes.
Job 16:10 They haue, opened their mouthes wyde vpon me, and smitten me vpon the cheke despytefully, they haue eased themselues thorow mine aduersite.
Job 16:11 God hath geuen me ouer to the vngodly, & deliuered me into the handes of the wycked.
Job 16:12 I was somtyme in wealth, but sodenlye hath broughte me to noughte. He hath taken me by the neck, he hath rente me, and set me, as it were a marck for hym to shute at.
Job 16:13 He hath compased me roundeaboute with his dartes, he hath wounded my loynes, and not spared. My bowels hath he poured vpon the grounde.
Job 16:14 Ye hath geuen the one wounde vpon another, and is fallen vpon me lyke a giaunte.
Job 16:15 I haue sowed a sack cloth vpon my skynne, and lye with my strength in the dust.
Job 16:16 My face is swollen with wepyng, & myne eyes are waxen dymne.
Job 16:17 Howbeit there is no wyckednesse in my handes, and my prayer is cleane.
Job 16:18 O earth, couer not my bloud, and let my cryenge fynde no rowme.
Job 16:19 For lo, my witnesse is in heauen, & he that knoweth me, is aboue in the heyght.
Job 16:20 My frendes laugh me to scorne, but myne eye poureth out teares vnto God.
Job 16:21 Though a body myght pleate with God, as one man doth with another,
Job 16:22 yeth the nombre of my yeares are come, and I must go the waye, from whence I shall not turne agayne.

CHAPTER: 17

Job 17:1 My breth fayleth, my dayes are shortened. I am harde at deathes dore.
Job 17:2 I haue disceyued no man, yet must myne eye continue in heuynesse.
Job 17:3 O deliuer me, and set me by the: who shall them be able to thruste my handes together?
Job 17:4 Thou haste withholden their hertes from vnderstandyng, therfore shall they not be sett vp on hye.
Job 17:5 He promyseth hys frendes parte of hys good, but his owne chyldren spende it.
Job 17:6 He hath made me as it were a byworde of the comon people. I am hys gestynge stocke amonge them.
Job 17:7 My countenaunce is heuy for very anger & the membres of my body are become lyke a shadowe.
Job 17:8 Vertuous men therfore shall wel consydre this, & the innocent shall take parte agaynst the ypocrite.
Job 17:9 The ryghteous wyll kepe his waye, & he that hath cleane handes, wyll euer be stronger & stronger.
Job 17:10 As for you, turne you, & get you hence, for I can not se one wyse man amonge you.
Job 17:11 My dayes are past, my thoughtes are vanyshed awaye, whych haue vexed myne herte,
Job 17:12 chaunginge the nyght in to daye, and the light into darcknes.
Job 17:13 Though I tary neuer so moch, yet the graue is my house, & I must make my bed in the darcke.
Job 17:14 I call corrupcion my father, and the wormes call I my mother and my syster.
Job 17:15 What helpeth then my longe taryenge? Or, who wyll fulfyll the thynge, that I loke for?
Job 17:16 All that I haue, shall go downe in to the pyt, and lye with me in the duste.

CHAPTER: 18

Job 18:1 Then answered Baldad the Suhite, and sayde:
Job 18:2 when wyll ye make an ende of your wordes? Marcke well, and consydre, we wyll speake also.
Job 18:3 Wherfore are we counted as beastes, and reputed so vyle in youre syght?
Job 18:4 Why destroyest thou thy selfe with anger? Shall the earth be forsaken, or the stones remoued oute of their place because of the?
Job 18:5 Shall not the lyght of the vngodly be put oute? yee the flame of hys fyre shall not burne.
Job 18:6 The lyght shalbe darcke in hys dwellynge, and hys candle shalbe put out with hym.
Job 18:7 His presumptuous goinges shall be kepte in, and his owne councell shal cast hym downe.
Job 18:8 For his fete shalbe taken in the nett, and he shall walke in the snare.
Job 18:9 His fote shalbe holden in the gilder, and the thrustie shall catch him.
Job 18:10 The snare is layed for him in the grounde, and a pitfall in the waye.
Job 18:11 Fearfulnesse shall make hym afrayed on euery syde, that he shall not knowe, where to get out.
Job 18:12 Honger shalbe his substaunce, and mysfortune shall hange vpon hym.
Job 18:13 He shall eate the strength of his skynne, the fyrste borne of death shall eate hys membres.
Job 18:14 All his comforte & hope shalbe roted out of his dwellynge, very fearfulnesse shall bringe hym to the kynge.
Job 18:15 Other men shall dwell in his house (which now is none of his) and brymstone shalbe scatered vpon his habitacion.
Job 18:16 Hys rotes shalbe dryed vp beneth, and aboue shall his haruest be cutt downe.
Job 18:17 Hys remembraunce shall perish from the earth, & hys name shall not be praysed in the stretes:
Job 18:18 he shalbe dryuen from the lyght into darcknesse, and be cast cleane out of the world.
Job 18:19 He shall nether haue chyldren nor kynsfolckes amonge his people, no, ner eny posterite in his countre:
Job 18:20 yonng & olde shalbe astonished at his death.
Job 18:21 Soche are now the dwellynges of the wycked, and this the place of him that knoweth not God.

CHAPTER: 19

Job 19:1 Iob answered, and sayde:
Job 19:2 howe longe wil ye vexe my mynde, & trouble me wyth wordes?
Job 19:3 Lo, ten tymes haue ye reproued me: are ye not ashamed, for to laugh me so to scorne?
Job 19:4 yf I go wronge, I go wronge to my selfe.
Job 19:5 But yf ye will enhaunce your selues againste me, & accuse me to be a wicked persone, because of the shame that is come vpon me:
Job 19:6 knowe thys then, that it is God, whiche hath handled me so violently & hath compased me aboute with his scourges.
Job 19:7 Beholde, though I crye, yet violence is done vnto me, I can not be herde: Though I complane, there is none to geue sentence with me.
Job 19:8 He had hedged vp my payth, I can not get awaye, he hath set darckenesse in my gate.
Job 19:9 He hath spoyled my of myne honoure, and taken the croune awaye from my head.
Job 19:10 He hath destroyed my on euery syde, & I am vndone: My hope hath he taken awaye from me, as it were a tre plucte vp by the rote.
Job 19:11 Hys wrath is kyndled agaynste me, he taketh me, as though I were hys enemy.
Job 19:12 His men of warre came together, whyche made their waye ouer me, and beseged my dwellinge roundeaboute.
Job 19:13 He hath put my brethren farre awaye from me, and suche as were of myne acquauntaunce, are become straungers vnto me.
Job 19:14 Mine owne kynsfolkes haue forsaken me, and my frendes haue put me out of remembraunce.
Job 19:15 The seruauntes & maydens of myne owne house take me for a straunger, and I am be come as an aleaunt in theyr syght.
Job 19:16 When I call vpon my seruaunt, he geueth me no answere: no though I praye him wyth my mouth.
Job 19:17 Myne owne wyfe may not abide my breth, I am faynt to speake fayre vnto the childeen of myne owne body.
Job 19:18 Ye the very deserte fooles despyse me, and when I am gone from them, they speake euell vpon me.
Job 19:19 Al suche as were my most familiers, abhorre me: and they whom I loued best, are turned against me.
Job 19:20 My bone hangeth to my skynne, & my flesh is awaye, only there is left me the skynne aboute my teth.
Job 19:21 Haue pyte vpon me, haue pite vpon me (O ye my frendes) for the hande of the Lorde hath touched me.
Job 19:22 Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied of my fleshe?
Job 19:23 O that my wordes were written, O that they were put in a boke:
Job 19:24 woulde God they were grauen with an yron penne in leade or in stone.
Job 19:25 For I am sure, that my redemer liueth & that I shal ryse out of the earth in the latter day:
Job 19:26 that I shal be clothed againe wyth thys skynne, & se God in my fleshe.
Job 19:27 Ye I my selfe shal beholde hym, not wyth other but wyth these same eyes. My reynes are consumed within me,
Job 19:28 when ye saye: Why do not we persecute him? we haue founde an occasyon against hym.
Job 19:29 But beware of the swearde, for the swearde wylbe auenged of wickednesse, and be sure, that there is a iudgement.

CHAPTER: 20

Job 20:1 Then answered Sophar the Naamathite, and sayde.
Job 20:2 For the same cause do my thoughtes compel me to answere. And why? my mynde is tossed here and there.
Job 20:3 I haue suffyciently herde thy checkinge and reprose, therfore am I purposed to make aunswere after myne vnderstandinge.
Job 20:4 Knowest thou not this, namely: that from the begynnynge (euer sence the creacion of man vpon earth)
Job 20:5 the prayse of the vngodlye hath bene shorte, and that the ioye of ypocrites continued but the twyncklyng of an eye?
Job 20:6 Though he be magnifyed vp to the heauen, so that his heade reacheth vnto the cloudes:
Job 20:7 yet he perisheth at the laste lyke dounge: In so moche that they which haue sene hym, saye: Where is he?
Job 20:8 He vanysheth as a dreame, so that he can no more be founde, & passeth awaye as a visyon in the nyght.
Job 20:9 So that the eye whiche sawe him before, getteth nowe no syght of hym, and his place knoweth hym no more.
Job 20:10 His chyldren go a begynge, theyr handes bringe them to sorow and heuynesse.
Job 20:11 From his youth his bones are full of vyce, which shall lye downe wyth hym in the earth.
Job 20:12 When wyckednesse is swete in his mouth, he hydeth it vnder his tonge.
Job 20:13 That he fauoureth, that wyll he not forsake, but kepeth it close in his throte.
Job 20:14 The meate that he eateth, shalbe turned to the poyson of serpentes, with in his body.
Job 20:15 The ryches that he deuoureth, shall he perbreake agayne, for God shal draw them out of his bely
Job 20:16 he shal sucke the serpentes head, & the adders tonge shal slaye hym:
Job 20:17 so that he shall nomore se the ryuers & brokes of honye & butter:
Job 20:18 But laboure shall he, and yet haue nothinge to eate. Greate trauayle shall he make for ryches, but he shall not enioye them.
Job 20:19 And why? he hath oppressed the poore, and not helped them: houses hath he spoyled, and not builded them.
Job 20:20 Hys bely could neuer be fylled, therfore shall he perish in his coueteousnesse.
Job 20:21 He deuoured so gredely that he lefte nothinge behinde, therfore hys goodes shall not prospere.
Job 20:22 Thoughe he had plenteousnesse of euery thynge, yet was he poore, and therefore he is but a wretche on euery syde.
Job 20:23 For though the wicked haue neuer so much to fyll his bely, yet God shall send his wrath vpon hym, and cause hys battaill to raygne ouer him:
Job 20:24 so that yf he fle the yron wepens, he shall be shott with the stele bowe.
Job 20:25 The arow shal be taken forth, and go out at hys backe, and a glistering swearde thorow the gall of him, feare shall come vpon him.
Job 20:26 There shal no darcknes be able to hyd him. And vnkindled fyre shall consume him, and loke what remayneth in his house, it shalbe destroyed.
Job 20:27 The heauen shal declare his wickednesse, and the earth shall take parte agaynst hym.
Job 20:28 The substaunce that he hath in hys house, shalbe taken away and peryshe, in the daye of the Lordes wrath.
Job 20:29 This is the porcyon that the wycked shall haue of God, and the heretage that he may loke for of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 21

Job 21:1 Iob answered, and sayde.
Job 21:2 O heare my wordes, and amende youre selues.
Job 21:3 Suffre me a litle that I may speake also, and then laugh my wordes to scorne, yf ye wyll.
Job 21:4 Is it with a man, that I make this disputacyon? Whych yf it were so, shoulde not my spyrite be then in sore trouble?
Job 21:5 Marck me well, be abasshed, and laye youre hande vpon youre mouth.
Job 21:6 For when I pondre & considre this, I am afrayed, & my fleshe is smitten with feare.
Job 21:7 Wherfore do wicked men lyue in health and prosperite, come to their olde age, and increase in ryches?
Job 21:8 Their childers children lyue in their syght, and their generacion before their eyes.
Job 21:9 Their houses are safe from all feare, for the road of God doth not smyte them.
Job 21:10 Their bullocke grendeth, and that not oute of tyme: their cowe calueth, and is not vnfrutefull.
Job 21:11 They sende forth their children by flockes, and their sonnes lead the daunce.
Job 21:12 They beare with them tabrettes and harpes, & haue instrumentes of musycke at their pleasure.
Job 21:13 They spent their dayes in welthinesse: but sodenlye they go doune to hel.
Job 21:14 They say vnto God: go from vs: we desyre not the knowledge of thy wayes.
Job 21:15 What maner of felow is the Almightye, that we shoulde serue him? What profyt should we haue, to submitte oure selues vnto hym?
Job 21:16 Lo there is vtterly no goodnesse in them, therfore wyll not I haue to do with the councell of the vngodly.
Job 21:17 How oft shall the candle of the wicked be put oute? howe oft commeth their destruccyon vpon them? O what sorow shal god geue them for their part in his wrath?
Job 21:18 Yea, they shalbe euen as chaffe before the wynde, and as dust that the storme caryed awaye.
Job 21:19 And though God saue their children from suche sorowe, yet wyl he so rewarde them selues, that they shall knowe it.
Job 21:20 Their owne destruccion and misery shall they se with their eyes, and dryncke of the fearfull wrath of the Almighty.
Job 21:21 For what careth he, what be come of his housholde after his death? whose monethes passe awaye swyfter then an arowe.
Job 21:22 In as muche then as God hath the hyest power of all, who can teache hym any knoweledge?
Job 21:23 One dyeth now, when he is myghtye & at his best, riche, & in prosperite:
Job 21:24 euen when his bowels are at the fattest, & his bones ful of mary.
Job 21:25 An other dyeth in sorowe and heauynesse, and neuer had good dayes.
Job 21:26 Nowe slepe they bothe a lyke in the earthe, and the wormes couer them.
Job 21:27 But I knowe what ye thincke, yea and what ye ymagin against me vnrighteously.
Job 21:28 For ye saye: where is the Princes palace? where is the dwellinge of the vngodly?
Job 21:29 Aske any man that goeth by the way, and (yf ye wyll not regarde their tokens and dedes) he shal tel you,
Job 21:30 that the wicked is kept vnto the daye of destruccion, and that the vngodly shalbe broughte forthe in the daye of wrath.
Job 21:31 Who darre reproue him for his waies to hys face? who rewardeth him for the vngracyousnesse that he doth?
Job 21:32 Yet shall he be brought to his graue, and watche amonge the heape of the deade.
Job 21:33 Then shall he be faine to be buryed amonge the stones by the broke syde. All men must folow him, and there are innumerable gone before him.
Job 21:34 O how vayne is the comforte that ye geue me? Are not youre answeres cleane contrary to right and truthe.

CHAPTER: 22

Job 22:1 So Eliphas the Themanite gaue answere and sayde:
Job 22:2 May a man be compared vnto God in wysdome, though he seme to hym selfe, for to be lyke him?
Job 22:3 What pleasure hath God in that thou art righteous? Or what doth it profyte him, that thy waies are perfecte?
Job 22:4 Is he afrayed to reproue the, & to steppe forth wt the into iudgement.
Job 22:5 Commeth not this for that great wickednesse, & for thine vngracious dedes which are innumerable?
Job 22:6 thou hast taken the pledge from thy brethren for nought and robbed the naked of their clothing.
Job 22:7 To suche as were wery, hast thou geuen no water to drincke, thou hast withdrawen bread from the hungry.
Job 22:8 Shoulde suche one then as vseth violence, wrong and oppression (doing al thing of parcialite, and hauinge respecte of personnes) dwel in the lande?
Job 22:9 Thou hast sent wyddowes away emptye and oppressed the poore fatherlesse.
Job 22:10 Therfore art thou compased aboute wyth snares on euery side, and sodenly vexed with feare.
Job 22:11 Shouldest thou then se no darckenesse? Should not the water floude runne ouer the?
Job 22:12 Now because that God is hyer then the heauens, & because thou seyst that the starres are so hye
Job 22:13 wilt thou therfore saye: Tush, how shoulde God know? Doth his dominion reach beyond the cloudes:
Job 22:14 Tush, the cloudes couer him, that he may not se, for he dwelleth in heauen.
Job 22:15 Well thou wilt kepe the olde waye, that all wicked men haue gone:
Job 22:16 bothe olde and young, whose foundacyon is a runninge water,
Job 22:17 whiche say vnto God: go from vs, and after this maner: Tush, what wyll the Almyghty do vnto vs?
Job 22:18 where as he (notwithstandinge) fylleth their houses wyth all good Whyche meanyng of the vngodly be farre from me.
Job 22:19 For with ioy shall the godly, and with gladnesse shall the innocent se,
Job 22:20 that their encrease shall be hewen doune, and their posteryte consumed wyth fyre.
Job 22:21 Therfore reconcile the vnto God, and be content, so shall all thinges prospere wyth the ryghtwell.
Job 22:22 Receyue the lawe at his mouth, & laye vp his wordes in thine hert.
Job 22:23 For yf thou wilt turne to the Almighty, thou shalt stande fast, & al vnrighteousnesse shalbe farre from thy dwellinge:
Job 22:24 He shall geue the an haruest, whiche in plenty & aboundance shall exceade the dust of the earth, and the gould of Ophir lyke riuer stones
Job 22:25 Yea, the almighty his own self shalbe thine haruest, and the heape of thy moneye.
Job 22:26 Then shalt thou haue thy delyte in the Almighty, & lift vp thy face vnto God.
Job 22:27 Then shalt thou make thy prayer vnto hym, and he shal heare the, and thou shalt kepe thy promises.
Job 22:28 Then loke what thou takest in hand he shall make it to prospere with the, and the light shall shyne in thy wayes.
Job 22:29 For who so humbleth hym selfe, him shall he set vp: and who so loketh mekely, shalbe healed.
Job 22:30 Yf thou be innocent, he shall saue the: and thorow the vngyltinesse of thyne handes shalt thou be delyuered.

CHAPTER: 23

Job 23:1 Iob answered, & sayd:
Job 23:2 My sayinge is yet this day in bitternes & my hande heauy among my groninges.
Job 23:3 O that I might se him, and fynde hym. O that I myght come before his seat,
Job 23:4 to pleat my cause before him, & to fill my mouth wt argumentes.
Job 23:5 That I might know, what answer he would geue me: & that I might vnderstand, what he woulde saye vnto me.
Job 23:6 Wyl he pleate against me with his greate power & strength, or will he leane him selfe vtterly vpon me?
Job 23:7 Oh no, let him not do so with me. But let him geue me lyke power to go to the lawe, then am I sure to winne my matter.
Job 23:8 For though I go before, I fynde him not. Yf I come behynde, I can get no knowledge of him:
Job 23:9 Yf I go on the left side to pondre his worckes, I can not atteine vnto them. Agayn, yf I go on the right syde, he hydeth him self, that I can not se him.
Job 23:10 But as for my way, he knoweth it: & tryeth me as the goulde in the fyre.
Job 23:11 Neuertheles my fete kepe his path, his hie strete haue I holden, and not gone oute of it.
Job 23:12 I haue not forsaken the commaundemente of hys lippes, but loke what he charged me wt his mouth, that haue I shut vp in my herte.
Job 23:13 It is he him selfe alone, who wyll turne hym back? He doth as him listeth, and bryngeth to passe what he will.
Job 23:14 He rewardeth me into my bosome, and many other thinges mo doth he, as he maye by hys power.
Job 23:15 Thys is the cause, that I shrincke at hys presence, so that when I consydre him, I am afrayed of hym.
Job 23:16 For in so muche as he is God, he maketh my herte soft: and seynge that he is Almightye, he putteth me in feare.
Job 23:17 Thus can not I get out of darcknesse, the cloude hath so couered my face.

CHAPTER: 24

Job 24:1 Consyderinge then that there is no tyme hyd from the almighty, how happeneth it, that they whyche know him, will not regarde his dayes?
Job 24:2 For some men there be, that remoue other mens landemarkes, that robbe them of their catell, and kepe the same for their owne:
Job 24:3 that driue away the asse of the fatherlesse, that take the wyddowes oxe for a pledge:
Job 24:4 that thrust the poore oute of the waie, and oppresse the simple of the worlde together.
Job 24:5 Beholde, the wilde asses in the deserte go by tymes, as their maner is, to spoyle: Yea, the very wyldernesse mynystreth fode for their children.
Job 24:6 They reape the corne feld that is not their owne and gather the grapes oute of hys vineyard, whome they haue oppressed by vyolence.
Job 24:7 They are the cause that so many men are naked and bare, hauinge no clothes to couer them and kepe them from coulde:
Job 24:8 So that when the showers in the mountaynes haue rayned vpon them, and they be all wet, they haue none other succoure, but to kepe them among the rockes.
Job 24:9 They spoyle the sucking fatherlesse children and put the dore in preson.
Job 24:10 In so muche that they let them go naked withoute clothinge, and yet the hungry beare the sheues.
Job 24:11 The poore are fayne to laboure in their oyle mylles, yea and to treade in their wyne presses, & yet to suffre thyrst.
Job 24:12 The whole cyty cryeth vnto the Lorde with syghynge, the soules of the slayne make their complainte. But God destroieth them not for al this,
Job 24:13 where as they (notwithstandinge) are rebellious and disobedient enemies: whiche seke not his lyghte and waye, nor turne agayne into hys pathe.
Job 24:14 Tymely in the mornynge do they aryse, to murthur the simple and poore, & in the night they go a stealynge.
Job 24:15 The eye of the vngodly is lyke the aduouterer, that wayteth for the darckenesse, & sayeth thus in hym selfe: Tush, there shall no man se me, & so he disgyseth his face.
Job 24:16 In the nighte ceason they searche the houses, and hyd them selues in the day tyme, but wyll not knowe the light.
Job 24:17 For as sone as the daye breaketh, the shadow of death commeth vpon them, & they go in horrible darcknesse.
Job 24:18 The vngodly is very swyft. O that his porcion also vpon earth were swyfter then the runninge water, whiche suffreth not the shipman to beholde the fayre & pleasaunt vineiardes.
Job 24:19 O that they (for the wickednesse whiche they haue done) were drawen to the hel, soner then snow melteth at the heate.
Job 24:20 O that all compassion vpon them were forgotten: that their dayntyes were wormes, that they were cleane put oute of remembraunce, & vtterly hewen doune lyke an vnfrutefull tree.
Job 24:21 For they manteyne the baren, and make them that they can not beare, and vnto wyddowes they do no good.
Job 24:22 They plucke doune the myghtye with theyr power, and when they themselues are gotten vp, they are neuer without feare, as longe as they lyue.
Job 24:23 And though they myght be safe, yet they wyll not receyue it, for their eyes loke vpon their own wayes.
Job 24:24 They are exalted for a lytle, but shortly are they gone, brought to extreme pouerte, and taken oute of the way: yea & vtterly plucte of, as the eares of corne.
Job 24:25 Is it not so? Who wyll then reproue me as a lyar, & say that my wordes are nothing worth.

CHAPTER: 25

Job 25:1 Then answered Baldad the Suhite, & said:
Job 25:2 Power & fear is wt him aboue, that maketh peace, sitting in his highnes
Job 25:3 whose men of warre are innumerable, & whose light aryseth ouer all.
Job 25:4 But how may a man compared vnto God, be iustified? Or, how can he be cleane that is borne of a woman?
Job 25:5 Beholde, the mone shyneth nothinge in comparison to him, and the starres are vncleane in his sight.
Job 25:6 Howe muche more then man, that is but corrupcion: & the sonne of man, whyche is but a worme?

CHAPTER: 26

Job 26:1 Iob answered, and said:
Job 26:2 O how helpest thou the weake? what comforte geuest thou vnto hym that hath no strength?
Job 26:3 Where is the counsell that thou shouldest geue him, which hath no wysedome? Wilt thou so shew thine excellent ryghteousnes?
Job 26:4 Before whom haste thou spoken those wordes? Who made the breth to come out of the mouth?
Job 26:5 The gyauntes & worthies that are slayne, and lye vnder the worlde with their companions:
Job 26:6 yea & all they which dwell beneth in the hell are not hid from him, and the very destruccion it selfe can not be kepte oute of his sighte.
Job 26:7 He stretched oute the north ouer the emptie, & hangeth the earth vpon nothinge.
Job 26:8 He bindeth the water in hys cloudes, that they fall not doune together.
Job 26:9 He holdeth back his stoul, that it can not be sene, and spredeth his cloudes before it.
Job 26:10 He hath compaseth the waters wt certayne boundes, vntill the day and night come to an ende.
Job 26:11 The very pillers of heauen tremble & quake at his reprofe.
Job 26:12 He stilleth the sea with his power, and thorow hys wisdom hath he set forthe the world.
Job 26:13 Wyth his spirites hath he garnisshed the heauens, & with his hand hath he wounded the rebellious serpent.
Job 26:14 This is nowe a short summe of his doynges. But who is able sufficiently to rehearse his workes? Who can perceyue and vnderstand the thondre of his power?

CHAPTER: 27

Job 27:1 And Iob proceaded & went forth in his communicacyon, saying:
Job 27:2 As truly as God liueth (which hath taken away my power from me) and the almighty, that hath vexed my mynd.
Job 27:3 My lippes shall talke of no vanite, and my tonge shall speake no disceyte
Job 27:4 whyle my breth is in me, and as longe as the wynde (that God hath geuen me) is in my nostrels.
Job 27:5 God forbidde, that I should graunt your cause to be ryght. As for me, vntil mine ende come, will I neuer go from mine innocencye.
Job 27:6 My ryghteous dealinge kepe I fast, whiche I wyll not forsake: my hert shall not reproue me of my dayes.
Job 27:7 Therfore myne enemye shalbe founde as the vngodly, and he that taketh parte against me, as the vnrighteous.
Job 27:8 What hope hath the ypocrite, though he haue greate good, and though God geue him ryches after his hertes desire?
Job 27:9 Doeth God hear him the soner, when he crieth vnto him in his necessite?
Job 27:10 Hath he suche pleasure and delyte in the Almighty, that he darre alway cal vpon God?
Job 27:11 I wyl teache you in the name of God? and the thinge that I haue of the Almightye will I not kepe from you.
Job 27:12 Beholde, ye stand in youre owne conceate, as though ye knewe all thinges. Wherfore then do ye go aboute with suche vaine wordes,
Job 27:13 saying: This is the porcion that the wicked shall haue of God, and the heretage that Tirauntes shall receyue of the almighty.
Job 27:14 Yf he get many chyldren, they shal perishe with the swearde, and hys posterite, shal haue scarcenesse of bread.
Job 27:15 Loke whom he leaueth behind him, they shall dye & be buried, and no man shall haue pite of hys wyddowes.
Job 27:16 Though he haue as muche money as the dust of the earthe, and raymente as ready as the claie,
Job 27:17 he maye wel prepare it: but the godly shall put it vpon him, & the innocent shall deale oute the money.
Job 27:18 His house shall endure as the moth, and as a bothe that the watcheman maketh.
Job 27:19 When the ryche man dyeth, he caried nothing with him: he is gone in the twinckelynge of an eye.
Job 27:20 Destruccyon taketh holde vpon him as a water floud, and the tempest stealeth hym awaie in the nyghte season.
Job 27:21 A vehemente wynde caried him hence and departeth: a storme plucketh hym oute of his place.
Job 27:22 It russheth in vpon hym, and spareth him not, he maye not escape from the power thereof.
Job 27:23 Then clappe men their handes at him, yea and yeast of him, when they loke vpon his place.

CHAPTER: 28

Job 28:1 There are places where syluer is molten, and were golde is tried:
Job 28:2 where yron is digged out of the ground, & stones resolued to metall.
Job 28:3 The darkenes shal ones come to an ende, he can seke out the grounde of all thynges: the stones, the darcke, & the horrible shadowe.
Job 28:4 Wyth the ryuer of water parteth he a sunder the straunge people, that knoweth no good neyghbourheade: suche as are rude, vnmanerly and boyustours.
Job 28:5 He bryngeth foode out of the earthe, & that whiche is vnder consumeth he with fyre.
Job 28:6 There is found a place, whose stones are cleane Saphirs, & where the clottes of earthe are golde.
Job 28:7 There is a way also that the byrdes knowe not, that no vulturs eye hath sene:
Job 28:8 wherin the proude & hye minded walke not, and where no lyon commeth.
Job 28:9 There putteth he his hande vpon stony rockes, and ouerthroweth the mountaynes
Job 28:10 Riuers flowe out of the rockes, and loke what is pleasaunt, his eye seith it.
Job 28:11 Out of droppes bringeth he greate floudes together & the thinge that is hyd bringeth he to lighte.
Job 28:12 Howe commeth a man then by wysedome? Where is the place that men fynde vnderstandinge?
Job 28:13 Verely no man can tell howe worthy a thynge she is, neither is she found in the land of the liuinge.
Job 28:14 The depe sayeth: she is not in me. The sea sayeth: she is not with me.
Job 28:15 She can not be gotten for the most fine gould, neither may the pryce of her be bought with any money.
Job 28:16 No wedges of goulde of Ophir, no precious Onix stones, no Saphirs maye be compared vnto her.
Job 28:17 No, neyther goulde, nor Christal, neyther swete odoures, nor golden plate.
Job 28:18 There is nothinge so worthy, or so excellent, as ones to be named vnto her: for perfecte wisedome goeth farre beyonde them al.
Job 28:19 The Topas that commeth out of Iude, may in no wise be lykened vnto her: yea no maner of apparel howe pleasaunt and fayre soeuer it be.
Job 28:20 From whence then commeth wysedome? & where is the place of vnderstandinge?
Job 28:21 She is hyd from the eyes of all men, yea & from the foules of the ayre.
Job 28:22 Destruccyon and death say: we haue hearde tell of her with oure eares.
Job 28:23 But God seyth her waie, and knoweth her place.
Job 28:24 For he beholdeth the endes of the world & loketh vpon al that is vnder heauen.
Job 28:25 When he weyed the windes, & measured the waters
Job 28:26 when he set the rayne in ordre, and gaue the mighty floudes a lawe?
Job 28:27 Then dyd he se her, then declared he her, prepared her, and knew her.
Job 28:28 And vnto man he sayde: Beholde, to feare the Lorde, is wisedom, and to forsake euil, is vnderstandinge.

CHAPTER: 29

Job 29:1 So Iob proceaded and went forth in his communicacyon, saying:
Job 29:2 O that I were as I was in the monethes by past, & in the daies when God preserued me:
Job 29:3 when his light shyned vpon my head: when I went after the same lyght and shininge euen thorowe the darckenesse.
Job 29:4 As it stode with me, when I was welthy and had ynoughe: when God prospered my house:
Job 29:5 when the almighty was wt me: when my houshold folckes stode about me:
Job 29:6 when my wayes ranne ouer wt butter and when the stony rockes gaue me ryuers of oyle:
Job 29:7 when I went thorow the cytye vnto the gate, and when they set me a chaire in the strete:
Job 29:8 when the younge men (as sone as they sawe me) hid them selues, and when the aged arose, and stode vp vnto me:
Job 29:9 when the Princes lefte of their talkinge, & layed their hande to their mouthe:
Job 29:10 when the mighty kepte styll their voice, and when their tonges cleaued to the rofe of their mouthes.
Job 29:11 When al they that hearde me, called me happie: & when all they that sawe me, wyshed me good.
Job 29:12 For I delyuered the poore when he cried, and the fatherlesse that wanted helpe.
Job 29:13 He that shoulde haue bene lost, gaue me a good worde, and the wyddowes herte praysed me.
Job 29:14 And why? I put vpon me ryghteousnes, whyche couered me as a garment, and equyte was my croune.
Job 29:15 I was an eye vnto the blinde, and a fote to the lame,
Job 29:16 I was a father vnto the poore and when I knew not their cause, I sought it oute diligently.
Job 29:17 I brake the chaftes of the vnrighteous, and plucte the spoyle oute of their tethe.
Job 29:18 Therfore, I thought verely, that I should haue dyed in my nest: & that my daies should haue bene as many as the soundes of the sea.
Job 29:19 For my rote was spred oute by the waterside and the dew lay vpon my corne.
Job 29:20 My honour encreased more and more, and my bowe was euer the stronger in my hande.
Job 29:21 Vnto me men gaue eare, me they regarded, and with silence they taryed for my counsel.
Job 29:22 Yf I had spoken they woulde haue it none other wayes; my wordes were so well taken amonge them.
Job 29:23 They wayted for me, as the earth doeth for the rayne: and gaped vpon me, as the ground doeth to receyue the latter shower.
Job 29:24 When I laughed, they knew wel it was not earnest: and this testimony of my countenaunce pleased them nothinge at all.
Job 29:25 When I agreed vnto their waye, I was the chefe, and sat as a Kynge amonge hys seruauntes: Or as one that comforteth suche as be in heauynesse.

CHAPTER: 30

Job 30:1 Bvt now they that are myne inferiours and younger then I, haue me in derision: yea euen they, whose fathers I woulde haue thought scorne to haue set with the dogges of my cattell.
Job 30:2 The power and strength of their handes might do me no good, and as for their age, it is spent and past away: wythout any profit.
Job 30:3 For very misery & honger, they went about in the wildernesse lyke wretches and beggers,
Job 30:4 plucking vp herbes from amonge the busshes, and the Iunipers rote was their meat.
Job 30:5 And when they were dryuen forth, men cried after them, as it had bene after a thefe.
Job 30:6 Their dwellyng was besyde foule brokes, yea in the caues and dennes of the earth.
Job 30:7 Vpon the drye heeth wente they aboute crying, and in the brome hilles they gathered them together.
Job 30:8 They were the chyldren of fooles and vilaynes, which are deade away from the world.
Job 30:9 Now am I their songe and am become their yestinge stocke:
Job 30:10 they abhorre me, they fle far from me, and stayne my face with spetle.
Job 30:11 For the Lorde hath opened his quyuer, he had hyt me, and put a brydle in my mouthe.
Job 30:12 Vpon my ryght hand they rose together against me, they haue hurte my fete, made a waye to destroye me,
Job 30:13 and my path haue they cleane marred. It was so easy for them to do me harme, that they neded no man to helpe them.
Job 30:14 They fell vpon me, as it had bene the breakinge in of waters, and came in by heapes to destroy me.
Job 30:15 Fearfulnesse is turned against me. Myne honoure vanysheth awaye more swyftly then winde, & my prosperite departeth hence lyke as it were a cloude.
Job 30:16 Therfore is my minde poured full of heauynesse, & the dayes of trouble haue taken holde vpon me.
Job 30:17 My bones are pearsed thorow in the nyghte season, & my sinewes take no rest.
Job 30:18 Wyth all their power haue they chaunged my garment & gyrded me therwith, as it were wt a cote.
Job 30:19 I am euen as it were claie, & am become like asshes and dust.
Job 30:20 When I crye vnto the, thou doest not heare me: & though I stande before the, yet thou regardest me not.
Job 30:21 Thou art become mine enemy, & wyth thy violent hande thou takest part agaynst me.
Job 30:22 In tymes past thou didest set vp me on hie, as it were aboue the wynde, but now hast thou geuen me a very sore fall.
Job 30:23 Sure I am, that thou wilt delyuer me vnto death: where as a lodgynge is prepared for all men lyuinge.
Job 30:24 Now vse not men to do violence vnto them, that are destroyed all ready: but where hurte is done, there vse they to helpe.
Job 30:25 Dyd I not wype in the tyme of trouble? Had not my soule compassion vpon the poore?
Job 30:26 Yet neuerthelesse where as I loked for good, euyl happened vnto me: and where as I wayted for lyghte, there came darkenesse.
Job 30:27 My bowels seeth within me, and take no reste, for the dayes of my trouble are come vpon me.
Job 30:28 Mekely & lowly came I in yea and without any displeasure: I stode vp in the congregacion, and communed with them.
Job 30:29 But now, I am a companion of dragons, & a felowe of Estriches.
Job 30:30 My skinne vpon me is turned to blacke, and my bones are brent with heate,
Job 30:31 my harpe is turned to sorow and my pype to wepynge.

CHAPTER: 31

Job 31:1 I made a couenaunt with mine eyes, that I woulde not loke vpon a damosell.
Job 31:2 For how great a porcion shal I haue of God from aboue? & what enheritaunce from the almyghty on hye?
Job 31:3 As for the vngodly & he that ioyneth hym selfe to the company of wycked doers shall not destruccion & misery come vpon him?
Job 31:4 Doeth not he se my wayes, and tell all my goynges.
Job 31:5 Yf I haue cleaued vnto vanitie or yf my fete haue runne to disceyue:
Job 31:6 let me be weyed in an euen balaunce that God may se my innocency.
Job 31:7 Yf so be that I haue with drawne my fote out of the right waye, yf my herte hath folowed myne eye syght, yf I haue stayned or defyled my handes.
Job 31:8 O then it is reason that I sowe, and another eate, yea that my generacion & posterite be cleane roted oute.
Job 31:9 Yf my hert hath lusted after my neyghboures wyfe, or yf I haue layd wayte at his dore.
Job 31:10 O then let my wyfe be another mans harlot, and let other lye wt her.
Job 31:11 For this is a wickeduesse and synne, that is worthy to be punished,
Job 31:12 yea a fyre that vtterly shoulde consume, and rote oute all my substaunce.
Job 31:13 Dyd I euer thinke scorne to do right vnto my seruauntes and maydens, when they had any matter against me.
Job 31:14 But seynge that God will syt in iudgement what shall I do? And for so muche as he will nedes vpset me, what answere shall I geue hym?
Job 31:15 He that fashioned me in my mothers womb, made he not him also? were we not bothe shapen alyke in oure mothers bodyes?
Job 31:16 When the poore desyreth any thinge at me, haue I denyed it them? Haue I caused the wyddowe stande wayting for me in vayne?
Job 31:17 Haue I eaten my porcyon alone, that the fatherlesse hath had no parte wyth me?
Job 31:18 for mercy grewe vp with me from my youth, and compassion from my mothers wombe.
Job 31:19 Haue I sene any man perysh thorow nakednesse and want of clothinge? Or any poore man for lack of rayment,
Job 31:20 whose sydes thancked me not, because he was warmed wt the wolle of my shepe?
Job 31:21 Dyd I euer lyfce vp my hande to hurte the fatherlesse? yea in the gate where I sawe my selfe to be in auctoryte:
Job 31:22 then let myne arme fall from my shoulder, and myne arme holes be broken from the yoyutes.
Job 31:23 For I haue euer feared the vengeaunce & punishement of God, & knew very wel, that I was no able to beare his burthen.
Job 31:24 Haue I put my truste in goulde? Or haue I sayde to the fynest gould of all: thou art my confidence?
Job 31:25 Haue I reioysed because my substaunce was great, and because my hande gat so muche?
Job 31:26 Dyd I euer greatly regard the rysynge of the sunne? or had I the goyng doune of the mone in greate reputacyon?
Job 31:27 Hath my hert medled priuely wt any disceyte? Or dyd I euer kisse mine owne hande?
Job 31:28 that were a wyckednesse worthy to be punished, for then I shoulde haue denyed the God that is aboue.
Job 31:29 Haue I euer reioysed at the hurte of myne enemy? Or whas I euer glad, that any harme happened vnto hym? Oh no.
Job 31:30 I neuer suffred my mouth to do such a synne, as to wyshe hym euyll.
Job 31:31 Yet they of mine owne housholde saye: who shall let vs to haue oure belly full of hys fleshe?
Job 31:32 I haue not suffred a straunger to lye withoute, but opened my dores vnto him.
Job 31:33 Haue I euer done any wicked dede where thorow I shamed my selfe before men: or any abhominacion, that I was fayne to hyde it?
Job 31:34 For yf I had feared any greate multitude of people, or yf I had bene dispysed of the symple, O then shoulde I haue bene afrayed. Thus haue I quyetly spent my life, and not gone oute at the dore.
Job 31:35 O that I had one whiche woulde heare me. Lo, this is my cause. Let the almighty geue me answere: and let hym that is my contrary party, sue me with a lybell.
Job 31:36 Then shal I take it vpon my shoulder, & as a garlande about my heade.
Job 31:37 I haue tolde the nombre of my goynges & delyuered them vnto hym as to a Prynce.
Job 31:38 But yf case be that my lande crye againste me, or that the forowes therof make any complainte:
Job 31:39 yf I haue eaten the frutes therof vnpaied for, yea yf I haue greued any of the plow men:
Job 31:40 then let thystles growe in steade of my wheate, and thornes for my barleye. Here ende the wordes of Iob.

CHAPTER: 32

Job 32:1 So these thre men would stryue no more wyth Iob, because he helde him selfe a ryghteous man.
Job 32:2 But Eliu the sonne of Barachell the Bussite of the kinred of Ram, was very sore displeased at Iob, that he called him felfe iust before God.
Job 32:3 And wyth Iobs thre frindes he was angry also, because they had founde no reasonnable answere to ouercome him.
Job 32:4 Now taryed Eliu till they had ended their communycacion with Iob, for why they were elder then he.
Job 32:5 So when Eliu the sonne of Barachel the Bussite sawe, that these thre men were not able to make Iob answere, he was myscontent:
Job 32:6 so that he gaue answere hym selfe, and sayde: Considringe, that I am younge, & ye be men of age, I was afraid, & durst not shew forth my minde,
Job 32:7 for I thought thus within my selfe. It becommeth olde men to speake, and the aged to teache wisedom.
Job 32:8 Euery man (no doute) hath a mind but it is the inspiracion of the Almyghty that geueth vnderstandynge.
Job 32:9 All men are not wise neyther dothe euery aged man vnderstande the thinge that is lawfull.
Job 32:10 Therfore wyll I speake also (in so farre as I may be hearde) & wyl shew you myne opynion.
Job 32:11 For when I had wayted till ye made an ende of your talking & hearde youre wysedome: what argumentes ye made in youre communycacyon:
Job 32:12 yea when I had dylygentlye pondred what, ye sayde, I I founde not one of you that made any good argumente agaynst Iob, or that directly coud make answere vnto hys wordes:
Job 32:13 lest ye shuld prayse youre selues, to haue founde oute wysdome: because it is God that hath caste hym oute, and no man.
Job 32:14 Neuerthelesse, seyng he hath not spoken vnto me, therfore wyll not I aunswere hym as ye haue done
Job 32:15 (for they were so abashed, that they coude not make aunswere, nor speake one worde)
Job 32:16 but in so muche as ye wyll not speake, standynge styll lyke domme men, and makynge no aunswere:
Job 32:17 I haue a good hope for my parte to shappe hym an answere, and to shewe hym my meanyng.
Job 32:18 For I am full of wordes, and the spryte that is wtin me, compelleth me.
Job 32:19 Beholde, I am as the newe wyne, whiche hath no vente, and bursteth the newe vessels in sunder.
Job 32:20 Therfore wyl I speake, that I may haue a vente: I wyl open my lyppes, & make aunswere.
Job 32:21 I wyll regarde no maner of person, no man wyll I spare.
Job 32:22 For yf I wolde go aboute to please men, I knowe not, how sone my maker wolde take me awaye.

CHAPTER: 33

Job 33:1 Wherfore heare my wordes (O Iob) and herken vnto me all, that I wyll saye:
Job 33:2 Beholde, I wyl open my mouthe, and my tonge shall speake out of my chawes.
Job 33:3 My herte shall ordre my wordes a ryghte, & my lyppes shall talke of pure wysdome.
Job 33:4 The spryte of God hath made me, & the breth of the almyghtye hath geuen me my lyfe.
Job 33:5 If thou canste, then geue me aunswere: prepare thy selfe to stande before me face to face.
Job 33:6 Beholde, before God am I euen as thou, for I am fashyoned, and made euen of the same moulde.
Job 33:7 Therfore, thou nedest not be afrayed of me, neyther nedest thou to feare, that my auctoryte shalbe to heauye for the.
Job 33:8 Now haste thou spoken in myne eares, and I haue heard the voyce of thy wordes:
Job 33:9 I am clene withoute any faute, I am innocente, & there is no wyckednesse in me,
Job 33:10 But lo, he hath pyked a quarell agaynste me, and taketh me for hys enemye,
Job 33:11 he hath put my fote in the stockes, & loketh narowlye vnto all my pathes.
Job 33:12 Beholde, vnto these vnreasonable wordes of thyne wil I make aunswere. Shulde God be reproued of man?
Job 33:13 Why doest thou then stryue agaynst hym, because he geueth the no accomptes of all hys doynges?
Job 33:14 For when God doth ones commaunde a thynge, there shulde no man be curyous, to searche whether it be ryghte.
Job 33:15 In dreames and visyons of the nyght season (when slombring commeth vpon men, that they fall a slepe in theyr beddes)
Job 33:16 he roundeth them in the eares, he infourmeth them, and sheweth them playnelye,
Job 33:17 that it is he, which wythdraweth man from euyll, delyuereth hym from pryde,
Job 33:18 kepeth hys soule from destruccyon, and his life from the swearde.
Job 33:19 He chasteneth hym wyth sycknesse, and bryngeth hym to hys bedde: he layeth sore punyshment vpon hys bones,
Job 33:20 so that hys lyfe maye awaye wyth no bread, & hys soule abhorreth to eate anye dayntye meate.
Job 33:21 In so muche that hys body is cleane consumed awaye, and hys bones apeare no more.
Job 33:22 Hys soule draweth on to destruccyon, & hys lyfe to death.
Job 33:23 Nowe yf there be a messenger (one amonge a thousande) sent for to speake vnto man, and to shewe hym the ryght waye:
Job 33:24 then the Lorde is mercyfull vnto hym, & sayeth: He shalbe delyuered, that he fall not doune to destruccyon, for I am suffycyentlye reconcyled.
Job 33:25 Then hys fleshe (which hath bene in myserye and trouble) shalbe as it was in hys youth.
Job 33:26 For yf he submytte hym self vnto God he is gracyous, and sheweth hym his countenaunce ioyfully, and rewardeth man for hys ryghtuousnes.
Job 33:27 Suche a respecte hath he vnto men. Therfore let a man confesse (and saye) I offended, but he hath chastened and reformed me: I dyd vnryghteouslye, neuerthelesse he hath not recompensed me thereafter.
Job 33:28 Yea he hath delyuered my soule from destruccyon, and my lyfe, that it seeth the lyght.
Job 33:29 Lo, thus worcketh God alwaye wyth man,
Job 33:30 that he kepeth hys soule from peryshynge, and letteth hym enioye the lyghte of the lyuyng.
Job 33:31 Marke well (O Iob) and heare me: holde the styl, vntyll I haue spoken.
Job 33:32 But yf thou hast anything to saye, then aunswere me, and speake, for thy aunswere pleaseth me.
Job 33:33 If thou hast nothyng, then heare me, and holde thy tonge, so shall I teache the wysdome.

CHAPTER: 34

Job 34:1 Eliu proceadynge forth in his communicacyon, sayde:
Job 34:2 Heare my wordes (O ye wyse men) herken vnto me, ye that haue vnderstandynge.
Job 34:3 For lyke as the mouthe tasteth the meates, so the eare proueth and discerneth the wordes.
Job 34:4 As for the iudgement, let vs seke it oute among our selues, that we may knowe what is ryghte.
Job 34:5 And why? Iob hath sayde: I am ryghtuous, but GOD doth me wronge.
Job 34:6 I muste nedes be a lyar, thoughe my cause be ryghte, and vyolently I am plaged where as I made no faut:
Job 34:7 where is there such one as Iob, that drincketh vp scornefulnes lyke water?
Job 34:8 which goeth in the company of wicked doars, & walketh with vngodly men?
Job 34:9 For he sayeth: Thoughe a man be good, yet is he naughte before God.
Job 34:10 Therfore herken vnto me, ye that haue vnderstandynge. Farre be it from God, that he shulde medle with wyckednesse: and farre be it from the almyghtye, that he shuld medle wyth vnryghtuous dealynge:
Job 34:11 but he rewardeth the worckes of man, and causeth euerye man to fynde accordynge to hys wayes.
Job 34:12 For sure it is, that God condemneth no man wrongouslye, and the iudgemente of the Almyghtye is not vnrightuous.
Job 34:13 Who ruleth the earth in his stead? Or, whome hath he set to gouerne the whole worlde?
Job 34:14 To whome hath he geuen hys herte, for to drawe hys spryte and breth vnto hym?
Job 34:15 All flesh shall come together vnto naught, & all men shall turne agayne vnto earthe.
Job 34:16 If thou nowe haue vnderstandynge, heare what I say, and herken to the voyce of my wordes.
Job 34:17 Maye he be made whole, that loueth no ryghte? If thou were a verye innocente man, shuldest thou then be punysheth:
Job 34:18 For he is euen the same, that knoweth the rebellyous kynges, and sayth to Princes:
Job 34:19 Vngodly men are ye. He hath none respecte vnto the personnes of the lordlye, and regardeth not the ryche more then pore. For they be al the worcke of hys handes.
Job 34:20 In the twynckelynge of an eye shal they be slayne: and at midnight, when the people and the tyrauntes rage, then shall they peryshe, and be taken awaye withoute handes.
Job 34:21 And why? hys eyes loke vpon the wayes of man, and he seith all hys goynges.
Job 34:22 There is no darcknes nor thicke shadow, that can hyde the wycked doers from hym.
Job 34:23 For no man shalbe suffered to go into iudgemente wyth God.
Job 34:24 Manye one, yea innumerable doth he punyshe, and setteth other in theyr steades.
Job 34:25 For he knoweth theyr euyll and darcke worckes, therfore shall they be destroyed.
Job 34:26 They that were in the steade of Sears, dealte lyke vngodly men.
Job 34:27 Therfore turned they backe trayterously and vnfaythfully from hym, & wolde not receyue hys wayes.
Job 34:28 In so muche that they haue caused the voyce of the poore to come vnto hym, and nowe he heareth the complaynte of suche as are in necessite.
Job 34:29 If he delyuer and graunte pardon, who wil iudge or condemne? But yf he hyde away hys countenaunce, who wyll turne it aboute agayne, whether it be to the people or to anye man?
Job 34:30 For the wyckednesse and synne of the people, he maketh an ypocryte to raygne ouer them.
Job 34:31 For so muche then as I haue begonne to talke of GOD, I wyll not hyndre the.
Job 34:32 If I haue gone a mysse, enfourme me: yf I haue done wronge, I wyl leaue of.
Job 34:33 Wylte thou not geue a reasonable aunswere? Art thou afrayed of anye thynge, seynge thou begannest fyrste to speake, & not I?
Job 34:34 For els the men of vnderstandyng & wysdome, that haue heard me, myght say: What canste thou speake?
Job 34:35 As for Iob he hath nether spoken to the purpose nor wyselye.
Job 34:36 O father, let Iob be well tryed, because he hath turned hym self to the wycked:
Job 34:37 yea aboue hys synnes he hath blasphemed, whiche offence he hath done euen before vs, in that he stryueth against God with his wordes.

CHAPTER: 35

Job 35:1 Eliu spake moreouer, and sayde:
Job 35:2 Thinkest thou it right that thou saiest: I am ryghteous before GOD?
Job 35:3 Seynge, thou sayest so, howe doest thou knowe it? What thynge haste thou more excellente then I, that I am a synner?
Job 35:4 Therfore wyll I geue answere vnto the and thy frendes:
Job 35:5 loke vnto the heauen, and beholde it: consydre the cloudes, how they are hyer then thou.
Job 35:6 If thou sinnest, what doest thou vnto hym? If thyne offences be manye, howe gettest thou his fauoure?
Job 35:7 Yf thou be ryghteous what geuest thou hym? Or what receyueth he of thy handes?
Job 35:8 Of such an vngodly personne as thou, and of the sonne of man that is ryghtuous as thou pretendeste to be:
Job 35:9 there is a great crye & complaynt made by them that are oppressed with violence, yea euerye man complayneth vpon the cruell arme of tyrauntes.
Job 35:10 For suche one neuer sayeth: Where is God that made me? & that shyneth vpon vs, that we myght prayse him in the nighte?
Job 35:11 Whiche geueth vs more vnderstandyng then he doth the beastes of the earthe, and teacheth vs more then the foules of heauen.
Job 35:12 If anye suche complayne, no man geueth answere, and that because of the wyckednesse of proude tyrauntes.
Job 35:13 But yf a man call vpon God, doth not he heare him? Doth not the almyghtye accepte hys crye?
Job 35:14 Whan thou speakest then, shulde not he pardon the, yf thou open thy selfe before hym, and put thy trust in hym?
Job 35:15 Then vseth he no vyolence in his wrath nether hath the pleasure in curyous & depe inquisicions.
Job 35:16 Therfore hath Iob opened hys mouthe but in vayne, and folyshlye hathe he made so many wordes.

CHAPTER: 36

Job 36:1 Eliu proceaded forth in his talking & sayde:
Job 36:2 Hold the styl a lytle, & I shal shew the, what I haue yet to speake on Godes behalfe.
Job 36:3 I wil open vnto the yet more of myne vnderstandynge, and proue my maker righteous.
Job 36:4 True are my wordes, & no lye: & the knowledge where with al I argue against the, is perfect.
Job 36:5 Behold, God casteth not away the myghtye, for he hym selfe is myghtye in power and wysdome.
Job 36:6 As for the vngodly, he preserueth them not, but helpeth the poore to their ryght.
Job 36:7 He turneth not his eyes awaye from the ryghteous, he setteth vp kynges in theyr trone, and confyrmeth them, so that they alway sit there in.
Job 36:8 But yf they be layed in preson & cheynes, or bounde with the bondes of pouertye:
Job 36:9 then sheweth he them theyr worckes & dedes & the synnes where with they haue vsed cruell vyolence.
Job 36:10 He wyth punyshynge and outtryng of them, roundeth them in the eares, warneth them to leaue of from theyr wyckednesse, and to amende.
Job 36:11 If tney nowe wyll take hede, and be obedyente, they shall were oute theyr dayes in prosperyte, and theyr yeares in pleasure & ioye.
Job 36:12 But yf they wyl not obeye, they shal go thorowe the swearde, and perysh or euer they be a warre.
Job 36:13 As for suche as be fayned, dissemblers and ypocrytes, they heape vp wrath for them selues: for they call not vpon him, though they be hys presoners.
Job 36:14 Thus theyr soule perysheth in folishnesse, and theyr lyfe wyth the condemned.
Job 36:15 The poore delyuereth he oute of hys straytnesse, and comforteth suche as be in necessyte and trouble.
Job 36:16 Euen so shall he kepe the (yf thou wylte be contente) from the bottomlesse pytte that is beneth: and yf thou wilt holde the quyete, he shall fyll thy table with plenteousnesse.
Job 36:17 Neuerthelesse thou haste condemned the iudgemente of the vngodly, yea euen suche a iudgement and sentence shalt thou suffre.
Job 36:18 For then shall not thy cause be stylled wyth crueltie, nor pacyfyed wyth manye gyftes.
Job 36:19 Hath God ordeyned then, that the gloryous lyfe of the, & all suche myghtye men shuld not be put doune?
Job 36:20 Prolonge not thou the tyme, tyl there come a nyght for the, to se other people in thy stead.
Job 36:21 But bewarre that thou turne not a syde to wyckednesse and synne, whiche hyther to thou hast chosen more then mekenesse.
Job 36:22 Behold God is of a myghtye hye power: Where is there soche a gyde and lawe geuer as he?
Job 36:23 Who wyll reproue hym of his waye? who will saye vnto him: thou hast done wronge?
Job 36:24 O consydre how greate and excellent his worckes be, whom all men loue and prayse:
Job 36:25 yee wondre at hym, and yet they se hym but a farre of.
Job 36:26 Beholde, so great is God, that he passeth oure knowledge, nether are we able to come to the experience of hys yeares.
Job 36:27 He turneth the water to small droppes, he dryueth hys cloudes
Job 36:28 to gether for to raygne, so that they poure downe and droppe vpon men.
Job 36:29 He can sprede out the cloudes (a couerynge of hys tabernacle)
Job 36:30 and cause hys lyght to shyne vpon them: and to couer the botome of the sea.
Job 36:31 By these thinges gouerneth he hys people, and geueth them aboundaunce of meate.
Job 36:32 In the turnynge of a hande he hydeth the lyght, & at hys commaundement it commeth agayne.
Job 36:33 The rysinge vp therof sheweth he to his frendes and to the cattell.

CHAPTER: 37

Job 37:1 At thys, my herte is astonyed, & moued out of hys place.
Job 37:2 Heare then the sounde of hys voyce, & the noyse that goeth out of hys mouth.
Job 37:3 He gouerneth euery thing vnder the heauen, & his lyghte reacheth vnto the ende of the worlde.
Job 37:4 A roarynge voyce foloweth hym: for hys gloryous maiestye geueth suche a thondre clappe, that (though a man heare it) yet may he not perceiue it afterward. It geueth an horryble sounde,
Job 37:5 when God sendeth oute hys voyce: greate thynges doth he, whiche we can not comprehende.
Job 37:6 When he commaundeth the snow, it falleth vpon the earth: As sone as he geueth the rayne a charge, ymmedyatly the showers haue theyr strength, & fall doune.
Job 37:7 He sendeth feare vpon euery man that they myght knowe theyr owne worckes.
Job 37:8 The beastes crepe into theyr dennes, and take theyr reste.
Job 37:9 Oute of the south commeth the tempest, and coulde out of the north.
Job 37:10 At the breth of God, the frost commeth, & the waters are shed abroad.
Job 37:11 The cloudes do theyr laboure in geuyng moystnes, the cloudes poure doune theyr rayne.
Job 37:12 He dystrybuteth also on euerye syde, accordynge as it pleaseth hym to deale oute hys worckes, that they maye do, whatsoeuer he commaundeth them thorowe the whole worlde:
Job 37:13 whether it be to punysh anye lande, or to do good vnto them, that seke him.
Job 37:14 Herken vnto this (O Iob) stande styl, and considre the wonderous worckes of God.
Job 37:15 Art thou of councel wyth God, when he doth these thinges? When he causeth the lighte to come forthe of his cloudes?
Job 37:16 Arte thou of hys councell when he spredeth oute the cloudes? Haste thou the perfect knowledge of his wonders?
Job 37:17 and howe thy clothes are warme, when the lande is styll thorowe the Southe wynd
Job 37:18 Hast thou helped him to spreade oute the heauen, which is to loke vpon, as it were cast of cleare metall?
Job 37:19 Teache vs what we shall saye vnto hym, for we are vnmete because of darcknes
Job 37:20 Shall it be tolde hym what I saye? Shulde a man speake, or shuld he kepe it backe?
Job 37:21 For euerye man seith not the lighte, that he kepeth cleare in the cloudes, which he clenseth when he maketh the wynde to blowe.
Job 37:22 Goulde is brought oute of the Northe, but the prayse & honoure of Gods feare commeth from God hym self.
Job 37:23 It is not we that can fynde oute the almighty for in power, equyte, and righteousnesse, he is hyer than can be expressed.
Job 37:24 Seyng then that euerye body feareth him, why shuld not all wise men also stande in feare of hym.

CHAPTER: 38

Job 38:1 Then spake the Lorde vnto Iob oute of the storme, and sayd:
Job 38:2 what is he that hideth his mynde with folysh wordes?
Job 38:3 Gyrde vp thy loynes lyke a man, for I wyl question the, se thou geue me a dyrecte aunswere.
Job 38:4 Where wast thou, when I layde the foundacyons of the earth? Tel planely yf thou hast vnderstandyng.
Job 38:5 Who hath measured it, knoweste thou? Or, who hath spreade the lyne vpon it?
Job 38:6 Wherevpon stande the pylers of it? Or who layed the corner stone?
Job 38:7 Where wast thou when the mornyng starres praysed me together & all the chyldren of God reioysed triumphantly?
Job 38:8 Who shut the sea with dores, when it brake forth as a chyld oute of his mothers wombe?
Job 38:9 When I made the cloudes to be a coueryng for it, & swadled it wyth the darcke?
Job 38:10 when I gaue it my commaundement, makynge dores & barres for it,
Job 38:11 saying: Hytherto shalt thou come, but no forther, & here shalte thou laye doune thy proude & hye waues.
Job 38:12 Haste thou geuen the mornyng his charge (as sone as thou wast borne) and shewed the daye sprynge his place,
Job 38:13 that it might take holde of the corners of the earthe, & that the vngodlye myght be shaken out?
Job 38:14 Theyr tokens & weapons haste thou turned lyke claye & set them vp agayne as the chaunginge of a garment.
Job 38:15 Yea thou hast spoyled the vngodly of theyr lyght, & broken the arme of the proude.
Job 38:16 Camest thou euer into the grounde of the sea: or haste thou walked in the lowe corners of the depe?
Job 38:17 Haue the gates of death ben opened vnto the, or haste thou sene the dore of euerlasting treasure?
Job 38:18 Hast thou also perceiued, how broad the earth is? Nowe yf thou haste knowledge of all,
Job 38:19 then shewe me where lyght dwelleth, & where darcknes is:
Job 38:20 that thou mayest brynge vs vnto theyr quarters, yf thou canste tell the waye to theyr houses.
Job 38:21 Knewest thou (when thou wast borne) how olde thou shuldest be?
Job 38:22 Wentest thou euer into the threasuryes of the snowe, or haste thou sene the secrete places of the hayle,
Job 38:23 whiche I haue prepared agaynst the tyme of trouble, agaynste the tyme of battell and warre?
Job 38:24 By what waye is the lyghte parted, and the heate dealte oute vpon the earth?
Job 38:25 Who deuydeth the aboundaunce of waters into ryuers, or who maketh a waye for the stormye wether,
Job 38:26 that it watereth & moystureth the drye and baren grounde,
Job 38:27 to make the grasse growe in places where no body dwelleth, and in the wyldernes where no man remayneth?
Job 38:28 Who is the father of rayne? Or who hath begotten the droppes of dewe?
Job 38:29 Oute of whose wombe came the yse? Who hath gendred the coldnes of the ayre?
Job 38:30 that the waters are as harde as stones, and lye congeled aboue the depe.
Job 38:31 Haste thou brought the .vij. starres together? Or art thou able to breake the circle of heauen?
Job 38:32 Canst thou brynge forth the mornynge starre or the euenyng starre at conuenyente tyme, & conueye them home agayne?
Job 38:33 Knowest thou the course of heauen, that thou mayest set vp the ordynaunce thereof vpon the earth?
Job 38:34 Moreouer canst thou lyfte vp thy voyce to the cloudes, that they maye powre doune a greate rayne vpon the?
Job 38:35 Canste thou thondre also that they maye go theyr waye, & be obedient vnto the, saying: Lo here are we.
Job 38:36 Who geueth sure wysdome or stedfast vnderstandyng?
Job 38:37 who numbreth the cloudes in wysdome? who stylleth the vehement waters of heauen?
Job 38:38 who turneth the clottes to duste, & then to be clottes agayne?
Job 38:39 Hunteste thou the praye from the lyon, or fedest thou hys welpes
Job 38:40 lying in theyr dennes, & lurkyng in theyr couches?
Job 38:41 who prouydeth meate for the rauen, when his younge ones crye vnto God, and fle aboute for wante of meate?

CHAPTER: 39

Job 39:1 Knowest thou the tyme when the wylde gotes bringe forthe theyr yonge among the stony rockes? Or layest thou wayte when the hyndes vse to fawne?
Job 39:2 rekeneste thou the monethes after they engendre, that thou knowest the tyme of theyr bearynge?
Job 39:3 or when they lye doune, when they raste theyr younge ones, & when they are delyuered of theyr trauayle and payne?
Job 39:4 How theyr younge ones growe vp & waxe greate thorowe good fedynge?
Job 39:5 who letteth the wylde asse go fre, or who louseth the bondes of the mule?
Job 39:6 Vnto whom I haue geuen the wyldernes to be their house, & the vntylled lande to be theyr dwellynge place.
Job 39:7 That they maye geue no force for the multytude of people in the cytyes, neither regard the crying of the dryuer,
Job 39:8 but seke their pasture aboute the mountaynes, and folow the grene grasse.
Job 39:9 Whyl the vnicorne be so tame as to do the seruyce, or to abyde styl by thy cryb?
Job 39:10 Canste thou bynd the yocke about him in thy sorowes, to make him plowe after the in the valleys?
Job 39:11 Mayest thou trust him (because he is strong) or committe thy laboure vnto hym?
Job 39:12 Mayest thou beleue him, that he wyll brynge home the corne, or to cary any thyng vnto the barne?
Job 39:13 The Estrych (whose fethers are fayrer then the wynges of the sparowe hauke)
Job 39:14 when he hath layed hys egges vpon the ground he bredeth them in the dust,
Job 39:15 & forgetteth them: so that they myght be troden with fete, or broken with some wylde beaste.
Job 39:16 So harde is he vnto hys yong ones, as thoughe they were not hys, & laboureth in vayne wythout anye feare.
Job 39:17 And that because God hath taken wysdome from hym, & hath not geuen hym vnderstandynge.
Job 39:18 When hys tyme is, he flyeth vp on hye, & careth neyther for horse nor man.
Job 39:19 Haste thou geuen the horse his strength, or learned him to bowe doune his necke wt feare:
Job 39:20 that he letteth him selfe be dryuen forthe lyke a greshopper, where as the stoute neyenge that he maketh, is fearfull?
Job 39:21 he breaketh the grounde with the hoffes of hys fete chearfullye in hys strength, & runneth to mete the harueste men.
Job 39:22 He layeth a syde all feare, hys stomack is not abated, neyther starteth he a backe for anye swerde.
Job 39:23 Thoughe the quyuers rattle vpon him though the speare & shyld glystre:
Job 39:24 yet rusheth he in fearsely, and beateth vpon the grounde, He feareth not the noyse of the trompettes,
Job 39:25 but as sone as he heareth the shawmes blow, thushe (sayth he) for he smelleth the battell a farre of, the noyse, the Captaynes and the shoutynge.
Job 39:26 Commeth it thorow thy wisdome, that the Goshauke flyeth towarde the South?
Job 39:27 Dothe the Aegle mounte vp, and make his neste on hye at the commaundement?
Job 39:28 He abydeth in the stonye rockes, and vpon the hye toppes of harde mountaynes, where no man can come.
Job 39:29 From thence maye he beholde his praye, and loke farre aboute wyth hys eyes.
Job 39:30 His younge ones are fed with bloude, & where any deade bodye lyeth, there is he immediatly.

CHAPTER: 40

Job 40:1 Moreouer, God spake vnto Iob & sayde:
Job 40:2 Can he that stryueth with the almightye, be at reste? Shulde not he whiche disputeth with God, geue hym an aunswere?
Job 40:3 Iob answered the Lorde, sayinge:
Job 40:4 Beholde, I am to vyle a personne, to aunswere the, therfore wyll I laye my hand vpon my mouth.
Job 40:5 Ones or twise haue I spoken, but I wyll saye no more.
Job 40:6 Then spake the Lorde vnto Iob oute of the storme, & sayd:
Job 40:7 Gyrd vp thy loynes lyke a man, & tell me the thynges that I wyl aske the.
Job 40:8 Wilt thou disanulle my iudgemente? Or wilt thou condempne me, that thou thy selfe mayest be made righteous?
Job 40:9 Is thyne arme then lyke the arme of God? Maketh thy voyce such a sound as hys doeth?
Job 40:10 Then arme thy selfe with thyne owne power, vp, decke the in thy ioly araye,
Job 40:11 poure oute the indignacyon of thy wrath: se that thou caste doune all the proude,
Job 40:12 loke well, that thou makest all suche as be stubborne, to obeye: treade all the vngodlye vnder thy fete,
Job 40:13 caste them doune vnto the myre. and couer theyr faces wt darckenesse.
Job 40:14 Then wil I confesse also, that thyne owne ryghte hande hath saued the.
Job 40:15 Behold Behemoth (whom I made with the) which eateth haye as an oxe:
Job 40:16 lo, how strong he is in his loynes, & what power he hathe in the nauell of hys bodye.
Job 40:17 He spredeth oute hys tayle like a Cedre tre, all hys vaynes are stife.
Job 40:18 His shynnes are lyke pypes of brasse, hys rygge bones are lyke staues of yron.
Job 40:19 Fyrste when God made hym, he ordened the wyldernesse for hym,
Job 40:20 that the mountaynes shuld geue hym grasse, where all the beastes of the fylde take theyr pastyme.
Job 40:21 He lyeth amonge the redes in the Mosses, the fennes
Job 40:22 hyde him wyth theyr shadowe, & the wylowes of the broke couer hym rounde about.
Job 40:23 Lo, withoute any labour myght he drincke out of the whole floud & suppe of Iordane wythoute anye trayle.
Job 40:24 Who darre laye hande vpon him openlye, & vndertake to catche hym? Or, who darre put a hooke thorowe hys nose, & laye a snare for hym.

CHAPTER: 41

Job 41:1 Darrest thou drawe out Leuyathan wt an angle, or bynde hys tonge with a snare?
Job 41:2 Canste thou put a rynge in the nose of hym, or bore hys chaftes thorow wt a naule.
Job 41:3 Wil he make many fayre wordes wyth the (thinckest thou) or flattre the?
Job 41:4 Wyll he make a couenaunt wyth the? Or art thou able for to compel him to do the contynuall seruyce?
Job 41:5 Wylt thou take thy pastyme wyth hym as with a byrd, or geue him vnto thy maydens,
Job 41:6 that thy companyons maye hewe hym in peces, to be parted amonge the marchaunt men?
Job 41:7 Canste thou fyl the net with his skinne, or the fyshe pannyer with hys heade?
Job 41:8 Darrest thou laye hande vpon him? It is better for the to consydre what harme might happen the there thorow & not to touche hym.
Job 41:9 For when thou thinkest to haue hold vpon hym, he shall begyle the: Euery man also that seyth hym, shal go backe. And why?
Job 41:10 there darre none be so bolde as to rayse hym vp. Who is able to stande before me?
Job 41:11 Or, who hath geuen me anye thynge afore hande, that I am bound to reward hym againe? All thynges vnder heauen are myne.
Job 41:12 I feare hym not, whether he threaten or speake fayre.
Job 41:13 Who lyfteth hym vp, & strypeth hym out of hys clothes, or who taketh him by the byt of hys brydle?
Job 41:14 Who openeth the dore of hys face? for he hath horryble tethe rounde aboute.
Job 41:15 Hys body is couered with scales as it were wyth shyldes, lockt in, kepte, & wel compacte together.
Job 41:16 One is so ioyned to another, that no ayre can come in
Job 41:17 Yea one hangeth so vpon another, & stycketh so together, that they can not be sundered.
Job 41:18 His nesynge is lyke a glysteryng fyre, & his eyes lyke the morning shyne.
Job 41:19 Oute of hys mouthe go torches & fyre brandes
Job 41:20 oute of hys nostrels there goeth a smoke, like as oute of an hote sethinge pot.
Job 41:21 His breth maketh the cotes burne, the flamme goeth out of hys mouth.
Job 41:22 In his necke remayneth strength & before hys face sorow is turned to gladnes.
Job 41:23 The membres of his body are ioyned so strait one to another, and cleue so fast together, that he can not be moued.
Job 41:24 His hert is as herde as a stone, & as faste as the stithye that the hammer man smyteth vpon.
Job 41:25 When he goeth, the myghtiest of al are afrayed, & the waues heauy.
Job 41:26 If he drawe out the swearde, there maye neyther speare nor brest plate, abyde hym
Job 41:27 He setteth as much by a strawe as by yron, and as muche by a rotten stocke as by metall.
Job 41:28 He starteth not away for hym that bendeth the bowe: & as for slynge stones, he careth as muche for stubble as for them.
Job 41:29 He counteth the hammer no better then a strawe, he laugheth hym to scorne that shaketh the speare.
Job 41:30 He treadeth the golde in the myre lyke the sharpe potsherdes.
Job 41:31 He maketh the depe to seethe and boyle lyke a pot, & stereth the sea together lyke an oyntment.
Job 41:32 The waye is lyght after hym, the depe is hys walkynge place.
Job 41:33 Vpon earth is there no power lyke vnto hys, for he is so made that he feareth not.
Job 41:34 If a man wyll consydre all hye thinges, thys same is a kynge ouer all the chyldren of pryde.

CHAPTER: 42

Job 42:1 Then Iob aunswered the Lorde, and sayd:
Job 42:2 I know that thou hast power ouer all thynges, & that there is no thought hyd vnto the.
Job 42:3 For who can kepe his owne councell so secrete, but it shalbe knowne? Therfore haue I spoken vnwysely, seyng these thynges are so hye, & passe myne vnderstandynge.
Job 42:4 O herken thou vnto me also, & let me speake: aunswere vnto the thynge that I wyll aske the
Job 42:5 I haue geuen dyligente care vnto the, & nowe I se the with mine eyes.
Job 42:6 Wherfor I geue myne owne selfe the blame, and take repentaunce in the duste and asshes.
Job 42:7 Now when the Lord had spoken these wordes vnto Iob, he sayde vnto Elephas the Themanite: I am displeased with the & thy two frendes, for ye haue not spoken the thyng that is right before me, lyke as my seruaunte Iob hath done.
Job 42:8 Therfore take .vij. oxen & .vij. rammes, and go to my seruaunte Iob: offre vp also for your selues a brentofferynge: & let my seruaunte Iob praye for you. Hym wyll I accepte, & not deale with you after youre folishnesse: in that ye haue not spoken the thynge whiche is right, like as my seruaunt Iob hath done.
Job 42:9 So Elephas the Themanite, Baldad the Suhyte & Sophar the Naamathite went their waye, and dyd accordynge as the Lorde commaunded them. The Lorde also accepted the personne of Iob,
Job 42:10 and the Lorde turned hym vnto Iob, when he prayed for his frendes. Yea the Lorde gaue Iob twyse as muche as he had a fore.
Job 42:11 And then came there vnto him all hys brethren, all hys sisters, with all them that had bene of hys acquayntaunce afore, & ate bread wyth hym in hys house, wondryng at hym, & comfortyng hym ouer all the trouble, that the Lorde had brought vpon hym. Euery man gaue hym a shepe and a Iewell of golde.
Job 42:12 And the Lorde made Iob rycher then he was before: for he had .xiiij.M. shepe .vi.M. camels, a .M. youcke of oxen, & a .M. asshes.
Job 42:13 He had chyldren also .vij. sonnes & .iij. doughters.
Job 42:14 The fyrste called daye: the seconde Pouerte: the thyrde all plenteousnes.
Job 42:15 In all the lande were none found so fayre, as the doughters of Iob, & theyr father gaue them enherytaunce amonge theyr brethren.
Job 42:16 After this lyued Iob .xl. yares, so that he sawe his children, & his children children to the fourthe generacyon.
Job 42:17 And so he dyed, beynge olde & of a perfecte age.

BOOK: Psalms

CHAPTER: 1

Psalms 1:1 O blessed is the man, that goeth not in the counsayll of the vngodly: that abydeth not in the waie of sinners and sitteth not in the seate of the scorneful.
Psalms 1:2 But deliteth in the lawe of the Lord, and exercyseth hym self in hys lawe, bothe daye and nyght.
Psalms 1:3 Suche a man is lyke a tree planted by the watersyde, that bringeth forthe hys frute in due season. His leaues shall not fall af, & loke whatsoeuer he doth, it shall prospere.
Psalms 1:4 As for the vngodly, it is not so with them but they are lyke the dust, wych the wynde scatered awaye from the grounde.
Psalms 1:5 Thefore the vngodly shall not be able to stande in the iudgement, nether the synners in the congregacyon of the ryghtuous.
Psalms 1:6 For the Lorde aloweth the waye of the righteous, but the waye of the vngodly shal peryshe.

CHAPTER: 2

Psalms 2:1 VVhy do the Heathen grudge? why do the people ymagyne vayne thinges?
Psalms 2:2 The kynges of the earth stande vp, and the rulers are come to gether, agaynste the Lorde and agaynste hys anoynted.
Psalms 2:3 Let vs breake their hondes a sunder, and cast away their yock from vs.
Psalms 2:4 Neuerthelesse he that dwelleth in heauen, shall laughe them to scorne: yea euen the Lorde hym selfe shall haue them in derysyon.
Psalms 2:5 Then shal he speake vnto them in hys wrath, and vexe them in hys sore displeasure.
Psalms 2:6 Yet haue I sette my kyng vpon my holy hyll of syon.
Psalms 2:7 As for me, I wyll preache the law, wherof the Lord hath sayde vnto me: Thou arte my sonne, this day haue I begotten the.
Psalms 2:8 Desyre of me, and I shall geue the Heathen for thyne enherytaunce. Yea the vttermost partes of the worlde for thy possessyon.
Psalms 2:9 Thou shalt rule them wyth a rodde of yron, and breake them in peces lyke an earthen vessell.
Psalms 2:10 Be wyse nowe therfore, O ye Kinges, be warned, ye that are iudges of the earthe.
Psalms 2:11 Serue the Lorde wyth feare, and reioyse before hym wyth reuerence.
Psalms 2:12 Kysse the sonne, lest the Lorde be angrye and so ye peryshe from the ryght way. For his wrath shalbe kindled shortly: blessed are all they that put their trust in hym.

CHAPTER: 3

Psalms 3:1 A Psalme of Dauid when he fledde from the face of Absalom. Why are they so many, O Lord that trouble me? a great multytude are they that ryse agaynst me.
Psalms 3:2 Yea many one ther be that say of my soule: there is no helpe for hym in God Selah.
Psalms 3:3 But thou, O Lord, arte my defender, my worshippe, and the lifter vp of my head.
Psalms 3:4 I call vpon the Lord wyth my voyce, and he heareth me out of hys holy hyll. Selah.
Psalms 3:5 I layed me downe and slepte, but I rose vp agayne, for the Lorde sustayned me.
Psalms 3:6 I am not afrayed for thousandes of the people, that compasse me rounde aboute.
Psalms 3:7 Vp Lorde, and helpe me O my God for thou smitest al mine enemyes vpon the cheke bones and breakest the teeth of the vngodly.
Psalms 3:8 Helpe belongeth vnto the Lorde, therfore let thy blessynge be vpon thy people.

CHAPTER: 4

Psalms 4:1 To the Chanter in Neginoth, a Psalme of Dauid. Heare me when I call, O God of my ryghteousnes: thou that comfortest me in my trouble: haue mercy vpon me, herken vnto my praier.
Psalms 4:2 O ye sonnes of men, howe longe wyll ye blaspheme myne honour? why haue ye suche pleasure in vanytye, and seke after lyes? Selah.
Psalms 4:3 Knowe thys, that the Lorde dealeth maruelously wyth hys saynt: and when I cal vpon the Lorde, he heareth me.
Psalms 4:4 Be angrye, but synne not: comen wyth youre owne hertes vpon youre beddes, and remember youre selues. Selah.
Psalms 4:5 Offer thy sacrifyce of ryghtuousnes, and put your trust in the Lord.
Psalms 4:6 There be many that saye: who wyll do vs any good? Lord lift vp vpon vs the lyghte of thy countenaunce.
Psalms 4:7 Thou reioyseste myne herte, thoughe their encrease be great both in corne & wyne.
Psalms 4:8 Therfore wyll I laye me downe in peace, and take my rest: for thou Lorde only settest me in a sure dwellynge.

CHAPTER: 5

Psalms 5:1 To the Chaunter by Nehiloh, a Psalme of Dauid. Heare my wordes (O Lorde) consyder my callynge.
Psalms 5:2 O marke the voice of my petition my Kynge and my God, for vnto the wyl I make my prayer.
Psalms 5:3 Heare my voyce by tymes (O Lorde) for early in the mornyng wyll I get me vnto the, yea and that with diligence.
Psalms 5:4 For thou art not the God that hath pleasure in wickednesse, ther may no vngodly person dwel with the.
Psalms 5:5 Suche as be cruell maye not stande in thy syght, thou art an enemye vnto all wycked doers.
Psalms 5:6 Thou destroiest the lyers: the Lord abhorreth the bloude thursty and disceatful.
Psalms 5:7 But as for me, I wyl come into thy house euen vpon the multytude of thy mercy: and in thy feare wyll I worshippe towarde thy holy temple.
Psalms 5:8 Lede me (O Lord) in thy ryghtuousnesse; because of myne enemyes, & make thy waye playne before me.
Psalms 5:9 For there is no faithfulnesse in their mouthes: they dessemble in their hertes: their throt is an open sepulcher: with their tonges thy disceaue.
Psalms 5:10 Punysh them (O God) that they may perysh in their owne ymaginacions: cast them out because of the multytude of their vngodlynesse, for they rebell agaynste the.
Psalms 5:11 Agayne, let all them that put their truste in the, reioyse: yea let them euer be geuynge of thankes, because thou defendest: them: that they whyche loue thy name, be ioyfull in the.
Psalms 5:12 For thou Lord geuest thy blessynge vnto the ryghtuous: and with thy fauorable kindnes thou defendest him, as wyth a shylde.

CHAPTER: 6

Psalms 6:1 To the chaunter by Negynoth vpon Sheminith, a Psalme of Dauid. Oh Lorde rebuke me not in thyne anger: Oh chasten me not in thy heuy dyspleasure.
Psalms 6:2 Haue mercye vpon me (O Lorde) for I am weake: O Lorde heale me for all my bones are vexed.
Psalms 6:3 My soule also is in great trouble, but lord how longe?
Psalms 6:4 Turne the (O Lord) and deliuer my soule Oh saue me for thy mercyes sake.
Psalms 6:5 For in death no man remembreth the: Oh who wyll geue the thankes in the hell?
Psalms 6:6 I am wery of gronyng euery nyght wash I my bedde, and water my couche wyth my teares.
Psalms 6:7 My countenance is chaunged for verye inwarde grefe. I consume awaye I haue so many enemyes.
Psalms 6:8 Awaye fro me all ye wicked dors, for the Lorde hath hearde the voyce of my wepyng
Psalms 6:9 The Lord hath hearde myne humble petycyon, the Lorde hath receaued my prayer.
Psalms 6:10 All myne enemies shalbe confunded and sore vexed: yea they shalbe turned backe and put to shame, and that ryght soone.

CHAPTER: 7

Psalms 7:1 Sigaion of Dauid, whych he sang for the wordes of Cus the sonne of Iemini. O Lord my god, in the do I trust: saue me from al them that persecute me, and delyuer me.
Psalms 7:2 Lest he deuoureth vp my soule lyke a lion and teare it in peces whyle ther is none to helpe,
Psalms 7:3 O Lorde my God, if I haue done anye suche thyng, if there be any vnrightuousnes in my handes:
Psalms 7:4 If I haue rewarded euyl vnto them that dealt frendly wyth me, or hurt them that wyth out any cause are myne enemies.
Psalms 7:5 Then let myne enemye persecute my soule, and take mo: ye let hym treade my life downe in the earth, and laye myne honour in the dust. Selah.
Psalms 7:6 Stande vp (O Lorde) in thy wrath, lyft vp thy selfe ouer the furyous indygnacyon of myne enemyes: aryse vp (for me) in the vengeaunce that thou hast promysed.
Psalms 7:7 That the congregacion of the people maye come about the, for their sakes therfore lyfte vp thy selfe agayne.
Psalms 7:8 The Lord is iudge ouer the people: auenge me then (O Lord) accordynge to my ryghtuousnes and innocency.
Psalms 7:9 Oh let the wickednes of the vngodly come to an ende: but maynteyne the iust, thou rightuous God, that triest the very hertes and the reynes.
Psalms 7:10 My helpe commeth of God, which preserueth them that are true of herte.
Psalms 7:11 God is a ryghtuous iudge, and God is euer threatnynge,
Psalms 7:12 If men wyll not turne, he hath whette his swearde: he hath bent his bowe and made it ready.
Psalms 7:13 He hath prepared hym the weapens of death, & ordeined his arrowes to be destroied.
Psalms 7:14 Beholde, he trauyleth wyth mischefe, he hath conceaued vnhappinesse, and broughte forth a lye.
Psalms 7:15 He hath grauen & digged vp a pyt, but he shall fall hym selfe into the pitte that he hath made.
Psalms 7:16 For hys vnhappinesse shall come vpon hys owne head, and hys wyckednes shal fal vpon hys owne pate.
Psalms 7:17 As for me, I wyll geue thankes vnto the Lorde for hys ryghtuousnes sake, and wyll prayse the name of the Lorde the most hyest.

CHAPTER: 8

Psalms 8:1 To the chaunter vpon Githith, a Psalme of Dauid. O Lord our gouernour: how wonderfull is thy name in all the worlde? howe excellente is thy glory aboue the heauens?
Psalms 8:2 Out of the mouth of the very babes and sucklynges thou haste ordeyned prayse, because of thyne enemyes, that thou mightest destroye the enemye & the auenger.
Psalms 8:3 For I considre thy heauens, euen the worke of thy fingers: the moone & the starres which thou hast made.
Psalms 8:4 Oh what is man, that thou art so myndfull of hym? either the sonne of man that thou visitest hym?
Psalms 8:5 After thou haddest for a season made him lower then the aungels, thou crounedest him with honour and glory.
Psalms 8:6 Thou haste set him aboue the workes of thy handes: and thou hast put all thynges in subiection vnder his fete.
Psalms 8:7 All shepe and oxen, yea, and the beastes of the felde.
Psalms 8:8 The foules of the ayre, the fish of the sea, and whatsoeuer walketh thorow the wayes of the sea.
Psalms 8:9 O Lorde our gouernoure, how wonderfull is thy name in all the worlde?

CHAPTER: 9

Psalms 9:1 To the chaunter vpon Almuth Laben, a Psalme of Dauid. I wyll geue thankes vnto the (O Lord) with my whole hert I will speake of all thy meruelous workes.
Psalms 9:2 I will be glad, and reioyse in the, yea, my songes wil I make of thy name O thou moost hyest.
Psalms 9:3 Because thou hast dryuen myne enemyes abacke, they were disconfited, and perished at thy presence.
Psalms 9:4 For thou hast maynteyned my right and my cause: thou sittest in the throne that arte the true iudge.
Psalms 9:5 Thou rebukest the Heythen, & destroyest the vngodly, thou puttest out their name for euer and euer.
Psalms 9:6 The enemyes sweardes are come too an ende, thou haste ouerthrowen their cytyes, their memorial is perished with them.
Psalms 9:7 But the Lorde endureth for euer, he hath prepared his seate vnto iudgement.
Psalms 9:8 He gouerneth the worlde with righteousnes, and ministreth true iudgement vnto the people.
Psalms 9:9 The Lorde is a defence for the poore, a defence in the tyme of trouble.
Psalms 9:10 Therfore they that know thy name, putte their trust in the: for thou (Lorde) neuer faylest them that seke the.
Psalms 9:11 O prayse the Lorde, whiche dwelleth in Syon, shewe the people of hys doynges.
Psalms 9:12 And why? he maketh inquisicion for their bloude, and remembreth theym: he forgetteth not th complaynte of the poore.
Psalms 9:13 Haue mercy vpon me (O Lord) considre the trouble that I am in amonge myne enemyes, thou that liftest me vp from the gates of death.
Psalms 9:14 That I maye shewe all thy prayses within the portes of the daughter of Sion, and reioyse in thy sauynge health.
Psalms 9:15 As for the Heathen, thei are suncken doune in the pytte that they made: in the same nette which they spred out priuely, is their owne feete taken.
Psalms 9:16 Thus the Lord is knowen to execute true iudgemente, when the vngodly is trapped in the woorkes of hys owne handes. Selah.
Psalms 9:17 The wicked must be turned vnto hell, & all the Heythen that forget God.
Psalms 9:18 But the poore shall not all waye be oute of remembraunce, the pacyent abydynge of suche as be in trouble shall not peryshe for euer.
Psalms 9:19 Vp Lorde, let no man haue the vpperhand let the Heythen be condemned before the.
Psalms 9:20 O Lorde set a scholemaster ouer them, that the Heathen maye knowe theim selfes to be but men. Selah.

CHAPTER: 10

Psalms 10:1 Why arte thou gone so far of, O Lord? wylt thou hyde thy selfe in tyme of trouble?
Psalms 10:2 While the vngodlye hath the ouer hand, the pore must suffer persecutyon. O that they were taken in the ymagynacion which they go aboute.
Psalms 10:3 For the vngodly maketh bost of his owne hertes desyre, the couetous blesseth him selfe and blasphemeth the Lorde.
Psalms 10:4 The vngodlye is so proude and full of indignacyon, that he careth not mether is God before hys eyes.
Psalms 10:5 Hys wayes are al waye filthye, thy iudgementes are farre out of his sight, he defyeth all his enemyes.
Psalms 10:6 For he sayth in hys herte: Tushe, I shall neuer be cast downe, ther shal no harme happen vnto me.
Psalms 10:7 His mouth is ful of cursyng, fraude & disceate vnder hys tonge is trauayle and sorowe.
Psalms 10:8 He sytteth lurckynge in the gardens, that he may pryuely murther the innocente, hys eyes are set vpon the poore.
Psalms 10:9 He lyeth waytynge secretlye, as ti were a lyon in hys denne. He lurketh that he maye rauyshe the pore, yea, to rauysh the poore, when he hath gotten him into hys net.
Psalms 10:10 Then smyteth he, then oppresseth he and casteth downe the pore with his authoritye.
Psalms 10:11 For he sayeth in hys herte: Tushe, God hath forgotten, he hath turned awaye hys face, so that he wyll neuer se it.
Psalms 10:12 Aryse Lorde God, lyfte vp thyne hande and forget not the poore.
Psalms 10:13 Wherfore should the wycked blaspheme God and saye in his herte: tush, he careth not for it:
Psalms 10:14 Thys thou seyst, for thou consyderest the mysery and sorowe. The poore geueth him selfe ouer into thy hande, and committeth hym vnto the, for thou art the helper of the frendlesse.
Psalms 10:15 Breake thou the arme of the vngodly and malycyous, search out the wickednes which he hath done, that he maye perysh.
Psalms 10:16 The Lord is kynge for euer, the Heithen shal perish out of his land.
Psalms 10:17 Lord, thou hearest the desyrous longing of the poore: theyr hert is sure, that thine eare herkeneth therto.
Psalms 10:18 Helpe the fatherlesse and poore vnto their ryght, that the vngodlye be no more exalted vpon earh.

CHAPTER: 11

Psalms 11:1 To the chaunter, of Dauid. In the Lord put I my trust: how will ye then saye too my soule: that she shoulde fle as a byrde vpon your hyll?
Psalms 11:2 For lo, the vngodly haue bent their bowe, and made ready their arrowes in the quyuer, that they maye priuely shute at them, which are true of hert.
Psalms 11:3 The verye foundacion haue they caste doune, what can the righteous then do with all?
Psalms 11:4 But the Lorde is in hys holy temple, the Lordes seate is in heauen: He considereth it with hys eyes, hys eye lyddes beholde the chyldren of men.
Psalms 11:5 The Lorde seith bothe the righteous and vngodly, but who so delyteth in wickednes, hym hys soule abhorreth.
Psalms 11:6 Vpon the vngodly he shall rayne snares, fyre, brymstone, storme and tempest: thys rewarde shall they haue to drynke.
Psalms 11:7 For the Lord is righteous, and he loueth righteousnes: hys countenaunce beholdeth the thinge that is iust.

CHAPTER: 12

Psalms 12:1 To the chaunter vpon Sheminith, a Psalme of Dauid. Helpe Lord, for there is not one saincte more: very fewe faythfull are there amonge the chyldren of men.
Psalms 12:2 Euery man telleth lyes too his neyghbour, they do but flatter with their lyppes and dissemble in their herte.
Psalms 12:3 O that the Lorde wolde rote out all disceatfull lyppes, and the tonge that speaketh proude thynges.
Psalms 12:4 Which saye: oure tonge shoulde preuayle we are they that oughte too speake, who is Lord ouer vs?
Psalms 12:5 Now for the troubles sake of the oppressed, and because of the complainte of the poore I will vp (sayeth the Lord) I wil helpe them, & set them at rest.
Psalms 12:6 The wordes of the Lord are pure wordes euen as the siluer, which from earth is tryed and purified .vij. tymes in the fyre.
Psalms 12:7 Kepe them therfore (O Lorde) and preserue vs from this generacion for euer.
Psalms 12:8 And why? when vanite & ydelnes getteth the ouerhande among the chyldren of men, all are full of the vngodly.

CHAPTER: 13

Psalms 13:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. How longe wilt thou forget me O Lorde? for euer? howe longe wilt thou hyde thy face fro me?
Psalms 13:2 Oh how long shal I seke counsayl in my soule? how longe shall I be so vexed in myne hert? howe longe shall myne enemye triumphe ouer me?
Psalms 13:3 Considre, & heare me, O Lorde my God: lighten myne eyes, that I sleape not in death.
Psalms 13:4 Lest myne enemye saye: I haue preuayled agaynst hym: for if I be cast doune, they that troble me will reioyse at it.
Psalms 13:5 But my trust is in thy mercy, & my herte is ioyfull in thy sauynge health.
Psalms 13:6 I will singe of the Lorde, that dealeth so louingly with me. (Yea, I wil prayse the name of the Lorde the moost hyest.)

CHAPTER: 14

Psalms 14:1 To the chaunter, of Dauid. The folyshe bodyes saye in their hertes: tushe, there is no God. They are corrupt, & become abhominable in their doynges, there is not one that doth good.
Psalms 14:2 The Lorde loked doune from heauen vpon the chyldren of men, too se if there were any that wolde vnderstande and seke after God.
Psalms 14:3 But they are all gone out of the waye, they are altogether become vnprofitable: there is none that doeth good, no not one.
Psalms 14:4 How can they haue vnderstandinge, that worke mischiefe, eatynge vp my people, as it were bread, & call not vpon the Lord?
Psalms 14:5 Therfore shall they be brought in greate feare, for God standeth by the generacion of the righteous.
Psalms 14:6 As for you ye haue made a mocke at the counsail of the poore, because he putteth hys trust in the Lorde.
Psalms 14:7 Oh that the sauynge healthe were geuen vnto Israel out of Sion. Oh that the Lord wolde deliuer his people out of captiuitie. Then shoulde Iacob reioyse, & Israell should be right glad.

CHAPTER: 15

Psalms 15:1 A Psalme of Dauid. Lorde, who shal dwel in thy tabernacle? who shall reste vpon thy holy hyl?
Psalms 15:2 Euen he that leadeth an vncorrupt life: that doth the thing which is right, and that speaketh the trueth from hys hert.
Psalms 15:3 He that vseth no disceat in his tongue: he that doth no euell to hys neyghbour, & sclaundreth not hys neyghbours.
Psalms 15:4 He that setteth not by the vngodly, but maketh muche of them that feare the Lorde: he that sweareth vnto his neyghbour, & dispoynteth hym not.
Psalms 15:5 He that geueth not his money vpon vsury, and taketh no rewarde agaynste the innocent. Who so doth these thinges, shall neuer be remoued.

CHAPTER: 16

Psalms 16:1 Michtam of Dauid. Preserue me (O God) for in the do I trust.
Psalms 16:2 I haue saide vnto the Lord: thou art my God, my goodes are nothing vnto the.
Psalms 16:3 All my delytes is vpon the saynctes that are in the earth, and vpon suche lyke.
Psalms 16:4 But they that runne after another, shall haue greate trouble. Their drinckoffringes of bloude will not I offre, neither make mencion of their name in my mouth.
Psalms 16:5 The Lorde him selfe is my good and my porcion, thou mayntaynest myne enherytaunce.
Psalms 16:6 The lot is fallen vnto me in a fayre ground, yea, I haue a goodly heritage.
Psalms 16:7 I will thanke the Lorde for geuynge me warnynge: my reynes also haue chastened me in the night season.
Psalms 16:8 Afore hand sawe I God alwayes before me, for he is on my righte hande, that I should not be moued.
Psalms 16:9 Therfore dyd my hert reioyce, & my tunge was glad, my flesh also shal rest in hope.
Psalms 16:10 For why? thou shalt not leaue my soule in hell, neither shalt thou suffre thy saincte to se corrupcion.
Psalms 16:11 Thou hast shewed me the wayes of lyfe: thou shalte make me full of ioye wyth thy countenaunce. At thy ryght hande there is pleasure and ioye for euermore.

CHAPTER: 17

Psalms 17:1 A prayer of Dauid. Heare the right (O Lord) considre my complaynte: herken vnto my prayer, that goeth not oute of a fayned mouth.
Psalms 17:2 Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: and loke vpon the thinge that is equall.
Psalms 17:3 Thou hast proued & visited myne herte in the night season: thou hast tryed me in the fyre: & hast founde no wickednes in me: for I vtterly purposed that my mouthe shoulde not offende.
Psalms 17:4 Because of the woordes of thy lippes, I haue kepte me from the workes of men, in the waye of the murtherer.
Psalms 17:5 Oh ordre thou my goinges in thy pathes: that my fote steppes slippe not.
Psalms 17:6 For vnto the I crie: heare me O God: encline thine eares to me: & herken vnto my woordes.
Psalms 17:7 Shewe thy maruelous louing kindnesse, thou that sauest them whiche put their trust in the, from suche as resist thy right hande.
Psalms 17:8 Kepe me as the apple of an eye, defende me vnder the shadow of thy wynges.
Psalms 17:9 From the vngodly that trouble me, fro myne enemyes which compasse my soule round about.
Psalms 17:10 Which manteyne their owne welthinesse with oppression, and their mouthe speaketh proude thynges.
Psalms 17:11 They lye wayting in our waye on euery side, turnyng their eyes doune to the ground.
Psalms 17:12 Like as a Lyon that is gredy of his pray, and as it were a Lyons whelpe lurkynge in hys denne.
Psalms 17:13 Vp Lord, disapoynte hym and cast him doune: deliuer my soule with thy swerde from the vngodly.
Psalms 17:14 From the men of thy hande (O Lord) from the men of the worlde, which haue theyr porcion in this lyfe: whose bellyes thou fyllest with thy treasure. They haue chyldren at theyr desyre, and leaue the rest of of theyr substaunce for their babes.
Psalms 17:15 But as for me, I wil beholde thy presence in righteousnes: and when thy glory appeareth, I shall be satisfied.

CHAPTER: 18

Psalms 18:1 To the chaunter of Dauid, seruaunt of the Lorde, whiche sayde vnto the Lorde the woordes of thys songe, on the daye in which the Lorde delyuered hym from the hande of all hys enemyes, and from the hande of Saul, and sayde. I wyll loue the (O Lorde) my strength.
Psalms 18:2 The Lorde is my succour, my refuge, my sauyoure: my God, my helper in whome I trust: my buckler, the horne of my health, and my proteccion.
Psalms 18:3 I will prayse the Lorde, and call vppon hym, so shall I be safe fro myne enemyes.
Psalms 18:4 The sorowes of deathe compassed me, and the brokes of vngodlynes made me afrayed.
Psalms 18:5 The paynes of hell came aboute me, the snares of death toke holde vpon me.
Psalms 18:6 Yet in my trouble I called vpon the Lord, and complayned vnto my God. So he hearde my voyce out of hys holye temple, and my complaynte came before hym ye euen into hys eares.
Psalms 18:7 Then the earth trembled and quaked, the verye foundacyones of the hylles shoke and were remoued, because he was wroth.
Psalms 18:8 There wente a smoke oute of hys nostrels and a consuming fyre out of his mouth so that coales were kyndled at it.
Psalms 18:9 He bowed the heauens & came downe, and it was darke vnder his fete.
Psalms 18:10 He rode vpon the Cherubyns & dyd fle: he came flyenge wyth the wynges of the wynde.
Psalms 18:11 He made darcknesse his pauylion rounde aboute hym, wyth darcke water and thycke cloudes to couer him.
Psalms 18:12 At the brightnes of his presence the cloudes remoued, wyth hayle stones and coales of fyre.
Psalms 18:13 The Lord also thondred out of the heauen and the heygth gaue his thonder wyth haile stones and coales of fyre.
Psalms 18:14 He sente oute hys arrowes and scattered them, he cast sore lyghtenynges, and destroied them.
Psalms 18:15 The sprynges of waters were sene, and the foundacyons of the rounde worlde were discouered at thy chidynge (O Lorde) at the blastynge and breth of thy displeasures.
Psalms 18:16 He sente doune from the heygth to fetch me, and toke me out of greate waters.
Psalms 18:17 He delyuered me fro my stronge enemies & fro my foes whych were to myghtye for me
Psalms 18:18 They preuented me in the time of my trouble, but the Lorde was my defence.
Psalms 18:19 He broughte me forthe also into lybertye: and delyuered me, because, he had a fauoure vnto me.
Psalms 18:20 The Lorde shall rewarde me after my righteous dealynge, and accordynge to the clennesse of my handes shall he recompense me.
Psalms 18:21 For I haue kepte the wayes of the Lord: and haue not behaued my selfe wickedly agaynst my God.
Psalms 18:22 I haue an eye vnto all hys lawes, and caste not oute hys commaundementes fro me.
Psalms 18:23 Vncorrupte wyll I be before him, and will eschue myne owne wyckednes.
Psalms 18:24 Therfore shall the Lorde rewarde me after my ryghtuous dealynge, and accordinge vnto the clennesse of my handes in his eye sighte.
Psalms 18:25 With the holye thou shalte be holye, and wyth the innocente thou shalte be innocente.
Psalms 18:26 With the cleane thou shalt be cleane, and with the frowarde thou shalte be frowarde.
Psalms 18:27 For thou shalte saue the poore oppressed, and brynge doune the hye lokes of the proude.
Psalms 18:28 Thou lyghtest my candell, O Lorde my God: thou maketh my darcknesse to be light
Psalms 18:29 For in the I can dyscomforte an hoste of men: yea in my God I can leape ouer the walle.
Psalms 18:30 The waye of God is a perfecte waye: the wordes of the Lorde are tryed in the fire: he is a shylde of defence, for all them that truste in hym.
Psalms 18:31 For who is God, but the Lord? Or who hath any strength, but our God?
Psalms 18:32 It is God that gyrded me with strength, and made my way vncorrupt.
Psalms 18:33 He hathe made my fete lyke hertes fete, and set me vpon hye.
Psalms 18:34 He teacheth myne handes to fyght, & maketh myne armes to breake euen a bowe of stele.
Psalms 18:35 Thou haste geuen me the defence of thy healthe, thy ryghte hande vpholdeth me, and thy louynge correctyon maketh me greate.
Psalms 18:36 Thou hast made roume ynough vnder me for to go, that my fote steppes shuld not slyde.
Psalms 18:37 I wyll folowe vpon myne enemyes, and take them: I wyll not turne tyll they be dyscomforted.
Psalms 18:38 I wyll smyte them, they shall not be able to stand, but fal vnder my fete.
Psalms 18:39 Thou hast gyrded me with strength vnto the battel, thou hast throwen them al downe vnder me that rose vp agaynst me.
Psalms 18:40 Thou hast made myne enemyes to turne heir backes vpon me, thou haste destroyed them: that hated me.
Psalms 18:41 They cryed, but there was none to helpe them: yea euen vnto the Lorde, but he heard them not.
Psalms 18:42 I wyll beate them as smalle as the duste claye in the wynde, I wyll cast them out as the clay in the stretes.
Psalms 18:43 Thou shalt delyuer me from the striuynges of the people, thou shalt make me the head of the Heathen. A people whom I haue not knowne shal serue me.
Psalms 18:44 As soone as they heare of me, they shall obey me, but the straung chyldren dyssemble with me.
Psalms 18:45 The straunge chyldren are waxen olde, and go haltynge out of their pathes.
Psalms 18:46 The Lorde lyueth: and blessed be, my helper, praysed be the God of my health.
Psalms 18:47 Euen the God which seyth that I be auenged, and subdueth the people vnto me.
Psalms 18:48 It is he that delyuereth me from my cruell enemyes: thou shalt lyfte me vp from them that ryse against me, thou shalt rid me from the wycked man.
Psalms 18:49 For this cause I wyll geue thankes vnto the (O lorde) among the gentiles, and synge prayses vnto thy name.
Psalms 18:50 Greate prosperitye geueth he vnto hys Kynge: and sheweth louynge kyndnesse vnto Dauyd hys anoynted yea & vnto his sede for euermore.

CHAPTER: 19

Psalms 19:1 To the chaunter, a Psalm of Dauid. The very heauens declare the glory of God, and the very firmament sheweth his handy worcke.
Psalms 19:2 One daye telleth another, and one nyght certifyeth another.
Psalms 19:3 There is neyther speach ner language, but their voices are hard among them.
Psalms 19:4 Their sounde is gone oute into all landes, and their wordes into the endes of the worlde.
Psalms 19:5 In them hathe he sette a tabernacle for the Sunne, whych commeth forthe as a brydegrome out of his chamber, and reioyseth as a giaunt to runne his course.
Psalms 19:6 It goeth forth from the one ende of the heauen, and runneth aboute vnto the same ende agayne, and there maye no man hyde hym selfe from the heate therof.
Psalms 19:7 The lawe of the Lorde is a perfecte lawe it quickeneth the soule. The testimonye of the Lorde is true, and geueth wisdome euen vnto babes.
Psalms 19:8 The statutes of the Lord are ryght, and reioyse the hert: the commaundement of the lord is pure, and geueth lyght vnto the eyes.
Psalms 19:9 The feare of the Lorde is cleane, and endureth for euer: the iudgementes of the Lord are true and ryghtuous altogether.
Psalms 19:10 More pleasaunt are they then golde, yea then much fyne golde: sweter then hony and the hony combe.
Psalms 19:11 These thy seruaunt kepeth, & for kepynge of them there is great reward.
Psalms 19:12 Who can tell, how oft he offendeth? Oh clense thou me fro my secrete fautes.
Psalms 19:13 Kepe the seruaunt also from presumptuous synnes, lest they get the dominion ouer me: so shall I be vndefyled and innocent from the greate offence.
Psalms 19:14 Yea the words of my mouth and the meditacion of my herte shalbe acceptable vnto the, O Lorde, my helper and my redemer.

CHAPTER: 20

Psalms 20:1 To the chanter, a Psalme of Dauid. The Lorde heare the in the tyme of trouble, that name of the God of Iacob defend the.
Psalms 20:2 Send the helpe from the Santuary, and strength the oute of Sion.
Psalms 20:3 Remembre all thy offerynges, and accept thy brent sacrifice, Selah.
Psalms 20:4 Graunte the thy hertes desyre, and fulfill all thy mynde.
Psalms 20:5 We wyll reioyse in thy health, & triumphe in the name of the Lorde our God: the Lord perfourme all thy peticion.
Psalms 20:6 Now knowe I, that the Lord helpeth hys anoynted, and will heare hym from his holy heauen: myghtye is the helpe of hys ryghte hande.
Psalms 20:7 Some put their trust in charettes, & some in horses: but we will remembre the name of the Lorde oure God.
Psalms 20:8 They are broughte doune and fallen, but we are rysen and stande vp right.
Psalms 20:9 Saue, Lorde, and helpe vs, O kyng, when we call vpon the.

CHAPTER: 21

Psalms 21:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. Lorde, how ioyfull is the kyng in thy strength? O how exceadyng glad is he of thy sauynge health?
Psalms 21:2 Thou haste geuen him hys hertes desyre, and hast not put him from the request of hys lippes. Selah.
Psalms 21:3 For thou hast preuented him with liberal blessinges, and set a croune of golde vpon hys head.
Psalms 21:4 He asked lyfe of the, and thou gauest him a longe lyfe, euen for euer and euer.
Psalms 21:5 His honour is great in thy sauing health, glory and great worship shalt thou laye vpon hym.
Psalms 21:6 For thou shalt geue hym euerlastinge felicitie, and make hym glad with the ioye of thy countenaunce.
Psalms 21:7 And why? because the kynge putteth hys trust in the Lord, and in the mercy of the most hyest he shall not miscary.
Psalms 21:8 Let all thyne enemyes fele thy hande: let thy right hande fynde out all theym that hate the.
Psalms 21:9 Thou shalt make them like a fyry ouen in tyme of thy wrath: the Lorde shall destroye them in hys displeasure, and the fyre shal consume them.
Psalms 21:10 Their frute shalte thou rote oute of the earth, and their sede from amonge the chyldren of men.
Psalms 21:11 For they intended mischief agaynst the, & ymagined suche deuyces, as they were not able to perfourme.
Psalms 21:12 Therfore shalte thou put them to flighte, & with thy strynges thou shalte make ready thyne arrowes agaynst the faces of them.
Psalms 21:13 Be thou exalted, Lorde in thyne owne strength, so wyll we synge and prayse thy power.

CHAPTER: 22

Psalms 22:1 To the chaunter vppon Aieleth of the dawnyng, a Psalme of Dauid. My God, my God: why haste thou forsaken me? the wordes of my complaynte are farre fro my health.
Psalms 22:2 O my God, I crye in the daye tyme, but thou hearest not: and in the night season also I take no rest.
Psalms 22:3 Yet dwellest thou in the sanctuarye, O thou worshyppe of Israel.
Psalms 22:4 Oure fathers hoped in the, they trusted in the, and thou dyddest deliuer them.
Psalms 22:5 They called vpon the, & were helped: they put their trust in the, & were not confounded.
Psalms 22:6 But as for me, I am a worme & no man: a very scorne of men and the outcaste of the people.
Psalms 22:7 Al they that se me, laugh me to scorne: thei shute out their lippes, & shake their heades.
Psalms 22:8 He trusted in God, let hym delyuer hym: let him helpe hym, if he will haue hym.
Psalms 22:9 But thou art he that toke me out of my mothers wombe: thou waste my hope, when I hanged yet vpon my mothers brestes.
Psalms 22:10 I haue bene left vnto the euer sence I was borne, thou art my God, euen fro my mothers wombe.
Psalms 22:11 O go not fro me then, for trouble is harde at hande, and here is none to helpe me.
Psalms 22:12 Great bulles are come about me, fatte oxen close me in on euery syde.
Psalms 22:13 They gape vpon me with their mouthes, as it were a rampynge and roarynge Lyon.
Psalms 22:14 I am poured out lyke water, all my boones are out of ioynt: my herte in the middest of my body is euen lyke meltyng waxe.
Psalms 22:15 My strength is dryed vp lyke a potsherde, my tunge cleueth to my goomes, & thou haste brought me into the dust of death.
Psalms 22:16 For dogges are come about me, the counsail of the wicked hath layed seage against me. They pearsed my handes and my fete,
Psalms 22:17 I might haue tolde all my bones: as for them, they stode staryng and lokyng vpon me.
Psalms 22:18 They haue parted my garmentes among them, and cast lottes vpon my vesture.
Psalms 22:19 But be not thou farre fro me, O Lorde: thou art my succoure, haste the to helpe me.
Psalms 22:20 Delyuer my soule from the swearde, my dearlyng from the power of the dogge.
Psalms 22:21 Saue me from the Lyons mouth, & heare me from amonge the hornes of the Vnicornes.
Psalms 22:22 So wyll I declare thy name vnto my brethren, in the middest of the congregacion wyl I prayse the.
Psalms 22:23 O praise the Lord ye that feare him: Magnify hym all ye sede of Iacob, and let al the sede of Israel feare hym.
Psalms 22:24 For he hath not despised nor abhorred the miserable estate of the poore: he hath not hid hys face fro me, but when I called vnto him he herde me.
Psalms 22:25 I wyll prayse the in the great congregacion, and perfourme my vowes in the sighte of all them that feare the.
Psalms 22:26 The poore shall eate & be satisfied: they that seke after the Lord shal prayse hym: our hert shall lyue for euer.
Psalms 22:27 All the endes of the worlde shall remembre them selfes, and be turned vnto the Lorde: & all the generacions of the Heithen shal worshippe before hym.
Psalms 22:28 For the kyngdom is the Lordes, & he shal be the gouernour of the Heythen.
Psalms 22:29 All such as be fat vpon earth, shall eate also and worshippe. All they that lye in the dust, and lyue so hardly, shall fall doune before hym.
Psalms 22:30 The sede shall serue hym, and preache of the Lord for euer.
Psalms 22:31 They shall come, and declare hys ryghteousnes: vnto a people that shallbe borne, whome the Lorde hath made.

CHAPTER: 23

Psalms 23:1 A Psalme of Dauid. The Lord is my shepherde, I can want nothynge.
Psalms 23:2 He fedeth me in a grene pasture, and ledeth me to a freshe water.
Psalms 23:3 He quickeneth my soule, and bryngeth me forth in the waye of righteousnes for his names sake.
Psalms 23:4 Though I should walke now in the valley of the shadow of death, yet I feare not euel for thou arte with me: thy staffe & thy shepehoke comforte me.
Psalms 23:5 Thou preparest a table before me agaynste myne enemyes: thou anoyntest my head with oyle, and fyllest my cuppe ful.
Psalms 23:6 Oh let thy louing kyndnes and mercy folowe me all the dayes of my life, that I may dwell in the house of the Lorde for euer.

CHAPTER: 24

Psalms 24:1 A Psalme of Dauid. The earth is the Lordes, & all that therin is: the compase of the world, & al that dwell therein.
Psalms 24:2 For he hath founded it vpon the seas, and buylded it vpon the floudes.
Psalms 24:3 Who shall go vp into the hyll of the Lord? Or who shal remayne in his holy place?
Psalms 24:4 Euen he that hath innocent handes and a cleane hert: which lifteth not vp his minde vnto vanite, and sweareth not to disceaue.
Psalms 24:5 He shal receaue the blessing from the Lord, and mercy from God his sauiour.
Psalms 24:6 This is the generation of them that seke hym, of them that seke thy face, O Iacob. Selah.
Psalms 24:7 Open your gates (O ye princes) lette the euerlastynge dores be opened, that the kyng of glory may come in.
Psalms 24:8 Who is this kyng of glory? It is the Lorde strong and myghtie, euen the Lorde myghty in batell.
Psalms 24:9 Open youre gates (O ye princes) let the euerlastynge dores be opened, that the kyng of glory may come in.
Psalms 24:10 Who is this king of glory? It is the Lord of Hoostes, he is the kynge of glorye. Selah.

CHAPTER: 25

Psalms 25:1 Of Dauid, Vnto the (O Lorde) I lyft vp my soule.
Psalms 25:2 My God, I trust in the: Oh lette me not be confounded, leste myne enemyes tryumphe ouer me.
Psalms 25:3 For all they that hope in the shall not be ashamed: but suche as be scornefull despysers without a cause they shall be put to confucyon.
Psalms 25:4 Shewe me thy wayes, O Lord, & teach me thy pathes.
Psalms 25:5 Lede me in thy trueth and learne me, for thou art the God of my healthe, and in the is my hope al the day long.
Psalms 25:6 Call to remembrance, O Lorde, thy tender mercyes and thy louynge kyndenesses, which haue bene euer of olde.
Psalms 25:7 Oh remembre not the synnes and offences of my youth, but accordynge vnto thy mercye thynke vpon we, O Lord, for thy goodnesse.
Psalms 25:8 O how frendly & rightuous is the Lord, therfore will he teach synners in the way.
Psalms 25:9 He ledeth the symple a right, & suche as be meke them lerneth he his wayes.
Psalms 25:10 All the wayes of the Lord are verye mercy and faythfulnes, vnto suche as kepe hys testament and couenaunte.
Psalms 25:11 For thy names sake, O Lorde, be mercyfull vnto my synne, for it is greate.
Psalms 25:12 Whatsoeuer he be that feareth the Lorde he shall shewe hym the waye that he hathe chosen.
Psalms 25:13 Hys soule shall dwell at ease, and his sede shal possesse the lande.
Psalms 25:14 The secrete of the Lorde is amonge them that feare him, and he sheweth them hys couenaunt.
Psalms 25:15 Myne eyes are euer lokynge vnto the Lorde, for he shall plucke my fete oute of the net.
Psalms 25:16 Turne the vnto me and haue mercy vpon me, for I am desolate and in misery.
Psalms 25:17 The sorowes of my herte, are greate, O brynge me out of my troubles.
Psalms 25:18 Loke vpon myne aduersyty and misery, & forgeue me all my synnes.
Psalms 25:19 Consyder how myne enemyes are many, and beare a malicious hate against me.
Psalms 25:20 O kepe my soule, and delyuer me: let me not be confounded, for I haue put my trust in the.
Psalms 25:21 Let inocencye and ryghtuous dealynge walie vpon me, for my hope is in the.
Psalms 25:22 Delyuer Israell, O God oute of all hys trouble.

CHAPTER: 26

Psalms 26:1 Of Dauid. Be thou my iudge, O Lord, for I walke innocently: my trust is in the Lorde therfore shal I not fal.
Psalms 26:2 Examen me. O Lorde, and proue me: trye out my raines and my hert
Psalms 26:3 For my louynge kindnesse is before mine eyes, and I walke in thy truth.
Psalms 26:4 I syt not amonge vayne personnes, & haue no feloshippe with the disceatfull.
Psalms 26:5 I hate the congregacyon of the wycked, and I wyll not syt amonge the vngodlye.
Psalms 26:6 I wash my handes with innocencye, O Lorde, and so go I to thyne alter.
Psalms 26:7 That I may shewe the voice of thy praise and tell of all thy wonderous workes,
Psalms 26:8 Lorde, I loue the habitacion of thy house, and the place where thy honoure dwelleth.
Psalms 26:9 O destroy not my soule wyth the sinners nor my lyfe with the bloudthursty.
Psalms 26:10 In whose handes is wyckednesse, and their right hande is full of gyftes.
Psalms 26:11 But as for me I wyll walcke innocentely: O deliuer me, and be mercyfull vnto me.
Psalms 26:12 My fote standeth right: I wyll prayse the (O Lorde) in the congregations.

CHAPTER: 27

Psalms 27:1 Of Dauid. The Lorde is my lyghte and my health: whome then shoulde I feare? the Lorde is the strength of my life, for whom then shuld I be afraied?
Psalms 27:2 Therfore when the wycked, euen myne enemies and my foes, came vpon me, to eate vp my flesh, stombled and fell.
Psalms 27:3 Thoughe an hooste of men were layed agaynst me, yet shall not my hert be afrayed: and though there rose vp warre agaynst me, yet wyll I put my trust in him.
Psalms 27:4 One thynge haue I desyred of the Lorde, which I wyll requyre: namelye, that I maye dwel in the house of the Lorde all the dayes of my lyfe, to beholde the fayre beutye of the Lorde, and to viset his temple.
Psalms 27:5 For in the tyme of trouble he hath hydde me in his tabernacle, yea in the secrete place of his dwellynge hath he kept and set me vp vpon a rocke of stone.
Psalms 27:6 And now hath he lift vp my head aboue myne enemyes, that compassed me rounde aboute. Therfore wyll I offer in hys dwellynge. the oblacyon of thankesgeuynge: I wil singe and speake prayses vnto the Lorde.
Psalms 27:7 Herken vnto my voyce, O Lorde, when I crye vnto the: haue mercye vpon me and heare me,
Psalms 27:8 My hert speketh vnto the, my face seketh the, yea Lorde, thy face wyll I seke.
Psalms 27:9 O hyde not thou thy face fro me, caste not in thy seruaunt of displeasure. Thou art my succour, leaue me not, nether forsake me, O God my sauioure.
Psalms 27:10 For my father and my mother haue forsaken me, but the Lord hath taken me vp.
Psalms 27:11 Shewe me thy waye O Lord and lede me in the right path, because of myne ennemye
Psalms 27:12 Delyuer me not into the wyles of myne aduersaryes, for there are false wytnesses risen vp against me, and they ymagyne myschyefe.
Psalms 27:13 Neuerthelesse I beleue verelye to se the goodnesse of the Lorde in the lande of the lyuynge.
Psalms 27:14 O tary thou the Lordes leisure, be strong let thyne hert be of good comfort, and wayte thou still for the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 28

Psalms 28:1 Of Dauid. Vnto the wil I crye, O my strong defence: thinke no scorne of me, leste if thou make the as thoughe thou herdeste not, I be come lyke them, that go downe in to the pyt.
Psalms 28:2 Heare the voyce of my humble peticyon, when I cry vnto the, and hold vp my handes toward thy holy temple.
Psalms 28:3 O plucke me not awaye amonge the vngodly and wickeddoers, which speake frendly to their neyghboure, but ymagin mischefe in their hertes.
Psalms 28:4 Rewarde them accordynge to their dedes and wyckednesse of their owne inuencyons. Recompence them after the worckes of their handes, paye them that they haue deserued.
Psalms 28:5 For they regarde not the worckes of the Lorde, nor the operacyon of his hands: therfore shall he breake them down, and not bild them vp.
Psalms 28:6 Praysed be the Lorde, for he hath herd the voyce of myne humble petycyon.
Psalms 28:7 The Lord is my strength and my shylde: my hert hoped in hym, and I am helped: therfore my hert daunseth for ioy, and I wil sing praises vnto hym.
Psalms 28:8 The Lord is the strength of his people, he is the defender and Sauioure of his anoynted.
Psalms 28:9 O helpe thy people, geue thy blessyng vnto thyne enheritaunce: fede them, and set them vp for euer.

CHAPTER: 29

Psalms 29:1 A Psalme of Dauid. Ascribe vnto the Lorde, O ye mightie, ascribe vnto the Lord worship and strength.
Psalms 29:2 Geue the Lord the honour of his name bow your selues to the holy magesty of the Lord,
Psalms 29:3 It is the Lorde that commaunded the waters: It is the gloryus God that maketh the thonder: it is the Lorde that ruleth the sea.
Psalms 29:4 The voyce of the Lorde is mighty in operacyon, the voice of the Lorde is a glorius voyce.
Psalms 29:5 The voyce of the Lorde breaketh the Cedre trees: yea the Lorde breaketh the Ceders of Libanus.
Psalms 29:6 He maketh them to skyppe lyke a calfe: Libanus and Sirion lyke a younge vnicorne
Psalms 29:7 The voyce of the Lorde deuydeth the flames of fyre:
Psalms 29:8 the voice of the Lorde shaketh the wylderuesse, yea the Lorde shaketh the wildernesse of Cades.
Psalms 29:9 The voyce of the Lorde moueth the hyndes and discouereth the thicke bushes: in hys temple shall euerye man speake of hys honoure.
Psalms 29:10 The Lord stilleth the water floud, and the Lord remaineth a king for euer.
Psalms 29:11 The Lorde shall geue power vnto hys people, the Lord shall geue his people the blessyng of peace.

CHAPTER: 30

Psalms 30:1 A Psalme and songe of the dedicatiou of the house of Dauid. I wyll magnifye the, O Lord, for thou hast set me vp, and not suffred my foes to triumphe ouer me.
Psalms 30:2 O Lord my God, I cried vnto the, and thou hast healed me.
Psalms 30:3 Thou Lord hast brought my soule out of hell: thou hast kepte my lyfe, where as they go downe to the pyt.
Psalms 30:4 Singe prayses vnto the Lord (O ye saintes of hys) geue thankes vnto hym for a remembraunce of hys holynesse.
Psalms 30:5 For his wrath endureth but the twincling of an eie, and his pleasure is in lyfe: heuinesse may well endure for a nyght, but ioye commeth in the morning.
Psalms 30:6 As for me, when I was in prosperytye, I sayd: Tush I shal neuer fall more.
Psalms 30:7 And why? thou Lord of thy goodnesse hadest made my hyll so stronge. But as soone as thou turnedest thy face fro me, I was brought in feare.
Psalms 30:8 Then cryed I vnto the, O Lorde, yea vnto the Lord made I my praier.
Psalms 30:9 What profyt is ther in my bloude, if I go downe to corruption? May the dust geue thankes vnto the? Or shal it declare thy faythfulnesse?
Psalms 30:10 Heare, O Lorde, and haue mercye vpon me: Lord be thou my helper.
Psalms 30:11 And so thou hast turned my heuynesse into ioye: thou haste put of my sacke cloth, & gyrded me with gladnesse.
Psalms 30:12 That mine honoure myght synge praises vnto the without ceasyng: O Lord my God, I wil geue thankes vnto the for euer.

CHAPTER: 31

Psalms 31:1 To the chaunter a Psalme of Dauyd. In the O lord, is my trust: let me neuer be put to confusyon, but delyuer me in thy rightuousnesse.
Psalms 31:2 Bow downe thyne eare to me, make haste to delyuer me: be thou my strong rocke and a house of defence, that thou mayest saue me.
Psalms 31:3 For thou arte my stronge holde and my castel: O be thou my gide and lede me for thy names sake.
Psalms 31:4 Drawe me out of the nette that they haue layed pryuelye for me, for thou arte my strength
Psalms 31:5 In to thy handes I commende my spirite: thou hast delyuered me O Lorde thou God of truth.
Psalms 31:6 I hate them that holde of vanites, and my trust is in the Lord.
Psalms 31:7 I wil be glad and reioyse in thy mercy for thou hast consydered my trouble, thou haste knowne my soule in aduersity.
Psalms 31:8 Thou hast not delyuered me ouer into the handes of the enemye, but hast set my fete in a large rowme.
Psalms 31:9 Haue mercy vpon me, O Lorde, for I am in trouble, myne eye consumed for verye heuynesse, yea my soule and my body.
Psalms 31:10 My lyfe is waxen olde with heuines, and my yeares with moornyng. My strength fayleth me because of mine aduersitie, and my bones are corrupt.
Psalms 31:11 I am become a verye reprofe amonge all myne enemyes, my neyghbours and they of myne owne aquayntaunce are afraied of me they that se me in the streate, conueye them selues fro me.
Psalms 31:12 I am cleane forgotten and oute of mynde as a dead man: I am become lyke a broken vessell.
Psalms 31:13 For I haue harde the blasphemy of the multytude: euerye man abhorreth me: they haue gathered a councell together agaynste me, and are purposed to take awaye my lyfe.
Psalms 31:14 But my hope is in the Lord, and I say thou art my God.
Psalms 31:15 My tyme is in thy hande: deliuer me from the hand of mine enemies, and from them that persecute me.
Psalms 31:16 Shewe thy seruaunte the lyghte of thy countenaunce, helpe me for thy mercyes sake.
Psalms 31:17 Let me not be confounded, O Lorde, for I calle vpon the: lette the vngodlye rather be put to confusyon, and broughte vnto the hell.
Psalms 31:18 Let the lieng lippes be put to silence which cruely, disdainefully, and despitefully speake against the rightuous.
Psalms 31:19 O howe greate and manyfolde is thy good, whyche thou haste hyd for them that feare the? O what thinges bringest thou to passe for them, that put their truste in the, euen before the sonnes of men?
Psalms 31:20 Thou hydest them priuely by thyne owne presence from the proude men, thou kepeste them secretly in thy tabernacle, from the strife of tonges.
Psalms 31:21 Thankes be to the Lorde, for he hath shewed me maruelous greate kyndenesse in a strong cytye.
Psalms 31:22 For when the suddaine feare cam vpon me I said: I am cast out of thy sighte. Neuerthelesse, thou herdest myne humble prayer, when I cried vnto the.
Psalms 31:23 O loue the Lorde (all ye hys saynctes) for the Lorde preserueth the faythfull, and plenteusly rewardeth he the proud doer.
Psalms 31:24 Be strong therfore and take a good herte vnto you, all ye that put your trust in the Lord.

CHAPTER: 32

Psalms 32:1 An instruccyon of Dauid. Blessed are they, whose vnryghtuousnes is forgeuen, and whose sinnes are couered.
Psalms 32:2 Blessed is the man, vnto whom the Lord imputeth no synne, in whose, spirite ther is no gyle.
Psalms 32:3 For while I helde my tonge my bones consumed awaye thorowe my daylye complaynynges.
Psalms 32:4 And because thy hand was so heuy vpon me both daye and nyght, my moysture was lyke the drouth in Sommer. Selah.
Psalms 32:5 Therfore I confessed my sinne vnto the & hyd not myne vnryghtuousnes. I sayde: I wyll knowledge myne offence and accuse my selfe vnto the Lord, & so thou forgauest me the wickednesse of my synne Selah.
Psalms 32:6 For thys shall euerye sayncte make hys prayer vnto the in due season, therfore shall not, the great water fludes, come nie hym.
Psalms 32:7 Thou art my defence in the trouble that is come aboute me, O compasse thou me about also with the ioy of deliuerance. Selah
Psalms 32:8 I wyl enforme the, and shew the the waie wherin thou shalt go I wyll fasten myne eyes vpon the.
Psalms 32:9 Be not ye now like horses & mules, which haue no vnderstandyng. Whose mouthes thou must hold with bit and bridle, if they wil not obey the.
Psalms 32:10 Great plages shal the vngodly haue, but who so putteth hys trust in the Lorde, mercy shall compasse him on euery syde.
Psalms 32:11 Be glad, O ye ryghtuous, and reioyse in the Lord, be ioyful al ye that are true of herte.

CHAPTER: 33

Psalms 33:1 Reioyse in the Lord, O ye righteous, for it becommeth well the iust to be thankefull.
Psalms 33:2 Prayse the Lord with harpe: singe psalmes vnto him wyth the lute and instrument of ten strynges.
Psalms 33:3 Singe hym a new songe, yea, sing lustely vnto hym, and with a good corage.
Psalms 33:4 For the woorde of the Lorde is true, & all hys workes are faythful.
Psalms 33:5 He loueth mercy and iudgement, the earth is full of the goodnesse of the Lorde.
Psalms 33:6 By the worde of the Lorde were the heauens made, and all the hoostes of theym by the breth of hys mouth.
Psalms 33:7 He gathereth the waters together as it were in a bottell, and layeth vp the depe in secret.
Psalms 33:8 Let all the earth feare the Lorde, and lette all them that dwell in the worlde, stande in awe of hym.
Psalms 33:9 For loke what he sayeth, it is done: and loke what he commaundeth, it standeth fast.
Psalms 33:10 The Lorde bryngeth the counsayl of the Heythen to naught, and turneth the deuyces of the people.
Psalms 33:11 But the counsayll of the Lorde endureth, and the thoughtes of his herte from generacion to generacion.
Psalms 33:12 Blessed are the people that holde the Lorde for their God, & blessed are the folke whome he hath chosen to be hys heretage.
Psalms 33:13 The Lorde loketh doune from heauen, & beholdeth all the chyldren of men:
Psalms 33:14 from hys stronge seate he considreth all them that dwell in the worlde.
Psalms 33:15 He onely hath fashyoned all the hertes of them, and knoweth all their workes.
Psalms 33:16 A kynge is not helped by hys owne great hoost, neyther is a giaunte saued thorow the myght of hys owne strength.
Psalms 33:17 A horse is but a vayne thing to saue a man, it is not the power of hys strengthe that can delyuer hym.
Psalms 33:18 Beholde, the eye of the Lorde loketh vnto them that feare hym, & put their trust in hys mercy.
Psalms 33:19 That he maye delyuer their soules frome death, & to fede them in the deare tyme.
Psalms 33:20 Let oure soule paciently abyde the Lord, for he is oure helpe and shylde.
Psalms 33:21 So shall oure hert reioyse in him, because we haue hoped in hys holy name.
Psalms 33:22 Let thy mercifull kyndnesse, O Lorde, be vpon vs, lyke as we put our trust in the.

CHAPTER: 34

Psalms 34:1 Of Dauid, when he fayned hym self too be madde before Abimelech: whyche droue hym awaye, and he departed. I wyll alwaye geue thanckes vnto the LORD, hys prayse shall euer be in my mouth.
Psalms 34:2 My soule shall make her boast in the Lord: the humble shall heare therof, & be glad.
Psalms 34:3 O prayse the Lord wyth me, and let vs magnyfye hys name together.
Psalms 34:4 I sought the Lorde, and he herde me, yea he delyuered me out of all my feare.
Psalms 34:5 They that haue an eye vnto hym, shalbe lightened, & ther faces shal not be ashamed.
Psalms 34:6 This poore man cryed vnto the Lorde, & he hearde hym, yea, and delyuered hym oute of all hys troubles.
Psalms 34:7 The Aungel of the Lorde pytcheth hys tente rounde aboute hym that feare hym, & delyuereth them.
Psalms 34:8 O taste and se how frendly the Lorde is, blessed is the man that trusteth in hym.
Psalms 34:9 O feare the Lord, ye that be hys sayntes: for they that feare hym, lacke nothyng.
Psalms 34:10 The ryche shall wante and suffre hunger, but they which seke the Lord, shal want no maner of thyng, that is good.
Psalms 34:11 Come hyther, O ye chyldren, herken vnto me, I wil teache you the feare of the Lorde.
Psalms 34:12 Who so lysteth to lyue, and wolde fayne se good dayes.
Psalms 34:13 Let hym refrayne his tonge from euell, & hys lyppes that they speake no gyle.
Psalms 34:14 Let hym eschue euell, and do good: Lette hym seke peace and ensue it.
Psalms 34:15 For the eyes of the Lorde are ouer the righteous, and his eares are open vnto theyr prayers.
Psalms 34:16 But the face of the Lorde beholdeth them that do euell, to destroye the remembraunce of them out of the earth.
Psalms 34:17 When the righteous crye, the Lorde heareth them, & delyuereth them out of all theyr troubles.
Psalms 34:18 The Lorde is nye vnto them that are contryte in hert, and will helpe suche as be of an humble sprete.
Psalms 34:19 Great are the troubles of the righteous, but the Lorde delyuereth them out of all.
Psalms 34:20 He kepeth all their bones, so that not one of them is broken.
Psalms 34:21 But misfortune shall slaye the vngodly, & they that hate the righteous shalbe gylty.
Psalms 34:22 The Lorde deliuereth the soules of hys seruauntes, and all they that put their truste in hym, shall not offende.

CHAPTER: 35

Psalms 35:1 Of Dauid. Stryue thou with them, O lord, that stryue with me, fight thou against them that fight against me.
Psalms 35:2 Laye hande vpon the shylde and speare, and stande vp to helpe me.
Psalms 35:3 Drawe out thy swearde, and stoppe the waye agaynst them that persecute me, saye vnto my soule: I am thy helpe.
Psalms 35:4 Let them be confounded & put to shame, that seke after my soule: let theym be turned back and brought to confusion, that ymagin mischiefe for me.
Psalms 35:5 Let them be as the dust before the winde, and the aungel of the Lord scateryng them.
Psalms 35:6 Let their waye be darcke and slippery, & the aungell of the Lorde to persecute them.
Psalms 35:7 For they haue priuely layed their nette to destroye me without a cause, yea, & made a pytte for my soule, which I neuer deserued.
Psalms 35:8 Let a soden destruccion come vpon hym vnwares, & the nette that he had layed pryuely, catche hym selfe, that he maye fall into hys owne mischief.
Psalms 35:9 But let my soule be ioyfull in the Lorde, and reioyse in hys helpe.
Psalms 35:10 All my bones shall saye: Lorde who is lyke vnto the? which deliuerest the poore from those that are to strong for him, yea, the poore and the nedy from hys robbers.
Psalms 35:11 False witnesses are rysen vp, and laye to my charge thinges that I know not.
Psalms 35:12 They rewarde me euell for good, too the great discomforte of my soule.
Psalms 35:13 Neuerthelesse, when they were sycke, I put on a sacke cloth: I humbled my soule with fastyng, and my prayer turned into myne owne bosome.
Psalms 35:14 I behaued my selfe as though it had bene my frende or my brother, I went heuely, as one that mourneth for hys mother.
Psalms 35:15 But in myne aduersitie they reioyse, & gather them together. Yea, the very lame come together agaynste me vnwares, makynge mowes at me, and ceasse not.
Psalms 35:16 With the gredy and scorneful hypocrites they gnasshed vpon me with their teeth.
Psalms 35:17 Lorde, whan wilt thou loke vpon thys? O restore my soule from the wycked rumoure of them, my dearlynge from the lyons?
Psalms 35:18 So will I geue the thanckes in the great congregacion, and prayse the among muche people.
Psalms 35:19 O let them not triumphe ouer me, that are myne enemyes for naught: O let them not winke with their eyes, that hate me without a cause.
Psalms 35:20 And why? their comening is not for peace but they ymagyn false wordes agaynste the outcastes of the lande.
Psalms 35:21 They gape vpon me with their mouthes, saying: there, there: we se it with our eyes.
Psalms 35:22 This thou seist, O lorde: holde not thy tonge then, go not farre fro me, O lorde.
Psalms 35:23 Awake lorde, and stande vp: auenge thou my cause, my God, and my lorde,
Psalms 35:24 Iudge me, O lorde my God, accordynge to thy righteousnesse, that they triumphe not ouer me.
Psalms 35:25 O let them not saye in their hertes: there there, so wolde we haue it: O let them not saye: we haue ouercome hym.
Psalms 35:26 Let them be put to confusion & shame, that reioyse at my trouble: let them be clothed wt rebuke and dishonoure, that boost them selfes agaynst me.
Psalms 35:27 Let them also be glad and reioyse, that fauoure my righteous dealynge: yea, let them saye alwaye: blessed be the lord, whiche hath pleasure in the prosperitie of hys seruaunt.
Psalms 35:28 And as for my tonge, it shalbe talkyng of thy righteousnes and of thy prayse, all the day longe.

CHAPTER: 36

Psalms 36:1 To the chaunter, of Dauid the seruaunt of the Lorde. My hert sheweth me the wickednesse of the vngodly, that there is no feare of God before hys eyes.
Psalms 36:2 For he dissembleth before his face, so longe tyll hys abhominable sinne be founde out.
Psalms 36:3 The woordes of hys mouth are vnrighteousnes and disceate, he will not be learned to do good.
Psalms 36:4 He ymagineth mischief vpon his bedde he wil come in no good waye, nor refuse the thyng that is euel.
Psalms 36:5 Thy mercy, O Lorde, reacheth vnto the heauen, and thy faythfulnesse vnto the cloudes.
Psalms 36:6 Thy righteousnesse standeth lyke the strong mountaynes, and thy iudgemente lyke the great depe. Thou Lord preseruest both men and beastes.
Psalms 36:7 How precious is thy mercy, O God, that the chyldren of men maye put their trust vnder the shadowe of thy wynges?
Psalms 36:8 They shalbe satisfied with the plenteousnesse of thy house, and thou shalte geue them drynke of the ryuer of thy pleasures.
Psalms 36:9 For by the is the wel of lyfe, and in thy lyght, shall we se lyght.
Psalms 36:10 O sprede forth thy louing kyndnesse vnto them that knowe the, and thy ryghteousnesse vnto them that are true of hert.
Psalms 36:11 O let not the fote of pride ouertake me, O let not the hande of the vngodly caste me doune.
Psalms 36:12 As for wycked doers, they fall, they are cast doune, and are not able to stande.

CHAPTER: 37

Psalms 37:1 A Psalme of Dauid. Fret not thy selfe at the vngodly be not thou enuious agaynst the euel doers.
Psalms 37:2 For they shall soone be cutte doune lyke the grasse, & be wythered euen as the grene herbe.
Psalms 37:3 Put thou thy trust in the Lorde, and be doyng good: so shalt thou dwel in the lande, & verely it shall fede the.
Psalms 37:4 Delyte thou in the Lorde, & he shall geue the thy hertes desire.
Psalms 37:5 Committe thy waye vnto the Lorde, sette thy hope in hym, and he shall brynge it too passe.
Psalms 37:6 He shal make thy righteousnesse as cleare as the light, & thy iust dealynge as the noone daye.
Psalms 37:7 Holde the styl in the Lord, and abyde paciently vpon hym: but greue not thy selfe at one that hath prosperytie, and lyueth in abhominacion.
Psalms 37:8 Leaue of from wrath, let go displeasure, let not thy gelousy moue the also to do euell.
Psalms 37:9 For wycked doers shalbe roted oute, but they that paciently abyde the Lord, shall enheret the lande.
Psalms 37:10 Suffre yet a litle whyle, and the vngodly shalbe cleane gone: thou shalt loke after hys place, and he shalbe awaye.
Psalms 37:11 But the meke spreted shall possesse the earth, and haue pleasure in muche rest.
Psalms 37:12 The vngodly layeth wayte for the iust, & gnassheth vpon him with his tethe.
Psalms 37:13 But the Lord laugheth him to scorne, for he seyth that his daye is commyng.
Psalms 37:14 The vngodly drawe oute the swerde & bende their bowe, to caste doune the simple and poore, and to slaye suche as go the right waye.
Psalms 37:15 Neuertheles, their swerde shal go thorow their owne hert, and theyr bowe shalbe broken.
Psalms 37:16 A small thinge that the righteous hath, is better then great ryches of the vngodly.
Psalms 37:17 For the armes of the vngodly shalbe broken, but the Lorde vpholdeth the ryghteous.
Psalms 37:18 The Lord knoweth the dayes of the Godly and their inheritaunce endureth for euer.
Psalms 37:19 They shall not be confounded in the perlous tyme, and in the daies of derth thei shal haue ynough.
Psalms 37:20 As for the vngodly, they shall perysh: and when the enemyes of the Lorde are in theyr floures, they shall consume, yea, euen as the smoke shall they consume awaye.
Psalms 37:21 The vngodly boroweth and payeth not agayne, but the righteous is mercyfull and lyberall.
Psalms 37:22 Such as be blessed of hym, shall possesse the lande: and they whome he curseth, shalbe roted out.
Psalms 37:23 The Lorde ordreth a good mans goynge, and hath pleasure in hys waye.
Psalms 37:24 Though he fall, he shall not be hurte, for the Lorde vpholdeth him with his hande.
Psalms 37:25 I haue bene yonge, and now am olde: yet sawe I neuer the righteous forsaken, nor hys sede to seke their bread.
Psalms 37:26 The righteous is euer mercifull, and lendeth gently, therfore shal his sede be blessed.
Psalms 37:27 Fle from euell, and do the thynge that is good, so shalt thou dwell for euer.
Psalms 37:28 For the Lorde loueth the thynge that is ryght, he forsaketh not hys sainctes, but thei shalbe preserued for euermore: as for the sede of the vngodly, it shalbe roted out.
Psalms 37:29 Yea, the righteous shal possesse the land, and dwell therein for euer.
Psalms 37:30 The mouth of the righteous is exercised in wysdome, and hys tonge talketh of iudgement.
Psalms 37:31 The lawe of his God is in his hert, therfore shall not his fotesteppes slyde.
Psalms 37:32 The vngodly seyth the righteous, & goeth aboute to slaye hym.
Psalms 37:33 But the Lorde will not leaue him in hys handes, nor condempne him when he is iudged.
Psalms 37:34 Hope thou in the Lord, & kepe his waye, & he shal so promote the, that thou shalt haue the lande by enheritaunce, and se, when the vngodly shall perishe.
Psalms 37:35 I my selfe haue sene the vngodly in great power, & florishinge lyke a grene baye tree:
Psalms 37:36 but when I went by, lo, he was gone: I sought hym, but he coulde no where be founde.
Psalms 37:37 Kepe innocency, and take hede vnto the thynge that is ryghte, for that shall brynge a man peace at the last.
Psalms 37:38 As for the transgressours, they shall peryshe together, and the vngodly shall be roted out at the laste.
Psalms 37:39 The helpe of the righteous commeth of the Lorde, he is their strength in the tyme of trouble.
Psalms 37:40 The Lorde shall stande by them, and saue them: he shall delyuer them from the vngodly and helpe them, because they put their truste in hym.

CHAPTER: 38

Psalms 38:1 To the chaunter, to brynge too remembraunce. Pvtte me not too rebuke (Oh Lorde) in thyne anger: Oh chasten me not in thy heuy displeasure.
Psalms 38:2 For thyne arrowes stycke fast in me, and thy hande presseth me sore.
Psalms 38:3 There is no whole parte in my body, because of thy displeasure: there is no reste in my bones, by reason of my synnes.
Psalms 38:4 For my wyckednesses are gone ouer my head, and are like a sore burthen, to heuy for me to beare.
Psalms 38:5 My woundes styncke and are corrupte, thorow my folyshnesse.
Psalms 38:6 I am broughte into so greate trouble and mysery, that I go mournynge all the daye longe.
Psalms 38:7 For my loynes are cleane dryed vp, and there is no whole parte in my body.
Psalms 38:8 I am feble & sore smytten, I roare for the very disquietnes of my hert.
Psalms 38:9 Lorde, thou knowest all my desyre, & my gronynge is not hyd from the.
Psalms 38:10 My hert panteth, my strengthe hath fayled me, and the lighte of myne eyes is gone fro me.
Psalms 38:11 My louers and frendes stande lokynge vpon my trouble, and my kynsmen are gone afarre of.
Psalms 38:12 They that sought after my lyfe, and to do me euell, spake of lyes & ymagined disceate all the daye longe.
Psalms 38:13 As for me, I was lyke a deaf man & herde not: and as one that were domme, not openynge hys mouth.
Psalms 38:14 I am become as a man that heareth not: and that can make no resistaunce wyth hys mouth.
Psalms 38:15 For in the, O Lorde, is my truste, thou shalt heare me, O Lorde my God.
Psalms 38:16 My desyre is, that myne enemyes triumphe not ouer me: for if my foote slyppe, they reioyse greatly agaynst me.
Psalms 38:17 I am ready to suffre trouble, and my heuinesse is euer in my sight.
Psalms 38:18 For I confesse my wyckednesse, and my synne greueth me.
Psalms 38:19 But myne enemyes lyue, & are mightye: and they that hate me without a cause, are many in numbre.
Psalms 38:20 They that rewarde me euel for good, speake euell of me, because I folowe the thyng that good is.
Psalms 38:21 Forsake me not (O Lord my God) O go not farre fro me.
Psalms 38:22 Haste the to helpe me, O Lorde my succoure.

CHAPTER: 39

Psalms 39:1 To the chanter for Iduthun, a Psalme of Dauid. I sayde: I wyll kepe my wayes that I offende not in my tonge And so I shutte my mouthe whyle the vngodly layed wait for me.
Psalms 39:2 I helde my tonge, I was domme, I kept sylence, yea euen from good wordes, but it was payne and grefe to me.
Psalms 39:3 My hert was hote within me, and whyle I was thus musyng, the fyre kindled: so that I spake wyth my tong.
Psalms 39:4 Lorde, let me knowe myne ende, and the numbre of my dayes: that I may be certified what I want.
Psalms 39:5 Behold, thou hast made my dayes a span longe, and my lyfe as it were nothynge before the. O how vayne are all men liuing? Selah
Psalms 39:6 Yea euery man walketh as it were a shadow, and disquieth him selfe in vayne: he heapeth vp ryches, and can not tell to whome he gathereth them.
Psalms 39:7 And now Lorde wherin shall I comforte me? my hope is in the.
Psalms 39:8 Delyuer me from all myne offences, and make me not a scorne vnto the folish.
Psalms 39:9 I kepe sylence, and open not my mouthe, for thou hast done it.
Psalms 39:10 Turne thy plages awaye fro me, for I am consumed thorow the feare of thy hande.
Psalms 39:11 When thou punishest man for sinne. thou chastenest him: so that his beutye consumeth awaye, lyke as it were a moth. O how vayne are al men? Selah.
Psalms 39:12 Heare my prayer O Lorde, and consyder my callynge: shewe not thy selfe as though thou sawest not my teares. For I am a straunger and pilgrymme wyth the, as all my forefathers were.
Psalms 39:13 Oh spare me a lytle that I may refreshe my selfe, before I goo hence, and be no more sene.

CHAPTER: 40

Psalms 40:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. I waited pacyently for the Lord, which enclined hym selfe vnto me: and herd my callynge.
Psalms 40:2 He brought me out of the horryble pitte, out of the myre and claye: he set my fete vpon the rocke, & ordred my goinges.
Psalms 40:3 He hath put a newe songe in my mouthe, euen a thanckes geuynge vnto oure God. Many men seing this shal feare the Lord, and put their trust in hym.
Psalms 40:4 Blessed is the man that setteth his hope in the Lorde, and turneth not vnto the proud, & to such as go aboute with lyes.
Psalms 40:5 O Lorde my God, greate are thy wonderous worckes whiche thou haste done: and in thy thoughtes toward vs there maye none be likened vnto the. I wold declare them, and speake of them: but they are so manye, that they can not be tolde.
Psalms 40:6 Sacryfyce and offerynge thou wouldeste not haue but a bodye haste thou ordeyned me: burnt offerynges and sacrifyce for synne thou hast not alowed.
Psalms 40:7 Then sayde I: Lo, I come. In the begynnynge of the boke is it written of me,
Psalms 40:8 that I shoulde fulfyl thy wyl O my God, and that am I content to do: yea thy lawe is wythin my hert.
Psalms 40:9 I will preach of thy ryghtuousnesse in the great congregacyon: Lo. I wyl not refraine my lippes, O Lorde, and that thou knowest.
Psalms 40:10 I do not hyde thy ryghtuousnes in my hert, my talkinge is of thy trueth and sauing health: I kepe not thy louyng mercy & faythfulnesse backe from the greate congregacyon.
Psalms 40:11 Turne not thou thy mercy fro me O Lord but let thy louynge kyndnesse and trueth alwaye preseue me.
Psalms 40:12 For innumerable troubles are come about me: my synnes haue taken suche holde vpon me that I am not able to loke vp: yea they are mo in number then the heares of my head and my hert hath fayled me.
Psalms 40:13 O Lorde, let it be thy pleasure to delyuer me make hast (Lord) to help me.
Psalms 40:14 Let them be ashamed and confunded, that seke after my soule, to destroye it: let them fall backwarde and be put to confusion, that wish me euell.
Psalms 40:15 Let them soone be broughte to shame, that crye ouer me, there there.
Psalms 40:16 But let all those that seke the, be ioyfull and glad in the: & let al such as delyte in thye sauyng health, say alway: the Lord be praised.
Psalms 40:17 As for me, I am poore and in miserye, but the Lord careth for me. Thou art my helper and redemer, make no long tariyng, O my God.

CHAPTER: 41

Psalms 41:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. Blessed is he, that consydereth the poore: the Lord shal deliuer him in the tyme of trouble.
Psalms 41:2 The Lord shal preserue him & kepe him aliue: he shall make him to prospere vpon earth, and shall not delyuer him into the wyl of his enemeyes.
Psalms 41:3 The Lord shal refresh him, when he lyeth sicke vpon his bed, yea thou makest hys bed in al his sicknesse.
Psalms 41:4 I sayd: Lord be mercifull vnto me, heale my soule, for I haue synned agaynst the.
Psalms 41:5 Myne enemyes speake euel vpon me: when shal he die, and his name perishe.
Psalms 41:6 Though he came in to se, yet meaned he falsede in his hert, heapyng myscheyfe vpon hym selfe.
Psalms 41:7 All they that hate me, runne together agaynst me, and ymagyn euell against me.
Psalms 41:8 They haue geuen a wycked sentence vpon me: when he lyeth, he shall ryse vp no more.
Psalms 41:9 Yea euen myne owne famylyer frende, whom I trusted, whiche dyd eate my breade hath lyfte vp his hele agaynste me.
Psalms 41:10 But be thou mercyful vnto me (O Lord) rayse thou me vp, and I shall reward them
Psalms 41:11 By this I know thou fauourest me, that. my enemy shal not triumphe ouer me.
Psalms 41:12 Thou hast vpholden me because of my innocency, and set me before thy face for euer.
Psalms 41:13 O blessed be the Lorde God of Israel, from hence forth and for euermore. Amen. Amen.

CHAPTER: 42

Psalms 42:1 To the chaunter, a monicion of the sonnes of Corah. Like as the hert desyreth the water brokes, so longeth my soule after the, O God.
Psalms 42:2 My soule is a thurste for God, yea euen for the lyuynge God: when shall I come, and behold the face of God?
Psalms 42:3 My teares are my meate daye and nighte whyle it is daylye sayed vnto me: where is now thy God?
Psalms 42:4 Now when I thincke ther vpon, I poure out my hert by my self: for I would faine go hence wyth the multytude and passe ouer wt them vnto the house of God, in the voyce of prayse and thankes geuynge, amonge suche as kepe holy daye.
Psalms 42:5 Why art thou so full of heuynes, (O my soule) and why arte thou so vnquyet wythin me? O put thy trust in God, for I wyl yet geue him thankes, for the helpe of his countenance
Psalms 42:6 My God, my soule is vexed wythin me: therfore I remembre the lande of Iordaine, and the litle hyl of Hermonim.
Psalms 42:7 One depe calleth another wyth the voyce of thy whistles, al thy waues and water floudes are gone ouer me.
Psalms 42:8 The Lorde hath promysed hys louynge kyndnesse daylye, therfore will I prayse him in the night season, and make my prayer vnto the God of my lyfe.
Psalms 42:9 I wyll say vnto God my stony rock: why host thou forgotten me? why go I thus heuely, whyle the enemye oppresseth me?
Psalms 42:10 Whyle my bones are broken, whyle mine enemyes cast me in the teeth, daylye saiynge vnto me: where is now thy God?
Psalms 42:11 Why art thou so heuy (O my soule) & why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God, for I wyll yet thanke hym for the helpe of hys countenaunce, and because he is my God.

CHAPTER: 43

Psalms 43:1 Geue sentence vpon me (O God) and defende my cause agaynst the vnholy people: Oh delyuer me from the dysceatefull, and wycked man.
Psalms 43:2 For thou (O God) art my strength: why hast thou shut me from the? Why go I then so heuely, whyle the enemye oppresseth me?
Psalms 43:3 Oh sende out thy light any thy truth, that they maye leade me and brynge me vnto thy holy hyll, and to thy dwellyng.
Psalms 43:4 That I maye go into the aulter of God, euen vnto the God whyche is my ioye & pleasure, and vpon the harpe to geue thankes vnto the, O God, my God.
Psalms 43:5 Why art thou so heuy (O my soule) and why art thou so disquyeted wythin me? O put thy trust in God, for I wyll yet geue hym thanckes for the helpe of hys countenaunce, and because he is my God.

CHAPTER: 44

Psalms 44:1 To the chaunter an instruccyon of the sonnes of Corah. We haue herde with our eares (O God) our fathers haue told vs, what thou hast don in their tyme of olde
Psalms 44:2 Howe thou hast dryuen out the Heythen wyth thy hand, and planted them in: how thou hast destroyed the nacions and cast them out.
Psalms 44:3 For they gat not the lande in possessyon thorowe their owne swearde, neyther was it their owne arme that helped them. But thy ryght hande, thyne arme and the lyght of thy countenaunce, because thou haddest a fauoure vnto them.
Psalms 44:4 Thou arte the Kynge and my God, thou sendest helpe vnto Iacob.
Psalms 44:5 Thorow the, wyll we ouerthrow our enemyes: and in thy name wyll we treade them vnder, that ryse vp agaynst vs.
Psalms 44:6 For I wyll not trust in my bowe, it is not my sweard that shall helpe me.
Psalms 44:7 But it is thou that sauest vs from our enemyes: and puttest them to confusyon that hate vs.
Psalms 44:8 We wyll alway make our boast of God, and prayse thy name for euer. Selah.
Psalms 44:9 But now thou forsakest vs, and puttest vs to confusyon, and goest not forth wyth oure Hostes.
Psalms 44:10 Thou makest vs to turne oure backes vpon oure enemyes, so that they which hate vs spoyle our goodes.
Psalms 44:11 Thou lettest vs be eaten vp lyke shepe, & scaterest vs among the Heathen.
Psalms 44:12 Thou sellest thy people for naught, and takest no money for them.
Psalms 44:13 Thou makeste vs to be rebuked of oure neyghboures, to be laughed to scorne & had in derision, of them that are rounde about v
Psalms 44:14 Thou hast made vs, a very by word among the Heathen, and that the people shake their heades at vs.
Psalms 44:15 My confusion is dayly before me, and the shame of my face couereth me.
Psalms 44:16 For the voyce of the sclaunderer and blasphemer, for the enemye and auenger.
Psalms 44:17 All this is come vpon vs, and yet haue we not forgotten the ner behaued oure selues vnfaythfully in thy couenaunt.
Psalms 44:18 Oure herte is not turned backe, neyther our steps gone out of thy way.
Psalms 44:19 For thou hast smitten vs in the place of dragones, and couered vs with the shadow of death.
Psalms 44:20 If we had forgotten the name of our God and holden vp oure handes to any straunge God.
Psalms 44:21 Should not God fynde it out? for he knoweth the very secretes of the herte.
Psalms 44:22 But for thy sake we are kylled all the daye longe, and are counted as shepe apoynted to be slayne.
Psalms 44:23 Vp Lorde, why slepest thou? wake, and cast vs not of for euer.
Psalms 44:24 Wherfore hydest thy face? wylte thou cleane forget oure mysery and oppression
Psalms 44:25 For oure soule is brought low euen vnto the dust, and our bely cleueth vnto the ground
Psalms 44:26 Arise O Lord, helpe vs and delyuer vs for thy mercy sake.

CHAPTER: 45

Psalms 45:1 To the chaunter, vpon Sosanim, an instruccion of the chyldren of Corah, a songe of loue. Mi herte is endytinge of a godd matter, I speake of that, which I haue made of the kynge: My tonge is the penne of a ready wryter.
Psalms 45:2 Thou arte the fayrest amonge the chyldren of men, full of grace are thy lyppes, therfore God blesseth the for euer.
Psalms 45:3 Gyrde the with thy swerde vpon thy thyghe (O thou mightye) with worshippe and renowne.
Psalms 45:4 Good lucke haue thou with thyne honor, ryde on with the trueth, mekenesse & righteousnes: and thy righthand shall teach the wonderfull thynges.
Psalms 45:5 Thy arrowes are sharpe, the people shal be subdued vnto the, euen in the myddest amonge the kynges enemyes.
Psalms 45:6 Thy seate (O God) endureth for euer: the scepter of thy kyngdome is a right scepter.
Psalms 45:7 Thou hast loued righteousnesse, & hated iniquitie: wherfore God (which is thy God) hath anoynted the with the oyle of gladnes aboue thy felowes.
Psalms 45:8 All thy garmentes are lyke myrre, Aloes & Cassia, when thou commest out of thine yuerye palaces in thy beutifull glory.
Psalms 45:9 Kynges daughters go in thy goodly aray and vpon thy right hande standeth the quene in a vesture of the most fyne golde.
Psalms 45:10 Herken (O daughter) considre, & enclyne thyne eare: forget thyne owne people, & thy fathers house.
Psalms 45:11 So shall the kynge haue pleasure in thy beuty, for he is thy Lorde, & thou shalte worshyp hym.
Psalms 45:12 The daughters of Tire shalbe there with gyftes, the ryche amonge the people shall make their supplication before the.
Psalms 45:13 The kynges daughter is all glorious within, her clothyng is of wrought golde.
Psalms 45:14 She shalbe brought vnto the kyng in rayment of nedle worke, & maidens after her: such as be next her shalbe brought vnto the.
Psalms 45:15 Wyth ioye and gladnesse shall they be brought, & go into the kynges palace.
Psalms 45:16 In steade of thy fathers thou hast gotten chyldren, whome thou shalt make princes in all landes.
Psalms 45:17 I wyll remembre thy name from one generacion to another: therfore shall the people geue thankes vnto the, worlde withoute ende.

CHAPTER: 46

Psalms 46:1 To the chaunter, a songe of the children of Corah vpon almuth. In oure troubles & aduersitye, we haue founde, that God is oure refuge, oure strength and helpe.
Psalms 46:2 Therfore wyl we not feare though the earth fell, and though the hylles were caryed into the myddest of the sea.
Psalms 46:3 Though the waters of the sea raged and were neuer so troublous, and thoughe the mountaynes shoke at the tempest of the same. Selah.
Psalms 46:4 For there is a floude, which with hys ryuers reioyseth the cytye of God, the holy dwellyng of the moost hyest.
Psalms 46:5 God is in the middest of her, therfore shal she not be remoued: for God helpeth her, & that right early.
Psalms 46:6 The Heythen are madde, the kingdomes make muche a do: but when he sheweth hys voyce, the earth melteth awaye.
Psalms 46:7 The Lord of hoostes is with vs, the God of Iacob is oure defence. Selah.
Psalms 46:8 O come hither, and beholde the woorkes of the LORD, what destruccions he hathe brought vpon the earth.
Psalms 46:9 He hath made warres to cease in all the worlde: he hathe broken the bowe, he hathe knapped the speare in sonder, and brente the charettes in the fyre.
Psalms 46:10 Be styll then and confesse that I am God I will be exalted amonge the Heythen, and I will be exalted vpon earth.
Psalms 46:11 The Lord of hostes is with vs, the God of Iacob is our defence. Selah.

CHAPTER: 47

Psalms 47:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of the chyldren of Corah. O clappe youre handes together (all ye people) O synge vnto God with the voyce of thankesgeuynge.
Psalms 47:2 For the Lord the most hyest is to be feared, and he is the great kyng vpon all the earth.
Psalms 47:3 He shal subdue the people vnder vs, and the Heythen vnder oure fete.
Psalms 47:4 He choseth vs for an heretage, the beutye of Iacob whome he loued. Selah.
Psalms 47:5 God is gone vp with a mery noyse, & the Lord with the sownde of the trompet.
Psalms 47:6 O singe prayses, singe prayses vnto God O singe prayses, singe prayses vnto oure kynge.
Psalms 47:7 For God is kyng of all the earth, O sing prayses vnto hym with vnderstandynge.
Psalms 47:8 God is kyng ouer the Heythen, God sitteth in hys holy seate.
Psalms 47:9 The prynces of the people are gathered together vnto the God of Abraham: for God is farre hyer exalted, then the mighty lordes of the earth.

CHAPTER: 48

Psalms 48:1 A songe of a Psalme of the chyldren of Corah. Greate is the Lorde & hyely too be praysed, in the cytye of oure God, euen vpon hys holy hyl.
Psalms 48:2 The hyll of Syon is lyke a fayre plante, whereof all the lande reioyseth: vpon the north side lyeth the cytye of the great kyng.
Psalms 48:3 God is well knowen in her palaces, that he is the defence of the same.
Psalms 48:4 For lo, kynges are gathered, and gone by together.
Psalms 48:5 They marueled, to se suche thynges: they were astonied, and sodenly cast doune.
Psalms 48:6 Feare came there vpon them, and sorow as vpon a woman in her trauayle.
Psalms 48:7 Thou shalt breake the shyppes of the sea, thorow the East wynde.
Psalms 48:8 Lyke as we haue herde, so se we in the cytye of the Lord of hoostes, in the citie of oure God. God vpholdeth the same for euer. Selah.
Psalms 48:9 We wayte for thy louynge kyndnesse (O God) in the middest of thy temple.
Psalms 48:10 O God, according vnto thy name, so is thy praise vnto the worldes ende: thy right hande is full of righteousnes.
Psalms 48:11 Oh let the mount Sion reioyse, and the daughters of Iuda be glad because of iudgementes.
Psalms 48:12 Walke about Sion, go rounde about her and tell her towres.
Psalms 48:13 Marke well her walles, sette vp her houses. that it may be tolde them that come after.
Psalms 48:14 For this God is our God for euer & euer, and he shall alwaye be oure guyde.

CHAPTER: 49

Psalms 49:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of the chyldren of Corah. O heare thys, all ye people: pondre it wel, all ye that dwel vpon the earth.
Psalms 49:2 Hye & lowe, & rych & poore, one wyth another.
Psalms 49:3 My mouth shall speake of wysdome, and my hert shall muse of vnderstandynge.
Psalms 49:4 I will enclyne myne eare to the parable, and shewe my darke speach vpon the harpe.
Psalms 49:5 Wherfore should I feare the euel dayes, when the wickednesse of my heles compaseth me rounde aboute?
Psalms 49:6 They that put their trust in their good, & boast theym selfes in the multitude of theyr ryches.
Psalms 49:7 No man may deliuer his brother, nor make agrement vnto hym for God.
Psalms 49:8 For it costeth more to redeme their soules so that he must let that alone for euer.
Psalms 49:9 Yea, though he liue longe, and se not the graue.
Psalms 49:10 For it shalbe sene, that such wyse men shal dye and perysh together, as wel as the ignoraunt and folysh, and leue their goodes for other.
Psalms 49:11 Loke what is in their houses, it contynueth still: their dwellyng places endure from one generacion to another, and are called after their owne names vpon the earth.
Psalms 49:12 Neuerthelesse man abydeth not in suche honour, but is compared vnto the brute beastes, and becommeth lyke vnto them.
Psalms 49:13 This waye of theirs is very folyshnesse, and yet their posteritie prayse it wyth theyr mouth. Selah.
Psalms 49:14 They lye in the hell like shepe, death shall gnawe vpon theim, and the righteous shall haue dominacion of theim in the mornynge by tymes: their strength shall consume, and hell shalbe their dwellynge.
Psalms 49:15 But God shall deliuer my soule from the power of hell, when he receyueth me. Selah.
Psalms 49:16 O be not thou afraied, when one is made ryche, & the glory of hys house increased.
Psalms 49:17 For he shall cary nothynge away wyth hym when he dyeth, neither shall his pompe folowe hym.
Psalms 49:18 Whyle he lyueth, he is counted an happy man: and so long as he is in prosperitie, men speake good of hym.
Psalms 49:19 But when he foloweth his fathers generacion, he shall neuer se light any more.
Psalms 49:20 When a man is in honour and hath no vnderstandinge, he is compared vnto the brute beastes, and becommeth lyke vnto them.

CHAPTER: 50

Psalms 50:1 A Psalme of Asaph. The Lord euen the mighty God hath spoken, & called the world from the risyng vp of the sunne vnto the goynge doune of the same.
Psalms 50:2 Out of Sion apeareth the glorious beuty of God.
Psalms 50:3 Oure God shal come, and not kepe silence there goeth before him a consuming fyre, and a mighty tempest round about him.
Psalms 50:4 He shall call the heauens from aboue, and the earth, that he may iudge his people.
Psalms 50:5 Gather my saynctes together vnto me, those that set more by the couenant then by any offering.
Psalms 50:6 And the heauens shal declare his rightuousnes, for God is iudge him selfe. Selah
Psalms 50:7 Heare, O my people: let me speake, let me testify among you, O Israell: I am God, euen thy God.
Psalms 50:8 I reproue the not because of thy sacryfice thy burnteofferynges are allwaye before me.
Psalms 50:9 I wil take no bullockes out of thy house, nor gotes out of thy foldes.
Psalms 50:10 For all the beastes of the felde are myne, and thousandes of cattell vppon the hylles.
Psalms 50:11 I know al the foules vpon the mountaynes, and the wylde beastes of the felde are in my sight.
Psalms 50:12 If I be hongry, I wyll not tell the: for the whole worlde is myne, & all that therein is.
Psalms 50:13 Thynkest thou, that I will eate the fleshe of oxen, or drynke the bloude of goates?
Psalms 50:14 Offre vnto God prayse and thankesgeuynge, and paye thy vowes vnto the most hyest.
Psalms 50:15 And call vpon me in the tyme of trouble, so wyll I heare the, that thou shalte thanke me.
Psalms 50:16 But vnto the vngodly sayeth God? Why doest thou preach my lawes, and takest my couenaunt in thy mouth?
Psalms 50:17 Where as thou hatest to be refourmed, and castest my woordes behynde the?
Psalms 50:18 If thou seist a thefe, thou runnest wyth him, and art partaker with the aduouterers.
Psalms 50:19 Thou lettest thy mouthe speake wickednesse, and thy tonge paynteth disceate.
Psalms 50:20 Thou sittest & speakest agaynste thy brother, yea, & sclaundrest thyne owne mothers sonne.
Psalms 50:21 This thou doest, whyle I holde my tonge and thynkest me to be euen suche one as thy self: but I wyll reproue the, and set my selfe agaynst the.
Psalms 50:22 O considre this, ye that forget God: lest I plucke you awaye, and there be none too delyuer you.
Psalms 50:23 Who so offreth me thankes and prayse, he honoureth me: & this is the way, wherby I wyll shewe hym the sauynge healthe of God.

CHAPTER: 51

Psalms 51:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid, when the prophet Nathan came vnto hym, after he was gone into Bethsabe. Haue mercy vpon me (O God) after thy goodnes, & according vnto thy great mercyes, do awaye myne offences.
Psalms 51:2 Wash me well fro my wickednesse, and clense me fro my synne.
Psalms 51:3 For I knowledge my fautes, & my synne is euer before me.
Psalms 51:4 Agaynst the only, agaynst the haue I sinned, & done euel in thy sight: that thou mightest be iustified in thy saynges, and shouldest ouercome when thou art iudged.
Psalms 51:5 Beholde, I was borne in wickednesse, & in synne hath my mother conceyued me.
Psalms 51:6 But lo, thou hast a pleasure in the trueth, and hast shewed me secrete wisdome.
Psalms 51:7 O purge me with Isope, and I shall be cleane: wash thou me, and I shalbe whyter then snowe.
Psalms 51:8 Oh let me heare of ioye & gladnesse, that the bones which thou hast broken, maye reioyse.
Psalms 51:9 Turne thy face from my synnes, & put oute all my misdedes.
Psalms 51:10 Make me a cleane hert, O God, & renue a right sprete within me.
Psalms 51:11 Cast me not awaye from thy presence, & take not thy holy sprete from me.
Psalms 51:12 O geue me the comforte of thy helpe agayne, and stablish me with thy sprete.
Psalms 51:13 Then shall I teache thy wayes vnto the wicked, that sinners may be conuerted vnto the.
Psalms 51:14 Deliuer me from bloude giltinesse, O God, thou that art the God of my health, that my tonge may prayse thy righteousnesse.
Psalms 51:15 Open my lyppes, O LORD, that my mouth maye shewe thy prayse.
Psalms 51:16 For if thou haddest pleasure in sacrifice, I wolde geue it the: but thou delytest not in burntofferinges.
Psalms 51:17 The sacryfice of God is a troubled spirit a broken and a contrite hert, O God, shalte thou not despyse.
Psalms 51:18 O be fauourable gracyous vnto Syon, that the walles of Ierusalem maye be buylded,
Psalms 51:19 For when shalt thou be pleased wyth the sacrifice of ryghtuousnes, with the burntofferinges and oblations: then shal they laye bullockes vpon thine alter.

CHAPTER: 52

Psalms 52:1 To the chaunter, an exortacyon of Dauid when Doeg the Edomite came to Saul, and shewed hym, sayinge: Dauid is come to the house of Ahimelech. Why boastest thou thy self, thou Tyrraunt, that thou canste do myschiefe? Wher as the goodnesse of God endureth yet dayly.
Psalms 52:2 Thy tonge ymagyneth wyckednesse, and with lyes it cutteth like a sharpe rasoure.
Psalms 52:3 Thou loueste vngratiousnesse more then good, to talke of lyes more then ryghtuousnesse. Selah.
Psalms 52:4 Thou louest to speake al wordes that may do hurte. O thou false tonge.
Psalms 52:5 Therfore shall God cleane destroye the, smyte the in peces, pluke the out of thy dwellynge, and rote the out of the lande of the lyuynge. Selah.
Psalms 52:6 The rightuous shal se this, and feare, and laugh him to scorne,
Psalms 52:7 Lo, this is the man, that toke not God for his strength but trusted vnto the multitud of his riches, & was myghty in his wickednes.
Psalms 52:8 As for me, I am lyke a grene olyue tree in the house of God: my truste is in the tender mercy of God for euer and euer.
Psalms 52:9 I wyll alwaye geue thankes vnto the, for that thou hast done: & wil hope in thy name, for thy sayntes lyke it wel.

CHAPTER: 53

Psalms 53:1 To the chaunter vpon Mahalath, an instruccyon of Dauid. The folysh bodyes saye in their hertes: Tush, there is no God. Corrupte are they & become abhomynable in their wyckednesse: there is not one, that doth good.
Psalms 53:2 God loked downe from heauen vpon the chyldren of men, to se if there were any that would vnderstand, or seke after God.
Psalms 53:3 But they are all gone out of the waye they are al become vnprofitable: ther is none that doth good, no not one.
Psalms 53:4 How can they haue vnderstandynge, that are the worckers of wyckednes, eatynge vp my people as it were breade, and call not vpon God?
Psalms 53:5 They are afrayed, where no feare is: for God breaketh the bones of them that beseige the: thou puttest them to confusion, for God despiseth them.
Psalms 53:6 Oh that the sauynge healthe were geuen vnto Israel out of Sion: Oh that the Lorde woulde delyuer his people out of captiuity. Then shoulde Iacob reioyse, and Israell should be ryght glad.

CHAPTER: 54

Psalms 54:1 To the chaunter in Neginoth, an instruccyon of Dauyd, when the Zephytes came and sayed vnto Saul: Dauid is hydde amongest vs. Helpe me (O God) for thy names sake, and deliuer me in thy strength.
Psalms 54:2 Heare my prayer (O God) considre the wordes of my mouth.
Psalms 54:3 For straungers are rysen vp agaynst me, and the mighty (which haue not God before their eyes) seke after my soule. Selah.
Psalms 54:4 But lo, God is my helper: it is he that vpholdeth my soule.
Psalms 54:5 He shall reward euel vnto myne enemies and in thy trueth shalt thou destroy them.
Psalms 54:6 A fre will offerynge will I geue the, and prayse thy name O Lorde, because it is so comfortable.
Psalms 54:7 For thou hast deliuered me out of all my trouble, so that myne eye seith his desire vpon myne enemyes.

CHAPTER: 55

Psalms 55:1 To the chaunter in Neginoth, an instruccion of Dauid. Heare my prayer, O God, and hyde not thy self fro my petycion.
Psalms 55:2 Take hede vnto me & heare me, how piteously I mourne and complayne.
Psalms 55:3 The enemye cryeth so, and the vngodly commeth on so fast: for they are mynded too do me some mischief, so maliciously are they set agaynst me.
Psalms 55:4 My hert is heuy within me, and the feare of death is fallen vpon me.
Psalms 55:5 Fearfulnesse and tremblynge are come vpon me, and an horrible drede hathe ouerwhelmed me.
Psalms 55:6 And I sayde: O that I had wynges lyke a doue, that I might fle somwhere, and be at rest.
Psalms 55:7 Lo, then wolde I get me awaye farre of, and remayne in the wildernesse. Selah.
Psalms 55:8 I wolde make haste to escape, from the stormy wynde and tempest.
Psalms 55:9 Destroye their tonges (O Lorde) and deuyde them, for I se vnrighteousnes & stryfe in the cytye.
Psalms 55:10 Thys goeth daye and nyght aboute the walles, mischief and vyce are in the middest of it.
Psalms 55:11 Wickednesse is therin, disceate and gyle go not out of her stretes.
Psalms 55:12 If it were myne enemye that reuyled me, I could beare it: or if one that ought me euel wyll dyd threaten me, I wolde hyde my self from hym.
Psalms 55:13 But it is thou my companyon, my gyde & myne owne familier frende.
Psalms 55:14 We had swete and secrete communicacion together in the house of God.
Psalms 55:15 Let death come hastely vppon them, and let them goo doune quyck into hell, for wickednes is amonge theym in their dwellynges.
Psalms 55:16 As for me, I will call vnto God, and the Lord shall helpe me.
Psalms 55:17 In the euenynge, mornyng and at noone daye will I mourne and complayne: and he shall heare my voyce.
Psalms 55:18 It is he that deliuereth my soule in peace, from them that laye wayte for me: for they are many agaynst me.
Psalms 55:19 Yea, euen God that endureth for euer, shall heare me, and bring them doune. Selah. For they will not turne: and why? they feare not God.
Psalms 55:20 Yea, they laye handes vpon such as be at peace with hym, & so they breake hys couenaunt.
Psalms 55:21 Their mouthes are softer then butter, & yet haue they battayll in theyr mynde: theyr wordes are smoother then oyle, and yet be they very swerdes.
Psalms 55:22 O cast thy burthen, or care, vpon the Lord he shall norysh the, and not leaue the ryghteous in vnquyetnesse.
Psalms 55:23 But as for them, thou (O God) shalt cast doune into the pytte of destruccion. The bloudthrustye & disceatfull shall not lyue out half their dayes. Neuerthelesse my trust is in the.

CHAPTER: 56

Psalms 56:1 To the chaunter, vpon the domme stock doue: whiche flyeth ferre of, Michtam of Dauid, when the Phylystynes toke hym in Geth. Be mercifull vnto me (O God) for men will treade me doune: they are dayly fightynge and troublynge me.
Psalms 56:2 Myne enemyes treade me dayly vnder their fete, for they be many that proudly fighte agaynste me.
Psalms 56:3 Neuerthelesse, when I am afrayed, I put my trust in the.
Psalms 56:4 I will comforte my selfe in Gods worde, yea, I will hope in God, & not feare: What can flesh then do vnto me?
Psalms 56:5 They vexe my dayly in my wordes: all that they ymagyne, is to do me euell.
Psalms 56:6 They holde alltogether, & kepe them selues close they marcke my steppes, how they may catch my soule.
Psalms 56:7 But in vayne, for it shall escape them: and why? thou (O God) in thy dyspleasure shalt cast doune suche people.
Psalms 56:8 Thou tellest my flytynges, thou puttest my teares in thy bottel, and numbrest them.
Psalms 56:9 When soeuer I call vpon the, myne enemyes are put to flight: whereby I knowe that thou art my God.
Psalms 56:10 In Goddes worde wyll I reioyse, in the Lordes worde wyll I comforte me.
Psalms 56:11 Yea, in God do I trust, and am not afraied what can man than do vnto me?
Psalms 56:12 Vnto the (O god) wil I paye my vowes, vnto the wyll I geue thankes and prayse.
Psalms 56:13 For thou haste delyuered my soule from death, and my fete frome fallynge, that I may walke before God in the lyght of the lyuyng.

CHAPTER: 57

Psalms 57:1 To the Chaunter destroy not Michtam of Dauid, when he fledde from Saull into the caue. Be mercyfull vnto me, O God, be mercyfull vnto me, for my soule trusteth in the: and vnder the shadow of thy winges shal be my refuge, vntyll wyckednes be ouer past.
Psalms 57:2 I call vnto God the moste hyest, euen the God that shal helpe me vp agayne.
Psalms 57:3 He shal send from heauen, and saue me from the reproue of him that would swalowe my vp. Selah. This shall God sende, for his mercye and faythfulnes sake.
Psalms 57:4 I lye wyth my soule among the cruel lions euen among the chyldren of men, whose teeth are speares and arrowes, and their tonge a sherpe sweard.
Psalms 57:5 Set vp thy selfe, O God, aboue the heauens, and thy glory aboue al the earthe.
Psalms 57:6 They haue layed a net for my fete, and pressed doune my soule: they haue dygged a pytte before me, and are fallen into it them selues. Selah.
Psalms 57:7 My hert is redy, O God, my herte is ready to synge and geue prayse.
Psalms 57:8 Awake, O my glorye, awake lute and harpe, I my selfe wil awake ryght early.
Psalms 57:9 I wil geue thanckes vnto the, O Lorde, amonge the people, I wyll synge prayses vnto the among the Heithen.
Psalms 57:10 For the greatnes of thy mercye reacheth vnto the heauens, and thy faythfulnes vnto the cloudes.
Psalms 57:11 Set vp thy selfe, O God, aboue the heauens, and thi glory aboue al the earth.

CHAPTER: 58

Psalms 58:1 To the chaunter Destroye not Michtam of Dauid. If youre myndes be vpon righteousnes in deede, then iudge the thyng that is ryght, O ye sonnes of men,
Psalms 58:2 But ye ymagyn mischefe in youre hertes and youre handes deale with wickednes.
Psalms 58:3 The vngodly are froward, euen from their mothers wombe: as soone as they be borne, they go a stray and speake lyes.
Psalms 58:4 They are as furyous as the serpent, euen lyke the deaf Ader that stoppeth her eares.
Psalms 58:5 That she shoulde not heare the voyce of the charmer, charme he neuer so wisely.
Psalms 58:6 Breake their teeth (O god) in their mouthes, smite the chaft bones of the lions whelpes in sonder, O Lord.
Psalms 58:7 That they maye fall awaye, lyke water that runneth a pace: and that when they shote their arrowes, they maye be broken.
Psalms 58:8 Let them consume away lyke a snaile, and lyke the vntymely frute of a woman, and let them not se the sunne.
Psalms 58:9 Or euer your thorns be sharpe, the wrath shall take them awaye quicke, like a stormy wynde.
Psalms 58:10 The ryghteous shal reioyse when he seith the vengeaunce, and shall washe hys fete in the bloud of the vngodly.
Psalms 58:11 So that men shall saye, verelye there is a rewarde for the righteous: doutles, there is a God that iudgeth the earth.

CHAPTER: 59

Psalms 59:1 To the chaunter destroye not Michtam of Dauid, when Saull sende to watche the house, to thintent to kyll hym. Delyuer me fro myne enemyes (O my God) and defende me from them that rise vp against me.
Psalms 59:2 O delyuer me from the wycked doers, and saue me from the bloudthursty men.
Psalms 59:3 For lo, they lye wayting for my soule: the mighty men are gathered together agaynste me, withoute any offence or faulte of me, O Lorde.
Psalms 59:4 They runne, & prepare them selfes, without my faute: Arise, come thou helpe me, and beholde.
Psalms 59:5 Stande vp O Lord God of hostes, thou God of Israel to viset all Heythen: be not mercifull vnto theym that offende of malicious wyckednesse. Selah.
Psalms 59:6 Let them go to and fro, and runne aboute the cytye, houlynge lyke dogges.
Psalms 59:7 Beholde, they speake (agaynste me) wyth their mouth, swerdes are vnder their lippes for who reproueth them?
Psalms 59:8 But thou (O Lorde) shalte haue theim in derision, thou shalte laugh all Heythen too scorne.
Psalms 59:9 My strength do I ascrybe vnto the, for thou (O God) art my defender.
Psalms 59:10 God sheweth me his goodnes plenteously, God letteth me se my desyre vppon myne enemyes.
Psalms 59:11 Slaye them not, leste my people forget it: but scatre them abroade with thy power, & put them doune, O Lord my defence.
Psalms 59:12 For the synne of their mouth, for the wordes of their lyppes, & because of their pryde, let them be taken: and why? their preachyng is of cursing and lyes.
Psalms 59:13 Consume them in thy wrath, consume them that they maye perishe, and knowe that it is God, whyche ruleth in Iacob and in all the worlde. Selah.
Psalms 59:14 Set them go to and fro, and runne aboute the cytye, houlyng lyke dogges.
Psalms 59:15 Let them runne here and there for meate, and grudge when they haue not ynough.
Psalms 59:16 As for me, I will synge of thy power, and prayse thy mercy by tymes in the mornyng: for thou art my defence & refuge in the tyme of my trouble.
Psalms 59:17 Vnto the (O my strengthe) wyll I singe, for thou (O God) art my defence, & my mercifull God.

CHAPTER: 60

Psalms 60:1 To the chaunter, vpon the rose of wytnesse Michtam of Dauid, for too teache when he fought agaynst Syria of Mesopotania, & Syria of Zoba: and when Ioab turned backe, and slue .xij. thousand Edomytes. in the valley of Salt. O God, thou that hast cast vs out and scatered vs abroade, thou that hast bene so sore displeased at vs, comforte vs agayne.
Psalms 60:2 Thou that hast remoued the lande & deuided it, heale the sores therof, for it shaketh.
Psalms 60:3 Thou hast shewed thy people heuy thinges, thou hast geuen vs a drynke of wyne, that we slombre with all.
Psalms 60:4 Yet hast thou geuen a token for suche as feare the, that they maye caste it vp in the trueth. Selah.
Psalms 60:5 That thy beloued myghte be delyuered, healpe them wyt thy ryghthande, and heare me.
Psalms 60:6 God hath spoken in his Sanctuary (which thing reioyseth me) I wyll deuyde Sichem, and meate aut the valley of Suchoth.
Psalms 60:7 Galaad is myne, Manasses is myne, Ephraim is the strength of myne head, Iuda is my Captayne.
Psalms 60:8 Moab is my washpotte, ouer Edom will I stretche oute my shoue, Phylystea shalbe glad of me.
Psalms 60:9 Who will leade me into the strong cytie? Who will bryng me into Edom?
Psalms 60:10 Shalt not thou do it O God, thou that hast cast out: thou God, that wenteste not out with our hostes?
Psalms 60:11 O be thou our helpe in trouble, for vayne is the helpe of man.
Psalms 60:12 Thorow God we shal do great actes, for it is he that shall treade downe oure enemies

CHAPTER: 61

Psalms 61:1 To the chaunter vpon Neginoth, of Dauid Heare my crying (O god) geue hede vnto my prayer.
Psalms 61:2 From the endes of the earth will I call vnto the, when my herte is in trouble:
Psalms 61:3 Oh sette me vp vpon an hye rocke. For thou art my hope, a strong tower for me agaynst the enemye.
Psalms 61:4 I wyll dwell in thy tabernacle for euer, that I maye be safe vnder the couerynge of thy wynges. Selah.
Psalms 61:5 For thou, O Lord, hast harde my desyres, thou hast geuen an heretage vnto those that feare thy name.
Psalms 61:6 Thou shalte graunte the Kynge a longe lyfe, that his yeares may endure thorow out all generacyons.
Psalms 61:7 That he maye dwel before God for euer: Oh let thy louynge mercy and faythfulnes preserue hym.
Psalms 61:8 So wyl I al away syng prayses vnto thy name, that I may dayly perfourme my vowes.

CHAPTER: 62

Psalms 62:1 To the chaunter, for by Iduthun a Psalme of Dauyd. My soule wayteth onely vpon God, for of hym commeth my helpe.
Psalms 62:2 He only is my strength, my saluation, my defence, so that I shal not greatly fall.
Psalms 62:3 How longe wyll ye ymagyn myschiefe agaynste euerye man? ye shalbe slayne all the sorte of you: yea as a tottrynge wall shall ye be, and lyke a broken hedge.
Psalms 62:4 Their deuyce is only how to put hym out, their delite is in lyes: they geue good wordes wyth their mouth, but curse wyth the herte. Selah.
Psalms 62:5 Neuerthelesse, my soule abideth only vpon God, for he is my God.
Psalms 62:6 He only is my strength my saluacion, and my defence: so that I shall not fal.
Psalms 62:7 In God is my helth, my glory, my might, and in God is my trust.
Psalms 62:8 O put your trust in him alway (ye people) poure oute youre hertes before hym, for God is our hope. Selah.
Psalms 62:9 As for men, they are but vayne, men are dysceatfull: vpon the weyghtes they are all together lyghter than vanitye it selfe.
Psalms 62:10 O trust not in wronge and robbery, geue not youre selues vnto vanitye: if ryches encrease, set not your herte vpon them.
Psalms 62:11 God spake once a worde, twyse haue I hearde the same: that power belongeth vnto God
Psalms 62:12 That thou Lorde arte mercyfull, and that thou rewardeste euerye man accordynge to his worckes.

CHAPTER: 63

Psalms 63:1 A Psalme of Dauid, when he was in the wildernes of Iuda. O God, thou art my God: earlye wyll I seke the. My soule thrusteth for the, my flesh longeth after the in a baren and drye lande wher no water is.
Psalms 63:2 Thus do I loke for the in thy Sanctuary, that I myght beholde thy power and glorye,
Psalms 63:3 For thy louynge kyndnesse is bettrr then lyfe, my lyppes shall prayse the.
Psalms 63:4 As longe as I lyue wyll I magnyfye the and lyft vp my handes in thy name.
Psalms 63:5 My soule is satisfied euen as it were with mary and fatnesse, when my mouth prayseth the with ioyful lyps.
Psalms 63:6 In my bedde wyll I remember the, and when I wake my talkynge shalbe of the.
Psalms 63:7 For thou hast bene my helper, and vnder the shadow of thy wynges wyl I reioyse.
Psalms 63:8 My soule hangeth vpon the, thy ryghte hande vpholdeth me.
Psalms 63:9 They seke after my soule, but in vayne, for they shall go vnder the earth.
Psalms 63:10 They shall fall into the swerd, and be a porcyon for foxes.
Psalms 63:11 But the Kynge shall reioyse in God: all they that sweare by him, shalbe commended for the mouth of lyers shalbe stopped.

CHAPTER: 64

Psalms 64:1 To the chaunter a Psalme of Dauid. Heare my voice, O God, in my complaynte, preserue my lyfe from feare of the enemye.
Psalms 64:2 Hide me from the gathering together of the frowarde, from the heape of wycked doers.
Psalms 64:3 Which whet their tonges lyke a sweard, and shote wyth their veneymous words like as with arowes.
Psalms 64:4 That they maye preuely hurt the innocent sodenly to hyt him wythout any feare.
Psalms 64:5 They haue deuysed myschefe, and communed amonge them selues, how they may laye snares: tush (saye they) who shall se them?
Psalms 64:6 They ymagyn wyckednes, and kepe it secrete amonge them selues, euerye man in the depe of his herte.
Psalms 64:7 But God shal sodenly shote wyth an arow that they shalbe wounded.
Psalms 64:8 Yea their owne tonges shall make them fall, in somuch that who so seyth them, shall laugh them to scorne.
Psalms 64:9 And all men that se it shal saye: thys hath God done, for they shall perceyue that it is hys worcke.
Psalms 64:10 The righteous shal reioyse in the Lorde, and put his trust in him: and all they that are true of hert, shalbe glad therof.

CHAPTER: 65

Psalms 65:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme and song of Dauid. Thou, O God art, praised in Syon, and vnto the is the vow perfourmed.
Psalms 65:2 Thou hearest the praier, therfore commeth all fleshe vnto the.
Psalms 65:3 Oure misededes preuaile agayust vs, Oh be thou mercyfull vnto our synnes.
Psalms 65:4 Blessed is the man whom thou chosest and receauest vnto the, that he may dwell in thy courtes: he shalbe satisfied wyth the pleasures of thy house, euen of thy holy temple.
Psalms 65:5 Heare vs, according vnto thy wonderfull rightuousnesse, O God oure saluation: thou that art the hope of all the endes of the earth, and of the broade sea.
Psalms 65:6 Which in his strength setteth fast the mountaynes, and is gyrded aboute wyth power.
Psalms 65:7 Which stilleth the ragynge of the sea, the roarynge of his waues, and the woodnes of the people.
Psalms 65:8 They that dwell in the vttermoste partes are afrayed at thy tokens, thou makest both the mornyng and euenyng starres to prayse the.
Psalms 65:9 Thou visitest the earth, thou waterest it. and makest it very plenteous. The riuer of god is ful of waters, thou preparest man hys corne, and thus thou prouydeste for the earth.
Psalms 65:10 Thou waters, her forowes, thou breakest the harde clottes thereof, thou makest it softe with the droppes of rayne, and blessest the increase of it.
Psalms 65:11 Thou crownest the yeare wyth thy good and thy fotsteppes droppe fatnesse.
Psalms 65:12 The dwellinges of the wildernes are fat also, that they droppe wyth all: and the lytle hylles are pleasaunt on euerye syde.
Psalms 65:13 The foldes are full of shepe, the valleyes stande so thicke with corne that they laughe and synge.

CHAPTER: 66

Psalms 66:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauyd. O be ioyfull in God, all ye landes,
Psalms 66:2 synge prayses vnto the honoure of his name, make hys prayse to be gloryous.
Psalms 66:3 Saye vnto God: O howe wonderful are thy worckes? thorowe the greatenesse of thy power shall thine enemyes be confounded.
Psalms 66:4 O that all the worlde woulde worshippe the, synge of the, and prayse thy name. Selah
Psalms 66:5 O come hyther and beholde the worckes of God, which is so wonderful in his doinges amonge the chyldren of men.
Psalms 66:6 He turned the sea into drye lande, so that they wente thorow the water on fote: therefore wyll we reioyse in him.
Psalms 66:7 He ruleth wyth hys power for euer, hys eyes beholde the people: the rennagates shall not be able to exalte them selues. Selah.
Psalms 66:8 O magnyfye oure God, ye people, make the voyce of his prayse to be hearde.
Psalms 66:9 Whych holdeth oure soule in life, and suffreth not our fete to slyppe.
Psalms 66:10 For thou, O God, hast proued vs, thou hast tryed vs lyke as syluer is tryed.
Psalms 66:11 Thou hast broughht vs into captyuyty, & layed trouble vpon oure loynes.
Psalms 66:12 Thou haste suffred men to ryde ouer oure heades, we went thorow fyre and water, but thou hast broughte vs out, and refreshed vs.
Psalms 66:13 Therfore wyll I go into thy house wyth brentoffrynges, to paye the my vowes,
Psalms 66:14 which I promysed with my lippes, and spake wyth my mouth, when I was in trouble.
Psalms 66:15 I wyll offer vnto the fat brentsacrifyces wyth the smoke of rammes, I wyl offer bullockes and goates. Selah.
Psalms 66:16 O come hither, and herken, all ye that feare God, I wyll tell you, what he hath done for my soule.
Psalms 66:17 I called vnto hym wyth my mouthe, and gaue hym prayses wyth my toung.
Psalms 66:18 If I enclyne vnto wyckednesse wyth my herte, the Lorde wyll not heare me.
Psalms 66:19 Therfore God hath herde me, and consydred the voyce of my prayer.
Psalms 66:20 Praysed be God, which hath not cast out my prayer, ner turned his mercy fro me.

CHAPTER: 67

Psalms 67:1 To the chaunter, in Neginoth, a Psalm and songe. God be mercyfull vnto vs, blesse vs, and shewe the lyght of hys countenaunce vpon vs. Selah
Psalms 67:2 That we maye knowe thy waye vpon earth, thy sauynge helth among al Heathen.
Psalms 67:3 Let the people prayse the, O God, yea let all people prayse the.
Psalms 67:4 O let the people reioyse and be glad, that thou iudgest the folke ryghtuouslye, and gouernest the nacions vpon earth.
Psalms 67:5 Let the people prayse the, O God, let al people prayse the.
Psalms 67:6 God, euen oure owne God, geue vs hys blessynge, that the earth maye brynge forth her encrease.
Psalms 67:7 God blesse vs, and let all the endes of the world feare hym.

CHAPTER: 68

Psalms 68:1 To the chaunter, a Psalm and song. of Dauid. Let God aryse, so shall hys enemyes be scattered, and they that hate hym, shall flee before hym.
Psalms 68:2 Lyke as the smoke vanysheth, so shalt thou dryue them away: and lyke as waxe melteth at the fyre so shal the vngodly perysh at the presence of God.
Psalms 68:3 But the ryghtuous shalbe glad and reioyce before God, they shalbe mery and ioyfull.
Psalms 68:4 Oh synge vnto God, synge prayses vnto his name: magnify hym that rydeth aboute the heauens (whose name is the Lord) & reioyce before hym.
Psalms 68:5 He is a father of the fatherlesse, he is a defender of widdowes: euen God in his holy habytacyon.
Psalms 68:6 He is the God that maketh men to be of one mynde in a house, and bryngeth the presoners out of captyuity in due season, but let the rennagates contynue in scarcenesse.
Psalms 68:7 O God, when thou wenteste forth before the people, when thou wentest thorowe the wyldernesse. Selah.
Psalms 68:8 The earth shoke, and the heauens dropped at the presence of God in Sinai, at the presence of God, whyche is the God of Israell.
Psalms 68:9 Thou O God sendest a gracyous raine vpon thyne enherytaunce, and refreshest it when it is dry.
Psalms 68:10 That thy beastes may dwel therin, which thou of thy goodnesse haste prepared for the poore.
Psalms 68:11 The Lorde shall geue the worde, wyth great hostes of Euangelystes.
Psalms 68:12 Kynges wyth their armyes shall fle, and they of the housholde shall deuyde the spoile
Psalms 68:13 If so be that ye lye amonge the pales, the doues fethers shalbe couered with syluer, & her wynges of the colour of golde.
Psalms 68:14 When the Almyghty setteth Kynges vpon the earth, it shalbe cleare euen in the darkne
Psalms 68:15 The hyll of Basan is Gods hyl, the hil of Basan is a plenteous hyl.
Psalms 68:16 Why hoppe ye so, ye greate hylles? It pleaseth God to dwell vpon thys hyll yea the Lorde wyll abide in it for euer.
Psalms 68:17 The charettes of God are many .M. tymes thousande, the Lorde is among them in the holy Sinai.
Psalms 68:18 Thou art gone vp an hye, thou hast ledde captiuitie captiue, and receyued gyftes for men: Yea, euen for thyne enemyes, that they might dwell with the Lord God.
Psalms 68:19 Praysed be the Lord dayly, euen the God whiche helpeth vs, & poureth hys benefites vpon vs. Selah.
Psalms 68:20 The God that is our sauiour, euen God the Lord by whome we escape death.
Psalms 68:21 The God that smyteth the enemies vpon the heades and vpon the heary scalpes: such as go on styll in their wickednes.
Psalms 68:22 The Lorde hath sayde: some wil I bryng agayne from Basan, some wyll I brynge agayne from the depe of the sea.
Psalms 68:23 That thy fote may be dipped in the bloud of thyne enemyes, and that thy dogges may licke it vp.
Psalms 68:24 It is well sene, O God, how thou goest, howe thou my God and kynge goest in the Sanctuary.
Psalms 68:25 The singers go before, and then the mynstrels amonge the maydens with the tymbrels.
Psalms 68:26 O geue thankes vnto God the Lorde in the congregacion, for the welles of Israel.
Psalms 68:27 There lytle Beniamin, the princes of Iuda, the princes of Zabulon, & the princes of Nephthaly beare rule amonge them.
Psalms 68:28 Thy God hath commytted strength vnto the, stablyshe the thynge, O God, that thou hast wrought in vs.
Psalms 68:29 For thy temples sake at Hierusalem shall kynges brynge presentes vnto the.
Psalms 68:30 Reproue the beastes amonge the reedes, the heape of bulles with the calues: those that dryue for money. Oh scatre the people that delite in battaile.
Psalms 68:31 The princes shall come out of Egipt, the Morians land shall stretch out her handes vnto God.
Psalms 68:32 Synge vnto God, O ye kyngedomes of the earth: O syng prayses vnto the Lorde. Selah.
Psalms 68:33 Which sitteth in the heauens ouer all from the beginnynge: Lo, he shall sende oute hys voyce, yea, and that a mighty voyce.
Psalms 68:34 Ascrybe ye the power vnto God, his glory is in Israel, and his might in the cloudes.
Psalms 68:35 God is wonderfull in his Sanctuary, he is the God of Israel, he will geue strength and power vnto hys people. Blessed be God.

CHAPTER: 69

Psalms 69:1 To the chaunter vpon Sosanim of Dauid. Helpe me, O god, for the waters are come in, euen vnto my soule.
Psalms 69:2 I stycke fast in the depe myre where no ground is: I am come into depe waters, and the floudes wyll drowne me.
Psalms 69:3 I am weery of crying, my throte is drye, my sight fayleth me, for waytinge so longe, vpon my God.
Psalms 69:4 They that hate me without a cause, are mo then the heeres of my head: they that are myne enemyes & wolde destroye me giltlesse are mighty: I am fayne to paye the thinges that I neuer toke.
Psalms 69:5 God thou knowest my simplenesse, and my faultes are not hyd from the.
Psalms 69:6 Let not them that trust in the, O Lord God of hoostes, be ashamed for my cause: let not those that seke the, be confounded thorowe me, O God of Israel.
Psalms 69:7 And why? for thy sake do I suffre reprofe, shame couereth my face.
Psalms 69:8 I am become a straunger vnto my brethren, and an aleaunt vnto my mothers chyldren.
Psalms 69:9 For the zele of thyne house hath euen eaten me, and the rebukes of them that rebuked the, is fallen vpon me.
Psalms 69:10 I wepte and chastened my selfe with fastyng, and that was turned to my reprofe.
Psalms 69:11 I put on a sacke cloth, and therefore they iested vpon me.
Psalms 69:12 They that sate in the gate, spake agaynste me, & the dronkardes made songes vpon me.
Psalms 69:13 But Lorde I made my prayer vnto the in an acceptable tyme. Heare me, O God, with thy great mercy and sure helpe.
Psalms 69:14 Take me out of the myre, that I sinke not Oh let me be deliuered from them that hate me, and out of the depe waters.
Psalms 69:15 Lest the water floud drowne me, that the depe swalowe me not vp, and that the pytte shut not her mouth vpon me.
Psalms 69:16 Heare me, O Lord, for thy louyng kyndnesse is comfortable: turne the vnto me according vnto thy great mercy.
Psalms 69:17 Hyde not thy face from thy seruaunt, for I am in trouble: O haste the to helpe me.
Psalms 69:18 Drawe nye vnto my soule, & saue it: Oh deliuer me because of myne enemyes.
Psalms 69:19 Thou knowest my reprofe, my shame & my dishonoure: myne aduersaries are all in thy sight.
Psalms 69:20 The rebuke breaketh my herte, and maketh me heuy: I loke for some to haue pytye vpon me, but ther is no man: and for some to comforte me, but I fynde none.
Psalms 69:21 They gaue me gall to eate, & when I was thurstye, they gaue me vinegar to dryncke.
Psalms 69:22 Let their table be made a snare to take them selues with all, an occasyon to fall and a reward vnto them.
Psalms 69:23 Let their eyes be blinded, that they se not: and euer bow downe their backes.
Psalms 69:24 Power out thyne indignacyon vpon them, and let thy wrathfull dyspleasure take holde of them.
Psalms 69:25 Let theyr habytacyon be voyd, and no man to dwel in ther tentes.
Psalms 69:26 For they persecute hym whom thou hast smytten, and besyde thy woundes they haue geuen him mo.
Psalms 69:27 Let them fall from one wyckednesse to another, and not come into thy ryghtuousnesse.
Psalms 69:28 Let them be wyped out of the boke of the lyuynge, and not be wrytten amonge the ryghtuous.
Psalms 69:29 As for me, I am poore and in heuines, let thy helpe defend me O God.
Psalms 69:30 That I may praise the name of God, with a songe and magnyfye it wyth thanckesgeuynge.
Psalms 69:31 Thys shall please the Lord better then a bullocke, that hath hornes and hoofes.
Psalms 69:32 O consyder this and be glad (ye that be in aduersytye) seke after God, and youre soule shall lyue.
Psalms 69:33 For the Lorde heareth the poore, and despyseth not hys priesoners.
Psalms 69:34 Let heauen and earth praise him, the sea & all that moueth ther in.
Psalms 69:35 For God wyll saue Syon, and buyld the cityes of Iuda, that men may dwel ther, and haue them in possession.
Psalms 69:36 The sede of his seruauntes shall inherette it, and they that loue hys name shall dwell therein.

CHAPTER: 70

Psalms 70:1 The chaunter, of Dauid to bryng to remembraunce. Hast the, O God, to deliuer me, and to helpe me, O Lord.
Psalms 70:2 Let them be shamed and confounded that seke after my soule let them be turned backward and put to confusyon, that wysh my euyl.
Psalms 70:3 Let them sone be broughte to shame, that crye ouer me, there there.
Psalms 70:4 But let all those that seke the, be ioyfull & gladde in the: and let al suche as delyte in thy sauynge health, saye alwaye: the Lorde be praysed.
Psalms 70:5 As for me, I am poore and in misery, hast the God for to helpe me. Thou art my helpe, my redemer and my God: Oh make no long tarying.

CHAPTER: 71

Psalms 71:1 In the, O Lord, is my trust, let me neuer be put to confusyon,
Psalms 71:2 but rydde me, and delyuer me thorow thy ryghtuousnesse: enclyne thyne eare vnto me, and helpe me.
Psalms 71:3 Be thou my strong hold (wher vnto I may all waye fle) thou that hast promised to helpe me: for thou art my house of defence and my castell.
Psalms 71:4 Deliuer me, O my God, out of the hand of the vngodly, oute of the hande of the vnryghtuous and cruell man.
Psalms 71:5 For thou, O Lord God, art the thing that I long for, thou art my hope euen fro my youth.
Psalms 71:6 I haue leaned vpon the euer sence I was borne, thou art he that toke me out of my mothers wombe therfore is my prayse all waye of the.
Psalms 71:7 I am become a wonder vnto the multytude, but my sure trust is in the.
Psalms 71:8 Oh let my mouth be filled with thy praise and honour all the day long.
Psalms 71:9 Cast me not away in myne old age forsake me not when my strength fayleth me.
Psalms 71:10 For myne enemyes speake agaynst me & they that laye wayte for my soule, take their councell together,
Psalms 71:11 sayinge: God hath forsaken hym, persecute hym, take hym, for there is none to helpe hym.
Psalms 71:12 Go not farre fro me, O God: my God, haste the to helpe me.
Psalms 71:13 Let them be confounded and perysh, that are agaynste my soule: let theym be couered with shame and dishonoure, that seke too do me euell.
Psalms 71:14 As for me, I wil paciently abyde alwaye, and will euer encrease thy prayse.
Psalms 71:15 My mouth shall speake of thy righteousnesse and sauyng health all the day longe, for I knowe no ende therof.
Psalms 71:16 Let me go in (O Lorde God) and I wyll make mencion of thy power and righteousnesse onely.
Psalms 71:17 Thou, O God, haste learned me fro my youth vp vntyll now, therfore wyll I tell of thy wonderous workes.
Psalms 71:18 Forsake me not, O GOD, in myne olde age, when I am gray headed: vntyll I haue shewed thyne arme vnto chylders chyldren, and thy power to all them that are yet for to come.
Psalms 71:19 Thy righteousnes, O God, is very hye, thou that doest great thinges: O God, who is lyke vnto the?
Psalms 71:20 O what great troubles and aduersityes hast thou shewed me? and yet dyddest thou turne and refreshe me: yea, & broughtest me from the depe of the earth agayn.
Psalms 71:21 Thou hast brought me to great honoure, and comforted me on euery syde.
Psalms 71:22 Therfore wil I prayse the and thy faythfulnesse, O God, playing vpon the lute, vnto the will I singe vpon the harpe, O thou holy one of Israell.
Psalms 71:23 My lippes wolde fayne singe prayses vnto the: and so wolde my soule, whom thou hast deliuered.
Psalms 71:24 My tongue talketh of thy righteousnesse all the daye longe, for they are confounded and brought vnto shame, that soughte to do me euell.

CHAPTER: 72

Psalms 72:1 Of Salomon. Geue the king thy iudgement, O God, and thy righteousnesse vnto the kynges sonne.
Psalms 72:2 That he maye gouerne thy people accordynge vnto ryght and defende thy poore.
Psalms 72:3 That the mountaynes maye brynge peace, and the litle hylles righteousnesse vnto the people.
Psalms 72:4 He shall kepe the symple folke by theyr ryght, defende the chyldren of the poore, and punish the wronge doer.
Psalms 72:5 Thou shalt be feared as longe as the sunne and moone endureth, from one generacyon to another.
Psalms 72:6 He shall come doune lyke the rayne into a fleise of wolle, & like the droppes that water the earth.
Psalms 72:7 In hys tyme shall righteousnesse florysh, yea, and aboundaunce of peace, so longe as the moone endureth.
Psalms 72:8 Hys dominion shalbe from the one sea to the other, & from the floud vnto the worldes ende.
Psalms 72:9 They that dwell in the wyldernes shall knele before him, & his enemyes shal licke the dust.
Psalms 72:10 The kynges of the sea & of the Iles shall bringe presentes, the kynges of Araby and Saba shall offre gyftes.
Psalms 72:11 All kynges shall worshyppe hym, and all Heathen shall do hym seruyce.
Psalms 72:12 For he shall delyuer the poore when he cryeth, and the neady that hath no helpe.
Psalms 72:13 He shalbe fauorable to the simple & poore, he shall preserue the soules of suche as be in aduersitie.
Psalms 72:14 He shall delyuer their soules from extorcyon and wrong, and deere shall their bloud be in hys sight.
Psalms 72:15 He shall lyue, and vnto hym shalbe geuen of the golde of Arabia: Prayer shalbe made euer vnto hym, and daylye shall he be praysed.
Psalms 72:16 There shalbe an heape of corne in the earth hye vpon the hilles, his frute shal shake like Libanus, and shalbe grene in the cytye, lyke grasse vpon the earth.
Psalms 72:17 Hys name shal endure for euer, his name shall remayne vnder the sunne amonge the posterites, which shalbe blessed thorow him and all the Heathen shall prayse hym.
Psalms 72:18 Blessed be the Lorde God, euen the God of Israell, whiche onely doeth wonderous thinges.
Psalms 72:19 And blessed be the name of his maiesty for euer, and al landes be fulfilled with his glory. Amen, Amen.
Psalms 72:20 Here ende the prayers of Dauid the sonne of Iesse.

CHAPTER: 73

Psalms 73:1 A Psalme of Asaph. O how louyng is God vnto Israel, to suche as are of a cleane hert?
Psalms 73:2 Neuerthelesse my fete were almost gone, my treadynges had well nye slypte.
Psalms 73:3 And why? I was greued at the wicked, to se the vngodly in suche prosperitie.
Psalms 73:4 For they are in no parell of deathe, but stande fast lyke a palace.
Psalms 73:5 They come in no misfortune lyke other folke, neither are they plaged like other men.
Psalms 73:6 And this is the cause that they be so puft vp in pryde, and ouerwhelmed with crueltie & vnrighteousnesse.
Psalms 73:7 Their eyes swell for fatnesse, they do euen what they lyst.
Psalms 73:8 Corrupte are they, and speake blasphemyes maliciouslye, proude and presumpteous are their wordes.
Psalms 73:9 They stretche forth their mouthe vnto the heauen, and their tongue goeth thorow the worlde.
Psalms 73:10 Therfore fall the people vnto them, and thereout sucke they no small auauntage.
Psalms 73:11 Tush (saye they) howe shoulde God perceiue it? is there knowlege in the most hyest?
Psalms 73:12 Lo, these are the vngodly, these prospere in the worlde, these haue ryches in possession.
Psalms 73:13 Shoulde I then clense my herte in vayne (thougt I) and washe my handes in innocency?
Psalms 73:14 Wherefore shoulde I be then punyshed dayly, & be chastened euery mornynge?
Psalms 73:15 Yea, I had almoost also sayd euen as they: but lo, then shoulde I haue condemned the generacion of thy chyldren.
Psalms 73:16 Then thought I, to vnderstande this, but it was to harde for me.
Psalms 73:17 Vntyll I wente into the Sanctuary of God, and considred the ende of these men.
Psalms 73:18 Namely, how thou hast set them in a slippery place, that thou mayst cast them doune headlinges and destroye them.
Psalms 73:19 O how sodenly do they consume, perysh, and come to a fearful ende?
Psalms 73:20 Yea, euen like as a dreame when one awaketh, so makest thou their ymage too vanysh out of the cytye.
Psalms 73:21 Thus my hert was greued, and it wente euen thorow my reynes.
Psalms 73:22 So folysh was I and ignoraunte, and as it were a beast before the.
Psalms 73:23 Neuerthelesse I am al waye by the, thou holdest me by my right hande.
Psalms 73:24 Thou leadest me with thy counsayll, and afterwarde receyuest me vnto glory.
Psalms 73:25 O what is there prepared for me in heauen? there is nothinge vpon earthe, that I desyre in comparyson of the.
Psalms 73:26 My fleash & my hert fayleth, but God is the strength of my herte, and my porcion for euer.
Psalms 73:27 For lo, they that forsake the shall perysh: thou destroyest all them that committe fornicacion agaynst the.
Psalms 73:28 But it is good for me, to holde me fast by God, to put my trust in the Lorde God, and to speake of all thy workes.

CHAPTER: 74

Psalms 74:1 An instruccion of Asaph. O God, wherfore doest thou cast vs so cleane away? why is thy wrath so hoote agaynste the shepe of thy pasture?
Psalms 74:2 O thynke vpon thy congregacion, whome thou hast purchased from the beginnyng: the stafe of thyne enheritaunce, whome thou hast redemed, euen this hyll of Sion wherein thou dwellest.
Psalms 74:3 Treade vpon them with thy fete, and cast them doune to the grounde, for the enemye hath destroyed altogether in the Sanctuary.
Psalms 74:4 Thyne aduersaries roare in thy houses, & set vp their banners for tokens.
Psalms 74:5 Men may se the axes glyster aboue, lyke as those that hewe in the wood.
Psalms 74:6 They cut doune all the syelyng worke of the Sanctuary with bylles and axes.
Psalms 74:7 They haue set fyre vpon the Sanctuary, they haue defyled the dwellyng place of thy name, euen vnto the grounde.
Psalms 74:8 Yea, they say in their hertes: let vs spoyle them altogether, thus haue they brent vp all the houses of God in the lande.
Psalms 74:9 We se oure tokens no more, there is not one Prophet more, no not one that vnderstandeth any more.
Psalms 74:10 O God, how long shall the aduersary do this dishonoure? how longe shall the enemy blaspheme thy name? for euer?
Psalms 74:11 Why withdrawest thou thine hand? why pluckest thou not thy right hande out of thy bosome, to consume thyne enemyes?
Psalms 74:12 But God is my Kynge of olde, the helpe that is done vpon earth, he doth it hym selfe.
Psalms 74:13 Thou deuidest the sea thorow thy power thou breakest the heades of the dragons in the waters.
Psalms 74:14 Thou smitest the heades of Leuiathan in peces, and geuest him to be meate for people in the wyldernes.
Psalms 74:15 Thou diggest vp welles and brokes, thou dryest vp myghty waters.
Psalms 74:16 The daye is thyne, and the nyght is thine thou hast prepared the lightes and the sunne.
Psalms 74:17 Thou hast set all the borders of the earth, thou hast made both sommer and winter.
Psalms 74:18 Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy rebuketh, and howe the folyshe people blaspheme thy name.
Psalms 74:19 O delyuer not the soule of thy turtle doue vnto the beastes, and forget not the congregacyon of the poore for euer.
Psalms 74:20 Loke vpon the couenaunte, for the darcke houses of the earth are full of wyckednesse.
Psalms 74:21 O let not the symple go awaye ashamed: for the poore and nedy geue prayses vnto thy name.
Psalms 74:22 Aryse, O God, and mayntaine thine own cause, remembre howe the folyshe man blasphemeth the daylye.
Psalms 74:23 Forget not the voyce of thyne enemyes, for the presumptyon of them that hate the, increaseth euer more and more

CHAPTER: 75

Psalms 75:1 To the chaunter destroye not, a Psalme and song of Asaph. Vnto the, O God, wil we geue thankes, yea vnto the wyll we geue thanckes, and seynge thy name is so ny, we wil tel of thy wonderous worckes.
Psalms 75:2 When I maye get a conuenyent tyme, I shall iudge accordyng vnto ryght.
Psalms 75:3 The earh is weake and al that is therein, but I beare vp her pyllers.
Psalms 75:4 I sayde vnto the madde people, deale not so madly, and to the vngodly set not vp your hornes.
Psalms 75:5 Set not vp your hornes on hie, and speake not wyth a styfe necke.
Psalms 75:6 For promocyon commeth neyther from the East ner from the weste, ner yet from the wyldernesse
Psalms 75:7 And why? God is the Iudge: he putteth downe one, and setteth vp another.
Psalms 75:8 For in the hand of the Lord ther is a cup full of strong wyne, and he poureth oute of the same: As for the dregges therof, al the vngodly of the earth shall dryncke them, and sucke them oute.
Psalms 75:9 But I wyll talke of the God of Iacob, & prayse him for euer.
Psalms 75:10 Al the hornes of the vngodly wil I breake and the hornes of the ryghtuous shall be exalted.

CHAPTER: 76

Psalms 76:1 To the chaunter, in Neginoth, a Psalm and songe of Asaph. In Iuda is God knowne, hys name is great in Israel.
Psalms 76:2 At Salem is hys tabernacle, and his dwellinge in Sion.
Psalms 76:3 Ther breaketh he the arowes of the bow, the shylde, the swearde, and the whole battaylle, Selah.
Psalms 76:4 Thou art of more honour and might then the hylles of robbers.
Psalms 76:5 The proude shalbe robbed and slepe their slepe, and the myghtye shalbe able to do nothyng with their handes.
Psalms 76:6 When thou rebukest them, O God of Iacob, both the charrettes and horsemen shall fal on slepe.
Psalms 76:7 Thou art fearful, for who maye abyde in thi sight, when thou art angry?
Psalms 76:8 When thou lettest thy iudgment be heard from heauen, the earth trembleth and is stil.
Psalms 76:9 Yea when God aryseth to geue iudgment and to helpe all them that be in aduersyty vpon earth. Selah.
Psalms 76:10 When thou punyshest one man, he muste knowledge that thou arte readye to punyshe other mo.
Psalms 76:11 Loke what ye promise vnto the Lord your God, se that, ye kepe it, all ye that be rounde about him: brynge presentes vnto hym that ought to be feared.
Psalms 76:12 Which taketh awaye the breth of Prynces, and is wonderfull amonge the Kynges of the earth.

CHAPTER: 77

Psalms 77:1 To the chaunter, for Iduthun. a Psalme of Asaph. I cryed vnto God wyth my voyce, yea vnto God cryed I wyth my voyce, and he hearde me.
Psalms 77:2 In the tyme of my trouble I soughte the Lorde, I helde vp myne handes vnto him in the night season, for my soule refused all other comforte.
Psalms 77:3 When I was in heuinesse, I thought vpon God: when my hert was vexed, then dyd I speake Selah.
Psalms 77:4 Thou heldest myne eyes wakyng, I was so feble, that I coulde not speake.
Psalms 77:5 Then remembred I the tymes of old, and the yeares that were past.
Psalms 77:6 I called to remembraunce my song in the night, I communed wyth myne owne herte, and sought out my spirite.
Psalms 77:7 Wyll the Lorde cast out for euer? Wyl he be no more intreated?
Psalms 77:8 Is hys mercye cleane gone? Is hys promyse come vtterlye to an ende for euermore?
Psalms 77:9 Hath the Lord forgotten to be gracyous? Or, hath he shut vp hys louynge kyndnes in dyspleasure? Selah.
Psalms 77:10 At the last, I came to thys poynte, that I thought: O why art thou so folysh? the right hande of the moost hyest can chaunge all.
Psalms 77:11 Therefore wyll I remembre the worckes of the Lorde, and call to mynde thy wonders of olde tyme.
Psalms 77:12 I wyll speake of all thy worckes, and my talkynge shalbe of thy doynges.
Psalms 77:13 Thy waye, O God, is holye: who is so great and myghty as God?
Psalms 77:14 Thou arte the God that doeth wonders, thou hast declared thy power amonge the people
Psalms 77:15 Thou wyth thyne arme hast delyuered thy people, euen the sonnes of Iacob and Ioseph. Selah.
Psalms 77:16 The waters saw the, O God, the waters sawe the, & were afrayed, the deapthes were moued.
Psalms 77:17 The thicke cloudes poured out water, the cloudes thondered, and thyne arowes went abroade.
Psalms 77:18 The thonder was hearde rounde aboute, the lyghtenynges shone vpon the grounde, the earth was moued and shoke wyth al.
Psalms 77:19 Thy waye was in the sea, and thy pathes in the greate waters, yet coulde noman know thy fotesteppes.
Psalms 77:20 Thou leddeste thy people lyke a flocke of shepe, by the hande of Moyses and Aaron.

CHAPTER: 78

Psalms 78:1 An instruccyon of Asaph. Heare my lawe, O my people, enclyne your eares vnto the wordes of my mouth.
Psalms 78:2 I wyll open my mouth in parables, and speake of thynges of olde.
Psalms 78:3 Whych we haue herde and knowne, and such as our fathers haue told vs.
Psalms 78:4 That we shoulde not hyde them from the chyldren of the generations to come: but to shewe the honoure of the Lorde, hys myghte and wonderfull worckes that he hath done.
Psalms 78:5 He made a couenaunte wyth Iacob, and gaue Israel a lawe, whiche he commaunded oure forefathers to teache their chyldren.
Psalms 78:6 That their posterytye myghte knowe it, and the chyldren whych were yet vnborne. To thintent that when they came vp they myghte shewe their chyldren the same.
Psalms 78:7 That they also myghte put their truste in God, & not to forget what he had done, but to kepe his commaundementes,
Psalms 78:8 And not to be as their forefathers, a froward and ouerthwarte generatyon, a generation that set not their herte a ryghte, and whose spirite was not true towarde God.
Psalms 78:9 Lyke as the chyldren of Ephraim, which beyng harnessed and carieng bowes, turned them selues backe in tyme of battayl.
Psalms 78:10 They kept not the couenant of god, and wold not walke in his law.
Psalms 78:11 They forgate what he had done, and the wonderfull workes that he had shewed for them.
Psalms 78:12 Maruelous thynges dyd he in the sighte of our fathers in the lande of Egipt, euen in the felde of Zoan.
Psalms 78:13 He deuided the sea & let them go thorowe it, & made the waters to stande like a wall.
Psalms 78:14 In the daye tyme he ledde them with a cloude, and all the night thorow with a light of fyre.
Psalms 78:15 He cloaue the harde rockes in the wildernesse, & gaue them drynke therof, as it hadde bene out of the great deapth.
Psalms 78:16 He brought waters out of the stony rock, so that they gusshed out lyke the ryuers.
Psalms 78:17 Yet for all this they synned agaynste hym, and prouoked the moost hyest in the wyldernes.
Psalms 78:18 They tempted God in their hertes, and requyred meate for their lust.
Psalms 78:19 For they spoke agaynst God, & sayde: yea yea, God shall prepare a table in the wildernesse, shall he?
Psalms 78:20 Lo, he smote the stony rocke, that the watery streames gusshed out, and the streames flowed with all: but how can he geue bread and prouyde flesh for hys people?
Psalms 78:21 When the Lord hearde this, he was wroth so the fyre was kyndled in Iacob, and heauy displeasure agaynst Israel.
Psalms 78:22 Because they beleued not in God, & putte not their trust in hys helpe.
Psalms 78:23 So he commaunded the cloudes aboue, & opened the dores of heauen.
Psalms 78:24 He rayned doune Manna vpon them for to eate, and gaue them bread from heauen.
Psalms 78:25 Then eate they aungels fode, for he sentte them meate ynough.
Psalms 78:26 He caused the East wynd to blowe vnder the heauen, & thorow hys power he brought in the South wynde.
Psalms 78:27 He made flesh to raine vpon them as thicke as dust, and fethered foules like as the sande of the sea.
Psalms 78:28 He let it fall amonge their tentes rounde about theyr habitacions.
Psalms 78:29 So they eate, and were fylled, for he gaue them their owne desyre.
Psalms 78:30 They were not disapoynted of their lust. But whyle the meate was yet in their mouthes:
Psalms 78:31 the heuy wrath of God came vpon them, slewe the welthiest of them, & smote doune the chosen men of Israel.
Psalms 78:32 But for all this they sinned yet more, and beleued not hys wonderous workes.
Psalms 78:33 Therfore their dayes were consumed in vanyte, and sodenly their yeares were gone.
Psalms 78:34 When he slewe them, they sought hym, & turned them early vnto God.
Psalms 78:35 They thoughte then that God was theyr succour, and that the hye God was their redemer.
Psalms 78:36 Neuerthelesse they dyd but flatter him in their mouthes, and dissembled with hym in their tonges.
Psalms 78:37 For their herte was not whole with him, neither continued they in his couenaunt.
Psalms 78:38 But he was so mercifull, that he forgaue their misdedes, and destroyed them not. Yea, many a tyme turned he hys wrathe awaye, and wolde not suffre hys whole dyspleasure to aryse.
Psalms 78:39 For he considered that they wer but flesh: euen a wynde that passeth awaye, and commeth not agayne.
Psalms 78:40 O how ofte haue they greued hym in the wyldernesse? How many a tyme haue they prouoked hym in the deserte?
Psalms 78:41 They turned backe, and tempted God, & moued the holy one in Israel.
Psalms 78:42 They thought not of hys hand, in the day when he delyuered them from the hande of the enemye.
Psalms 78:43 Howe he had wroughte hys myracles in Egypte, and hys wonders in the lande of Zoan.
Psalms 78:44 How he turned their waters into bloude, so that they myghte not dryncke of the ryuers.
Psalms 78:45 How he sent lyce among them, to eate them vp, and frogges to destroye them.
Psalms 78:46 How he gaue their frutes vnto the catyrpyller, & their labour vnto the greshopper.
Psalms 78:47 How he bete doune theyr vyneyardes wt hayle stones, and their molbery trees wyth the frost.
Psalms 78:48 How he smote theyr cattel with haylestones, & their flockes with hote thonder boltes.
Psalms 78:49 How he sent vppon them the furiousnesse of his wrath, anger & displeasure: with trouble and falling in of euell aungels.
Psalms 78:50 When he made a waye to hys fearful indignacion, and spared not their soules from death, yea, & gaue their cattell ouer to the pestilence.
Psalms 78:51 When he smote al the first born in Egipt, the mooste principall and mightyest in the dwellynges of Ham.
Psalms 78:52 But as for his owne people, he lead them forth lyke shepe, and caried them in the wyldernesse lyke a flocke.
Psalms 78:53 He brought them out safely, that they shoulde not feare, and ouerwhelmed their enemyes with the sea.
Psalms 78:54 He caryed them vnto the borders of his Sanctuary: euen into thys hyl, which he purchased with hys ryghthande.
Psalms 78:55 He dyd cast out the Heathen before them, caused their lande to be deuyded among them for an heritage, and made the trybes of Israel to dwell in their tentes.
Psalms 78:56 For all this they tempted & displeased the most hye God, and kept not hys couenaunt.
Psalms 78:57 But turned their backes, and fell awaye lyke their forefathers, startynge asyde like a broken boowe.
Psalms 78:58 And so they greued hym with theyr hye places, & prouoked him with their ymages.
Psalms 78:59 When God hearde thys, he was wroth, and toke sore dyspleasure at Israell.
Psalms 78:60 So that he forsoke the Tabernacle in Silo, euen his habitacyon wherin he dwelte amonge men.
Psalms 78:61 He delyuered their power into captyuitye and their glory into the enemies hande.
Psalms 78:62 He gaue his people ouer into the swearde for he was wroth wyth hys herytage.
Psalms 78:63 The fyre consumed their yonge men, and their maydens were not geuen to mariage.
Psalms 78:64 Their Prestes were slaine with the swerd and there were no wyddowes to make lamentacyon.
Psalms 78:65 So the Lorde, awaked as one oute of slepe, and lyke a gyaunte refreshed wyth wyne.
Psalms 78:66 He smote hys enemyes in the hynder partes, and put them to perpetuall shame.
Psalms 78:67 He refused the tabernacle of Ioseph, and chose not the trybe of Ephraim.
Psalms 78:68 Neuertheles, he chose the trybe of Iuda, euen the hyll of Syon which he loued.
Psalms 78:69 And there he buylded hys temple on hye, and layd the foundation of it like the ground that it myght perpetually endure.
Psalms 78:70 He chose Dauid also hys seruaunte, and toke hym away from the shepe foldes.
Psalms 78:71 As he was folowynge the yewes greate with yonge, he toke him, that he myghte fede Iacob hys people, & Israel hys enherytance.
Psalms 78:72 So he fedde them wyth a fayethfull and true herte, and ruled them wyth diligence of of his power.

CHAPTER: 79

Psalms 79:1 A Psalme of Asaph. O God, the Heathen are fallen into thyne heritage: the holy temple haue they defiled, and made Ierusalem an heape of stones.
Psalms 79:2 The deade bodye of thy seruauntes haue they geuen vnto the foules of the ayre to be deuoured, and the flesh of thy saintes vnto the beastes of the lande.
Psalms 79:3 Their bloude haue they shed lyke water on euery syde of Ierusalem, and ther was no man to bury them.
Psalms 79:4 We are become an open shame vnto oure enemyes, a verye scorne and derysyon vnto them that are rounde aboute vs.
Psalms 79:5 Lorde, howe longe wylt thou be angrye? shall thy ielousy burne lyke fyre for euer?
Psalms 79:6 Poure oute thyne indignacyon vpon the Heathen that knowe the not, and vpon the Kyngdomes that call not vpon thy name.
Psalms 79:7 For they haue deuoured Iacob, and laied wast his dwellynge place.
Psalms 79:8 O remembre not oure olde synnes, but haue mercye vpon vs, and that soone, for we are come to greate mysery.
Psalms 79:9 Helpe, vs, O God oure sauyoure, for the glory of thy name: O deliuer vs, and forgeue vs oure synnes for thy names sake.
Psalms 79:10 Wherfore shall the Heathen say: wher is now their God? O lette the vengeaunce of thy seruauntes bloude that is shed, be openly shewed vpon the Heathen in our syght.
Psalms 79:11 O Let the sorowfull sighehyng of the presoners come before the, and accordinge vnto the power of thyne arme, preserue those that are appoynted to dye.
Psalms 79:12 And for the blasphemye wherewyth oure neyghboures haue blasphemed the, rewarde them, O Lorde, seenu folde into theyr bosome.
Psalms 79:13 So we that be the people and shepe of thy pasture, shall geue the thanckes for euer, and wyll all waye be shewynge forth thy prayse more and more.

CHAPTER: 80

Psalms 80:1 To the chaunter, vpon Sosanim, a Psalme of Asaph. Heare O thou shepeherde of Israel, thou that leadest Iacob lyke a flocke of shepe: shew thy self, thou that sittest vppon the Cherubyns.
Psalms 80:2 Before Ephraim, Beniamin, and Manasses: stirre vp thy power, & come help vs.
Psalms 80:3 Turne vs agayn, O God, shew the light of thy countenaunce, and we shalbe whole.
Psalms 80:4 O Lord God of hostes, howe longe wilt thou be angry ouer the praier of thy people?
Psalms 80:5 Thou hast fed them with the bread of teares, yea, thou hast geuen them plenteousnes of teares to drynke.
Psalms 80:6 Thou haste made vs a verye stryfe vnto oure neyghbours, and oure enemyes laugh vs to scorne.
Psalms 80:7 Turne vs agayne, thou God of hoostes, shewe the light of thy countenaunce, & we shalbe whole.
Psalms 80:8 Thou hast broughte a vyneyarde oute of Egypte, thou diddest cast out the Heathen, & planted it.
Psalms 80:9 Thou madest rowme for it, and caused it to take rote, so that it fylled the lande.
Psalms 80:10 The hylles were couered with the shadow of it, and so were the stronge Cedre trees wt the bowes therof.
Psalms 80:11 She stretched out her braunches vnto the sea, and her bowes vnto the water.
Psalms 80:12 Why haste thou then broken doune her hedge, that all they whiche go by, plucke of her grapes?
Psalms 80:13 Then wylde bore out of the wood hath roted it vp, and the beastes of the felde haue deuoured it.
Psalms 80:14 Turne the agayne, thou God of hoostes, loke doune from heauen, beholde and vyset this vyneyarde.
Psalms 80:15 Maynteyne it, that thy rightehande hath planted, and the sonne whom thou madest so muche of for thy self.
Psalms 80:16 For why? it is brent with fyre, and lyeth waste: O let them peryshe at the rebuke of thy wrath.
Psalms 80:17 Let thy hande be vpon the man of thy right hande, and vpon the man whome thou madest so much of for thyne owne selfe.
Psalms 80:18 And so will not we go back from the: Oh let vs lyue, & we shall call vpon thy name.
Psalms 80:19 Turne vs agayne, O Lorde God of hoostes, shewe the light of thy countenaunce, & we shalbe whole.

CHAPTER: 81

Psalms 81:1 To the chaunter vpon Githith, of Asaph. Singe merely vnto God which is our strengthe, make a chearfull noyse vnto the god of Iacob.
Psalms 81:2 Take the Psalme, brynge hyther the tabret, the mery harpe & lute.
Psalms 81:3 Blowe vp the trompettes in the new mone, vpon our solempne feast daye.
Psalms 81:4 For this is the vse in Israel, and a lawe of the God of Iacob.
Psalms 81:5 This he ordeined in Ioseph for a testimony, when he came out of Epipt, & had heard a straunge language.
Psalms 81:6 When he eased hys shoulder from the burthen, and when hys handes were deliuered from the pottes.
Psalms 81:7 When thou callest vpon me in trouble, I helped the, and hearde the, what tyme as the storme fell vpon the, I proued the also at the water of stryfe. Selah.
Psalms 81:8 Heare, O my people, for I assure the O Israel, if thou wilt herken vnto me:
Psalms 81:9 There shal no straunge God be in the, neither shalt thou worshippe any other God.
Psalms 81:10 I am the Lord thy God, which broughte the out of the lande of Egipt, open thy mouth wyde, and I shall fyll it.
Psalms 81:11 But my people wolde not heare my voice and Israel wolde not obey me.
Psalms 81:12 So I gaue them vp vnto their owne hertes luste, and let them folowe theyr owne ymaginacions.
Psalms 81:13 O that my people wolde obeye me, for if Israel wolde walke in my wayes:
Psalms 81:14 I should soone put doune their enemyes, and turne myne hande againste their aduersaries.
Psalms 81:15 The haters of the Lord should mysse Israel, but their tyme shoulde endure for euer.
Psalms 81:16 He should feade them with the finest wheat floure, and satisfye them with hony out of the stony rocke.

CHAPTER: 82

Psalms 82:1 A Psalme of Asaph. God standeth in the congregacion of the Goddes, and is a iudge amonge the iudges.
Psalms 82:2 How long will ye geue wrong iudgement, and accept the personnes of the vngodly? Selah.
Psalms 82:3 Defende the poore and fatherlesse, se that suche as be in nede & necessitie haue right.
Psalms 82:4 Deliuer the outcaste & poore, & saue hym from the hande of the vngodly.
Psalms 82:5 Neuerthelesse, they will not be learned & vnderstande, but walke on styll in darkenesse: therfore must all the foundacions of the lande be moued.
Psalms 82:6 I haue sayde: ye are Goddes, ye all are the chyldren of the moost hyest.
Psalms 82:7 But ye shall dye lyke men, and fall lyke one of the tyrauntes.
Psalms 82:8 Aryse, O God, & iudge thou the earth, for all the Heathen are thyne by enheritaunce.

CHAPTER: 83

Psalms 83:1 A songe and Psalme of Asaph. Holde not thy tongue, O God, kepe not styll silence, refrayne not thy self O God.
Psalms 83:2 For lo, thyne enemies make a murmurynge, and they that hate the, lyft vp their heade.
Psalms 83:3 They ymagyn craftely agaynst thy people, and take counsayll agaynste thy secrete ones.
Psalms 83:4 Come (saye they) let vs rote them out from amonge the people, that the name of Israell maye be put out of remembraunce.
Psalms 83:5 For they haue caste their heades together with one consent, & are confederate agaynst the.
Psalms 83:6 The tabernacles of the Edomites and Ismaelytes, the Moabytes and Hagarenes.
Psalms 83:7 Gebal, Ammom, and Amalech: the Philistines with them that dwell at Tyre.
Psalms 83:8 Assur also is ioyned vnto them, and helpe the chyldren of Loth. Selah.
Psalms 83:9 But do thou to them as vnto the Madianites, vnto Sisera, and vnto Iabin by the broke of Kyson.
Psalms 83:10 Whych peryshed at Endor, & became as the donge of the earth.
Psalms 83:11 Make their prynces lyke Oreb & Zeb. Yea, make all their prynces lyke as Zebea & Salmana.
Psalms 83:12 Whiche saye: we will haue the houses of God in possession.
Psalms 83:13 O my God, make them lyke vnto a whele, and as the stubble before the wynde.
Psalms 83:14 Lyke as a fyre that burneth vp the wood, and as the flame that consumeth the mountaynes.
Psalms 83:15 Persecute them euen so with thy tempest, and make them afrayed with thy storme.
Psalms 83:16 Make their faces ashamed, O Lord that they maye seke thy name.
Psalms 83:17 Let them be confounded and vexed euer more and more: let them be put to shame and perishe.
Psalms 83:18 That they may know that thou art alone that thy name is the Lorde, & that thou onely art the moost hyest ouer all the earth.

CHAPTER: 84

Psalms 84:1 Vpon Githith, a Psalm of the sonnes of Corah. O howe amiable are thy dwellinges, thou Lord of hoostes?
Psalms 84:2 My soule hath a desyre & longing for the court of the Lord, my hert and my fleshe reioyse in the lyuyng God.
Psalms 84:3 For the sparow hath founde her an house and the swalow a nest, where she maye laye her yonge: euen thy aulters O Lorde of hostes, my kynge and my God.
Psalms 84:4 O how blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they are all way praysing the. Selah.
Psalms 84:5 Blessed are the men whose strengthe is in the, in whose herte are thy wayes.
Psalms 84:6 Which goinge thorow the vale of misery vse it for a well, and the poles are filled with water.
Psalms 84:7 They go from strength to strength, and so the God of Goddes appeareth vnto them in Sion.
Psalms 84:8 O Lord God of hostes, heare my prayer: herken O God of Iacob.
Psalms 84:9 Beholde O God our defence, loke vpon the face of thyne anoynted.
Psalms 84:10 For one daye in thy courte is better then a thousande. I had rather be a dore keper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tentes of the vngodly.
Psalms 84:11 For the Lord God is a light and defence, the Lorde wyll geue grace and worshyppe, and no good thynge shall he wytholde from them that lyue a godly lyfe.
Psalms 84:12 O Lorde God of Hostes, blessed is the man that putteth his truste in the.

CHAPTER: 85

Psalms 85:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of the sonnes of Corah. Lorde, thou barest a loue vnto thy land thou dydest brynge agayne the captyuyte of Iacob.
Psalms 85:2 Thou dydest forgeue the offence of thy people, and couerdest al their synnes. Sela.
Psalms 85:3 Thou takest away al thy displeasure, and turnedest thy selfe from thy wrathfull indignacyon.
Psalms 85:4 Turne vs then. O God oure Sauyoure, and let thyne anger ceasse from vs.
Psalms 85:5 Wylt thou be dyspleased at vs for euer? wylt thou stretch out thy wrath from one generacyon to another?
Psalms 85:6 Wylt thou not turne agayne and quycken vs, that thy people maye reioyse in the?
Psalms 85:7 n/a
Psalms 85:8 I wyll herken what the Lorde God wyll saye for he shall speake peace vnto hys people and to hys saynctes, that they turne not them selues vnto folyshnes.
Psalms 85:9 For hys saluacyon is nye them that feare hym so, that glory shall dwell in oure lande.
Psalms 85:10 Mercy and trueth are met together, ryghtuousnesse and peace kysseth eche other.
Psalms 85:11 Trueth shall ryse oute of the earthe, and ryghtuousnesse shal loke downe from heauen
Psalms 85:12 And why? the Lorde shall shewe louynge kyndnesse, and oure lande shal geue her encrease.
Psalms 85:13 Rightuousnes shall go before hym, and prepare the waye for his commynge.

CHAPTER: 86

Psalms 86:1 A prayer of Dauyd. Bow downe thine eare, O Lord and heare me, for I am comfortles and poore.
Psalms 86:2 O kepe my soule, for I am holy my God, helpe thy seruante that putteth his trust in the.
Psalms 86:3 Be merciful vnto me, O Lord, for I cal dayly vpon the.
Psalms 86:4 Comfort the soule of thy seruaunt, for vnto the, O Lord, do I lyft vp my soule.
Psalms 86:5 For thou Lorde arte good and gracyous, and of greate mercye vnto all them that call vpon the.
Psalms 86:6 Geue eare Lord vnto my praier, and ponder my humble desyre.
Psalms 86:7 In the tyme of my trouble I cal vpon the, for thou hearest me.
Psalms 86:8 Amonge the Goddes ther is none like vnto the, O Lorde, there is not one that can do as thou doest.
Psalms 86:9 All nacyons whom thou hast made, shall come and worship before the, O Lorde, and shal gloryfy thy name.
Psalms 86:10 For thou art great, thou dost wonderous thinges, thou art God alone.
Psalms 86:11 Leade me in thy way, O Lord, that I may walke in thy trueth: O let my herte delyte in fearyng thy name.
Psalms 86:12 I thanke the. O Lorde my God, and will prayse thy name for euer.
Psalms 86:13 For great is thy mercy towarde me, thou hast delyuered my soule from the nether most hell.
Psalms 86:14 O God the proude are rysen agaynst me, and the congregacyon of the myghtye seketh after my soule, and sette not the before theyr eyes.
Psalms 86:15 But thou, O Lord God, art ful of compassion, and mercy, long suffring, great in goodnes and truth.
Psalms 86:16 O turne the then vnto me, haue mercy vpon me: geue thy strength vnto thy seruante, and helpe the sonne of thyne handmayde.
Psalms 86:17 Shew some token vpon me for good, that they which hate me, maye se it, and be ashamed: because thou Lord hast helped me, and comforted me.

CHAPTER: 87

Psalms 87:1 A Psalme and songe of the sonnes of Corah Her foundatyons are vpon the holye hylles:
Psalms 87:2 the Lorde loueth the gates of Syon more then all the dwellynges, of Iacob.
Psalms 87:3 Very excellent thynges are spoken of the thou cyty of God. Selah.
Psalms 87:4 I wyll thynke vpon Rahab and Babilon so that they shall know me. Yea the Philistines also, and they of Tire wyth the Morians. Lo ther was he borne.
Psalms 87:5 And of Sion it shalbe reported, that he was borne in her, euen the most hyest whych hath buylded her.
Psalms 87:6 The Lorde shall cause it to be preached & wrytten amonge the people, that he was borne ther. Selah.
Psalms 87:7 Therfore the dwellynge of all syngers & daunsers is in the.

CHAPTER: 88

Psalms 88:1 A Psalme and songe, of the sonnes of Corah, to the chaunter vpon Mahelath, for affliccyon, an instruccyon of Heman the Ezrathyte. O Lord God my sauiour, I cry day and nyghte before the:
Psalms 88:2 Oh let my praier enter into thy presence, incline thyne eare vnto my callynge.
Psalms 88:3 For my soule is full of trouble, and my lyfe draweth nye vnto hell.
Psalms 88:4 I am counted as one of them that go downe vnto the pitte, I am euen as a man that hath no strength.
Psalms 88:5 Fre among the dead, like vnto them that lye in the graue, whyche be out of remembraunce, and are cutte away from thy hand.
Psalms 88:6 Thou hast layed me, in the lowest pytte, in the darcknesse and in the depe.
Psalms 88:7 Thyne indignacion lieth harde vpon me, and thou vexest me wyth all thy floudes Selah.
Psalms 88:8 Thou hast put awaye myn acquaintance farre fro me, and made me to be abhorred of them: I am so faste in pryson, that I can not get forth.
Psalms 88:9 My syght fayleth for very trouble: Lord I call dayly vpon the, and stretch oute myne handes vnto the.
Psalms 88:10 Doest thou shewe wonders amonge the deade? Can the Phisicions raise them vp againe that they maye prayse the?
Psalms 88:11 Maye thy louynge kyndnes be shewed in the graue or thy faythfulnesse in destruccyon:
Psalms 88:12 May thy wonderous workes be knowne in the darcke, or thy ryghtuousnes in the land wher al thinges are forgotten?
Psalms 88:13 Vnto the I crye, O Lorde, and early commeth my prayer before the.
Psalms 88:14 Lorde, why putteste thou awaye my soule? Wherfore hydest thou thy face fro me?
Psalms 88:15 My strength is gone for very sorow & myserye, wyh fearfulnesse do I beare thy burthens.
Psalms 88:16 Thy wrathfull dyspleasure goeth ouer me the feare of the, oppresseth me.
Psalms 88:17 They come rounde about me dayly lyke water, and compasse me together on euerye side.
Psalms 88:18 My louers, and frendes hast thou put awaye fro me, and turned awaye myne acquayntaunce.

CHAPTER: 89

Psalms 89:1 An instruccyon yf Ethan the Ezrahyte. My songe shalbe alway of the louynge kyndnesse of the Lorde, wyth my mouth wyl I euer be shewynge thy faythfulnes from one generacyon to another.
Psalms 89:2 For I haue sayed, mercy shalbe set vp for euer, thy faythfulnesse shalt thou stablysh in the heauens.
Psalms 89:3 I haue made a couenaunt wyth my chosen, I haue sworne vnto Dauid my seruant.
Psalms 89:4 Thy sede wyll I stablyshe for euer, and set vp thy trone from one generacyon to another Selah.
Psalms 89:5 O Lorde the verye heauens shall prayse thy wonderous, worckes, yea and thy faythfulnes in the congregation of the saynctes.
Psalms 89:6 For who is he amonge the cloudes, that may be compared vnto the Lord. Yea, what is he among the Gods that is like vnto the lord?
Psalms 89:7 God is greatly to be feared in the councel of the saintes and to be had in reuerence of al them that are aboute hym.
Psalms 89:8 O Lorde God of Hostes who is lyke vnto the in power? thy trueth is round about the
Psalms 89:9 Thou rulest the pryde of the sea, thou stillest the waues therof, when they aryse.
Psalms 89:10 Thou breakest the proude, like one that is wounded, thou scatrest thine enemies abroad with thy mightye arme.
Psalms 89:11 The heauens are thine, the earth is thine: thou hast layed the foundation of the rounde world, and al that therin is.
Psalms 89:12 Thou hast made the north and the south, Tabor and Hermon shal reioyse in thy name
Psalms 89:13 Thou hast a myghty arme, stronge is thy hande, and hye is thy righthande.
Psalms 89:14 Righteousnes and equite is the habitacion of thy seate, mercy and truethe go before thy face.
Psalms 89:15 Blessed is the people, O Lorde, that can reioyse in the, & walketh in the lyghte of thy countenauce.
Psalms 89:16 Their delyte is in thy name all the daye longe, and thorowe thy righteousnesse they shalbe exalted.
Psalms 89:17 For thou art the glory of their strength, & thorow thy fauoure shalt thou lyfte vp oure hornes.
Psalms 89:18 The Lorde is our defence, and the holy one of Israel is our kyng.
Psalms 89:19 Thou spakest sometyme in visions vnto thy saynctes, and saydest: I haue layed helpe vpon one that is mighty, I haue exalted one chosen out of the people.
Psalms 89:20 I haue founde Dauid my seruaunt, with my holy oyle haue I anoynted hym.
Psalms 89:21 My hande shal holde him fast, and myne arme shall strengthen hym.
Psalms 89:22 The enemye shall not ouercome hym, & the sonne of wyckednesse shall not hurte hym.
Psalms 89:23 I shall smyte doune hys foes before hys face, and plage them that hate hym.
Psalms 89:24 My trueth also & my mercy shalbe wyth hym, and in my name shall hys horne be exalted.
Psalms 89:25 I will set hys hande in the sea, & his right hande in the floudes.
Psalms 89:26 He shall call me, thou art my father, my God, and the strength of my saluacion.
Psalms 89:27 And I will make hym my fyrste borne, hyer then the kynges of the earth.
Psalms 89:28 My mercy wyll I kepe for hym for euermore, and my couenaunte shall stande faste with hym.
Psalms 89:29 Hys sede wyll I make to endure for euer, yea, and his trone as the dayes of heauen.
Psalms 89:30 But if hys chyldren forsake my law, and walke not in my iudgementes.
Psalms 89:31 If they breake myne ordynaunces, & kepe not my commaundementes.
Psalms 89:32 I will vyset their offences wyth the rodde, and their synnes wit scourges.
Psalms 89:33 Neuerthelesse, my louinge kyndnesse wil I not vtterly take from hym, nor suffre my trueth to fayle.
Psalms 89:34 My couenaunt wyl I not breake, nor disanulle the thynge that is gone out of my lippes.
Psalms 89:35 I haue sworne once by my holinesse, that I will not fayle Dauid.
Psalms 89:36 Hys sede shall endure for euer, and hys seate also lyke as the sunne before me.
Psalms 89:37 He shall stande faste for euermore as the moone, and as the faythfull wytnesse in heauen. Selah.
Psalms 89:38 But now thou forsakest & abhorrest thine anoynted, and art displeased at hym.
Psalms 89:39 Thou hast turned backe the couenaunte of thy seruaunt, and caste hys croune to the grounde.
Psalms 89:40 Thou hast ouerthrowen all his hedges, & broken doune his stronge holdes.
Psalms 89:41 All they that go by, spoyle hym, he is become a rebuke vnto hys neyghbours.
Psalms 89:42 Thou settest vp the righthande of his enemyes, and makest all hys aduersaries to reioyse.
Psalms 89:43 Thou hast taken awaye the strengthe of his swerde, and geuest him not victory in the battayle.
Psalms 89:44 Thou hast put out his glory, and cast his trone doune to the grounde.
Psalms 89:45 The dayes of his youth hast thou shortened, & couered him with dishonoure. Selah.
Psalms 89:46 Lord, how longe wilt thou hyde thy self? For euer? shall thy wrathe burne lyke fyre?
Psalms 89:47 O remembre how shorte my time is, hast thou made all men for nought?
Psalms 89:48 What man is he that lyueth, and shall not se death? Maye a man deliuer his owne soule from the hande of hell? Selah.
Psalms 89:49 Lorde, where are thy olde louing kyndnesses, whyche thou sworest vnto Dauid in thy trueth?
Psalms 89:50 Remembre Lord the rebuke that the multitude of the people do vnto thy seruauntes, and how I haue borne it in my bosome.
Psalms 89:51 Wherwith thyne enemyes blaspheme the, and sclaunder the footesteppes of thyne anoynted.
Psalms 89:52 Thankes be too the Lorde for euermore: Amen: Amen.

CHAPTER: 90

Psalms 90:1 A prayer of Moyses the man of God. Lorde thou art oure refuge from one generacion to another.
Psalms 90:2 Before the mountaines were broughte forthe, or euer the earthe and the worlde were made, thou art God from euerlastynge and worlde without ende.
Psalms 90:3 Thou turnest man to destruccyon, Agayne, thou sayest: come agayne ye chyldren of men
Psalms 90:4 For a thousande yeares in thy sighte are but as yesterdaye that is past, and lyke as it were a nyght watch.
Psalms 90:5 As sone as thou scatrest them, they are euen as a slepe, & fade awaye sodenly like the grasse.
Psalms 90:6 In the mornyng it is grene and groweth vp, but in the euenynge it is cut doune and wythered.
Psalms 90:7 For we consume awaye in thy displeasure, and are afrayed at thy wrathful indignacion.
Psalms 90:8 Thou settest our misdedes before the, and our secrete sinnes in the light of thy countenaunce.
Psalms 90:9 For when thou art angrye, all oure dayes are gone, we brynge our yeares to an ende, as it were a tale that is tolde.
Psalms 90:10 The dayes of oure age are .iij. score yeares and ten: and though men be so strong that they come to foure score yeares, yet is their strength then but laboure, & sorowe: so soone passeth it awaye, and we are gone.
Psalms 90:11 But who regardeth the power of thy wrath thy fearfull and terrible displeasure?
Psalms 90:12 O teach vs to numbre our daies, that we maye apply our hertes vnto wisdome.
Psalms 90:13 Turne the agayn (O Lorde) at the last, & be gracious vnto thy seruauntes.
Psalms 90:14 O satisfie vs with thy mercy, & that sone, so shall we reioyse and be glad all the dayes of our lyfe.
Psalms 90:15 Comforte vs agayne, now after the tyme that thou hast plaged vs, and for the yeares wherin we haue suffred aduersitie.
Psalms 90:16 Shewe thy seruauntes thy worke, & their chyldren thy glory.
Psalms 90:17 And the glorious maiesty of the Lord our God be vpon vs: O prospere thou the worke of our handes vpon vs, O prospere thou our handy worke.

CHAPTER: 91

Psalms 91:1 Who so dwelleth vnder the defence of the most hyest, & abydeth vnder the shadowe of the almightye.
Psalms 91:2 He shal say vnto the Lorde: O my hope, and my strong holde, my God, in whome I will trust.
Psalms 91:3 For he shall delyuer the from the snare of the hunter, and from the noysome pestylence.
Psalms 91:4 He shall couer the vnder hys wynges, that thou mayest be safe vnder his fethers: his faythfulnesse & trueth shalbe thy shylde and buckler.
Psalms 91:5 So that thou shalt not nede to be afrayed for any bugges by night, nor for the arrowe that flyeth by daye.
Psalms 91:6 For the pestilence that crepeth in the darkenesse, nor for the sikenesse that destroyeth in the noone daye.
Psalms 91:7 A thousande shall fall beside the, and ten thousande at thy righthande, but it shall not come nye the.
Psalms 91:8 Yea, with thyne eyes shalt thou beholde, and se the rewarde of the vngodly.
Psalms 91:9 For thou Lorde art my hope, thou hast set thyne house of defence very hye.
Psalms 91:10 There shall no euell happen vnto the, neither shall any plage come nye thy dwelling.
Psalms 91:11 For he shall gyue his aungels charge ouer the, to kepe the in all thy wayes.
Psalms 91:12 They shall beare the in their handes, that thou hurt not thy fote agaynst a stone.
Psalms 91:13 Thou shalt go vpon the Lyon and Adder the yonge lyon and the Dragon shalte thou treade vnder thy fete.
Psalms 91:14 Because he hath set his loue vppon me, I shall deliuer hym: I shal defende him, for he hath knowen my name.
Psalms 91:15 When he calleth vpon me, I shall heare hym: yea, I am with hym in hys trouble, wherout I will deliuer him, and bring hym to honoure.
Psalms 91:16 With longe lyfe will I satisfye him, and shewe hym my saluacion.

CHAPTER: 92

Psalms 92:1 A Psalme of the songe for the Sabboth daye. It is a good thynge too geue thankes vnto the Lord, and to synge prayses vnto thy name, O moost hyest.
Psalms 92:2 To tell of thy louyng kyndnesse early in the mornyng. and of thy trueth in the night season.
Psalms 92:3 Vpon an instrument of ten strynges, vpon the lute and with a songe vpon the harpe.
Psalms 92:4 For thou lord hast made me glad thorow thy workes, and I will reioyse ouer the operacion of thy handes.
Psalms 92:5 O Lorde, how glorious are thy workes, thy thoughtes are very depe.
Psalms 92:6 An vnwyse man will not knowe thys, and a foole will not vnderstande it.
Psalms 92:7 That the vngodly are grene as the grasse and that all the workes of wickednes do florish to be destroyed for euer.
Psalms 92:8 But thou Lorde O mooste hyest, abydest worlde without ende.
Psalms 92:9 For lo, thyne enemyes, O Lord, lo, thyne enemyes shall perishe, and all the workers of wickednes shalbe scatred abroade.
Psalms 92:10 But my horne shalbe exalted like the horne of an Vnicorne, & shalbe anoynted wyth fresh oyle.
Psalms 92:11 Myne eye also shall se hys luste of myne enemyes, and myne eare shall heare his desire of the wicked that ryse vp agaynst me.
Psalms 92:12 The righteous shall florish lyke a palme tree, and growe like a Cedre of Libanus.
Psalms 92:13 Suche as be planted in the house of the Lorde, be frutefull,
Psalms 92:14 plenteous and grene.
Psalms 92:15 That they maye shew, how true the Lorde my strength is, and that there is no vnrighteousnesse in hym.

CHAPTER: 93

Psalms 93:1 The Lorde is kyng, and hath put on glorious apparell, the Lorde hath put on his apparell, & gyrded him selfe with strengthe: he hath made the rounde world so sure, that it can not be moued.
Psalms 93:2 From that tyme forth hath thy seate bene prepared, thou art from euerlastyng.
Psalms 93:3 The floudes aryse (O Lorde) the floudes lyft vp their noyse, the floudes lyfte vp theyr waues.
Psalms 93:4 The waues of the sea are mightye, & rage horribly: but yet the Lorde that dwelled on hye, is mightier.
Psalms 93:5 Thy testimonies, O LORD, are very sure, holynesse becommeth thyne house for euer.

CHAPTER: 94

Psalms 94:1 O Lorde God, to whome vengeaunce belongeth: thou God to whome vengeaunce belongeth shewe thy self.
Psalms 94:2 Aryse thou iudge of the world & rewarde the proude after their deseruyng.
Psalms 94:3 Lorde how longe shall the vngodly, how longe shall the vngodly triumphe?
Psalms 94:4 How longe shall all wicked doers speake so disdaynfully, and make such proude boastynge?
Psalms 94:5 They smyte doune thy people, O Lorde, and trouble thine heritage.
Psalms 94:6 They murthur the wydowe & the straunger, and put the fatherlesse to death.
Psalms 94:7 And yet they saye: Tushe, the Lorde seyth not, the God of Iacob regardeth it not.
Psalms 94:8 Take hede, ye vnwyse among the people: O ye fooles, when will ye vnderstande?
Psalms 94:9 He that planted the eare, shal he not heare? he that made the eye, shal not he se?
Psalms 94:10 He that nurtureth the Heathen, and teacheth a man knowlege, shall not he punish?
Psalms 94:11 The Lord knoweth the thoughtes of men, that they are but vayne.
Psalms 94:12 Blessed is the man, whome thou learnest (O LORDE) and teacheste hym in thy lawe.
Psalms 94:13 That thou mayest geue hym pacience in tyme of aduersitie, vntil the pytte be dygged vp for the vngodly.
Psalms 94:14 For the Lorde will not fayle his people, neither will he forsake his inheritaunce.
Psalms 94:15 And why? iudgement shalbe turned agayn vnto righteousnesse, and all suche as be true of hert shall folow it.
Psalms 94:16 Who ryseth vp with me agaynst the wicked? who taketh my parte agaynste the euell doers?
Psalms 94:17 If the Lord had not helped me, my soule had almost bene put to silence.
Psalms 94:18 When I sayde: my fote hath slypped, thy mercy (O Lord) helde me vp.
Psalms 94:19 In the multitude of the sorowes that I had in my herte, thy comfortes haue refreshed my soule.
Psalms 94:20 Wilt thou haue any thing to do with the stoole of wickednesse, which ymagineth mischief in the lawe?
Psalms 94:21 They gather them together agaynste the soule of the righteous, and condemne the innocent bloude.
Psalms 94:22 But the Lord is my refuge, my God is the strength of my confidence.
Psalms 94:23 He shall recompence them their wickednesse, & destroye them in their owne malyce: yea, the Lorde our God shall destroy them.

CHAPTER: 95

Psalms 95:1 O come let vs prayse the Lord, let vs hertely reioyse in the strength of our saluacion.
Psalms 95:2 Let vs come before his presence with thankesgeuynge, & shewe oure selfe gladde in hym with Psalmes.
Psalms 95:3 For the Lord is a great God, and a great kyng aboue all Goddes.
Psalms 95:4 In his hand are al the corners of the earth, and the strength of the hylles is his also.
Psalms 95:5 The sea is his, for he made it, & his handes prepared the drye lande.
Psalms 95:6 O come, let vs worshippe & bowe doune our selfes: Let vs knele before the Lord our maker.
Psalms 95:7 For he is oure God: & we are the people of his pasture, and the shepe of his handes. To daye if ye wil heare his voyce,
Psalms 95:8 harden not youre hertes, as when ye prouoked in tyme of temptacion in the wildernes.
Psalms 95:9 Where your fathers tempted me, proued me, and sawe my workes.
Psalms 95:10 .xl. yeares long was I greued with the generacion, & sayd: they euer erre in their hertes, they verely haue not knowen my wayes.
Psalms 95:11 Therfore I sayd vnto them in my wrath, that they should not enter into my rest.

CHAPTER: 96

Psalms 96:1 O synge vnto the Lorde a newe songe, singe vnto the Lorde all the whole earth.
Psalms 96:2 Synge vnto the Lord, and prayse his name, be tellyng of his saluacion from daye to daye.
Psalms 96:3 Declare his honour among the Heathen, and his wonders among all people.
Psalms 96:4 For the Lord is great, and can not worthely be praysed: he is more to be feared then all goddes.
Psalms 96:5 As for all the goddes of the Heathen, they be but Idols, but it is the Lorde that made the heauens.
Psalms 96:6 Thankesgeuynge and worshippe are before hym, power & honoure are in hys Sanctuary.
Psalms 96:7 Ascribe vnto the Lord (O ye kynredes of the Heathen) ascribe vnto the Lord worship and strength.
Psalms 96:8 Ascribe vnto the Lord the honoure of his name, brynge presentes, and come into hys courte.
Psalms 96:9 O worship the lorde in the beuty of holynesse, lette the whole earthe stande in awe of hym.
Psalms 96:10 Tell it out amonge the Heathen, that the Lorde is kynge: and that it is he, which hath made the rounde worlde so faste, that it can not be moued, and howe that he shall iudge the people righteously.
Psalms 96:11 Let the heauens reioyse, and let the earth be glad: let the sea make a noyse, yea, and all that therin is.
Psalms 96:12 Let the felde be ioyfull and all that is in it, lette all the trees of the woode leape for ioye.
Psalms 96:13 Before the lorde, for he commeth: for he commeth to iudge the earth: yea, with ryghteousnesse shall he iudge the worlde, and the people with his trueth.

CHAPTER: 97

Psalms 97:1 The Lord is king, the earth may be glad therof: yea, the multitude of the Iles may be glad therof.
Psalms 97:2 Cloudes & darkenesse are round about him, righteousnesse & iudgement are the habitacion of hys seate.
Psalms 97:3 There goeth a fyre before hym, to burne vp hys enemyes on euery syde.
Psalms 97:4 Hys lightenynges geue shyne vnto the worlde, the earth seyth it, and is afrayed.
Psalms 97:5 The hilles melt like waxe at the presence of the lord of the whole earth.
Psalms 97:6 The very heauens declare his righteousnes, and all the people se his glory.
Psalms 97:7 Confounded be all thei that worship ymages, and delyte in their Idols: worship him all ye Goddes.
Psalms 97:8 Sion heareth of it & reioyseth: yea, & all the daughters of Iuda are glad because of thy iudgementes, O lorde.
Psalms 97:9 For thou lorde art the most hyest ouer all the earth, thou arte exalted farre aboue all goddes.
Psalms 97:10 O ye that loue the lorde, se that ye hate that thyng whiche is euell: the lorde preserueth the soules of his saynctes, he shall deliuer them from the hande of the vngodly.
Psalms 97:11 There is sprong vp a lighte for the ryghteous, and a ioyfull gladnesse for suche as be true herted.
Psalms 97:12 Reioyse therfore in the lorde, ye ryghteous: and geue thankes for a remembraunce of hys holinesse.

CHAPTER: 98

Psalms 98:1 A Psalme. O synge vnto the Lorde a new song, for he hath done maruelous thynges. With hys owne ryght hande and with his holy arme hathe he gotten the victory.
Psalms 98:2 The lord hath declared his sauyng health & hys righteousnes hathe he openly shewed in the sight of the Heathen.
Psalms 98:3 He hath remembred his mercy and trueth towarde the house of Israel: so that all the endes of the worlde, se the sauing health of our God.
Psalms 98:4 Shewe youre selfes ioyfull vnto the Lorde all ye landes, synge, reioyse, and geue thanckes.
Psalms 98:5 Prayse the Lordes, vpon the harpe, synge to the harpe wyth a psalme of thanckesgeuynge
Psalms 98:6 With trompettes also and shawmes: O shewe youre selues ioyfull before the Lorde the kynge.
Psalms 98:7 Let the sea make a noyse and all that therin is, yea the whole worlde, and al that dwel therein.
Psalms 98:8 Let the floudes clappe their handes, and let al the hylles be ioyful together.
Psalms 98:9 Before the Lorde, for he is come to iudge the earth. Yea wyth ryghtuousnes shall he iudg the worlde, and the people wyth equyte.

CHAPTER: 99

Psalms 99:1 The Lorde is kynge, be the people neuer so vnpaciente: he sytteth vpon the Cherubyns, be the earth neuer so vnquiete.
Psalms 99:2 The Lord is greate in Sion, & hye aboue all people.
Psalms 99:3 O let men geue thanckes vnto thy greate and wonderfull name, for it is holye.
Psalms 99:4 The kinges power loueth iudgment, thou preparest equite, thou executest iudgment and ryghtuousnes in, Iacob.
Psalms 99:5 O magnyfy the Lorde oure God, fal down before his fote stole, for he is holye.
Psalms 99:6 Moyses ond Aaron amonge hys pryestes and Samuell amonge such as call vpon hys name: these called vpon the Lorde, and he hearde them.
Psalms 99:7 He spake vnto them out of the cloudy piller for he kepte hys testymonyes, and the lawe that gaue them.
Psalms 99:8 Thou heardest them, O Lorde oure God thou forgauest them O God, and punyshedst their owne inueucions.
Psalms 99:9 O magnyfye the Lorde oure God, and worshyppe hym vpon hys holy hyll, for the Lorde oure God is holy.

CHAPTER: 100

Psalms 100:1 A Psalme of praise. O be ioiful in God (al ye landes)
Psalms 100:2 serue the Lorde with gladnes, come before his presence wyth ioye.
Psalms 100:3 Be ye sure, that the Lord he is God: It is he that hath made vs, and not we our selues: we are but his people, and the shepe of his pastoure.
Psalms 100:4 O go youre waye into hys gates then with thanckesgeuynge, and into his courtes with prayse, be thanckefull vnto hym, and speake good of his name.
Psalms 100:5 For the Lorde is gracyous, hys mercie is euerlastynge, and hys trueth endureth from generatyon to generacyon.

CHAPTER: 101

Psalms 101:1 A Psalme of Dauid. My songe shalbe of mercye and iudgment yea vnto the, O Lord wyll I synge.
Psalms 101:2 O let me haue vnderstandynge in the way of Godlynesse vntyll the tyme that thou come vnto me: and so shall I walcke in my house wyth an innocent herte.
Psalms 101:3 I wyl take no wycked thynge in hande, I hate the synne of vnfaythfulnesse, it shal not cleaue vnto me.
Psalms 101:4 A frowarde harte shall departe fro me I wyll not knowe a wicked personne.
Psalms 101:5 Who so preuely sclaundereth hys neyghboure. hym wyl I destroye: Who so hath a prowd loke and an hye stomacke, I may not awaye with him.
Psalms 101:6 Myne eyes shal loke for such as be faythfull in the lande, that they maye dwell wyth me: and who so leadeth a godly liue, shall be my seruaunt.
Psalms 101:7 There shall no disceatfull personne dwell in my house he that telleth lyes shall not tary in my syght.
Psalms 101:8 I shalll soone destroye all the vngodlie of the lande, that all wycked doers maye be roted out of the cytie of the Lord.

CHAPTER: 102

Psalms 102:1 A prayer of the afflycte, when he was in woo, and powered oute hys complaynte before the Lord. Heare my prayer, O Lord, & and lette my crienge come vnto the.
Psalms 102:2 Hyde not thy face fro me in the tyme of my trouble encline thyne eares vnto me when I call, O heare me, and that ryghte sone.
Psalms 102:3 For my dayes are consumed awaye lyke smoke, and my bones are brent vp as it were a fyre brande.
Psalms 102:4 My herte smytten doune and wythered lyke grasse, so that I forgette too eate my bread.
Psalms 102:5 For the voyce of my gronynge, my bone wil scarse cleue to my flesh.
Psalms 102:6 I am be come lyke a Pellicane in the wildernes, and lyke an owle in a broken wal.
Psalms 102:7 I wake, and am euen as it were a sparow sittinge alone vpon the house toppe.
Psalms 102:8 Myne enemyes reuyle me all the daye longe, they laugh me to scorne, & are sworne together agaynst me.
Psalms 102:9 I eate ashes with my bread, and myngle my drynke with wepynge.
Psalms 102:10 And that because of thyne indignacion & wrath, for thou hast taken me vp, and caste me awaye.
Psalms 102:11 My dayes are gone lyke a shadowe, and I am wythered lyke grasse.
Psalms 102:12 But thou O Lord, endurest for euer, and thy remembraunce thorow out all generacyons.
Psalms 102:13 Aryse therfore & haue mercy vpon Sion, for it is time to haue mercy vpon her, yea, the tyme is come.
Psalms 102:14 And why? thy seruauntes haue a loue too her stones, and it pitieth them to se her in the dust.
Psalms 102:15 The Heathen shal feare thy name, O Lord, and all the kynges of the earth thy maiesty.
Psalms 102:16 For the Lorde shall buylde vp Sion, and shall apeare in hys glory.
Psalms 102:17 He turneth him vnto the prayer of the poore destitute, & despiseth not their desyre.
Psalms 102:18 This shalbe wrytten for those that come after, that the people whiche shalbe borne, maye prayse the Lorde.
Psalms 102:19 For he loketh doune from hys Sanctuary, out of the heauen doth the Lorde beholde the earth.
Psalms 102:20 That he maye heare the mournynges of such as be in captiuitie, and deliuer the chyldren of death.
Psalms 102:21 That they maye preache the name of the Lorde in Sion, and his worshippe at Hierusalem.
Psalms 102:22 When the people are gathered together, & the kyngdomes also to serue the Lord.
Psalms 102:23 He hath brought doune my strength in my iourney, and shortened my dayes.
Psalms 102:24 Yet will I saye: O my God, take me not away in the myddest of myne age: as for thy yeares, they endure thorowe out all generacions.
Psalms 102:25 Thou Lorde in the beginnyng hast layed the foundacion of the earth, and the heauens are the workes of thy handes.
Psalms 102:26 They shal perish, but thou shalt endure: they all shall wexe olde as doth a garment, & as a vesture shalt thou chaunge them, & they shalbe chaunged.
Psalms 102:27 But thou art the same, & thy yeares shall not fayle.
Psalms 102:28 The chyldren of thy seruauntes shall continue, and their sede shall prospere in thy sighte.

CHAPTER: 103

Psalms 103:1 Of Dauid. Prayse the Lorde O my soule: & all that is within me prayse hys holy name.
Psalms 103:2 Prayse the Lord O my soule & forget not all his benefites.
Psalms 103:3 Whych forgeueth all thy synnes, & healeth all thyne infirmities.
Psalms 103:4 Which saueth thy lyfe from destruccion, and crouneth the with mercy, and louynge kyndnesse.
Psalms 103:5 Whiche satisfeth thy desyre wyth good thynges, makyng the yonge and lusty as an Aegle.
Psalms 103:6 The Lorde executeth righteousnesse and iudgement, for all theim that suffre wronge.
Psalms 103:7 He shewed his wayes vnto Moses, & his workes vnto the chyldren of Israel.
Psalms 103:8 The Lord is ful of compassion and mercy, long sufferyng, & of great goodnesse.
Psalms 103:9 He will not alwaye be chydynge, neither will he kepe his anger for euer.
Psalms 103:10 He hath not dealt with vs after oure sinnes, nor rewarded vs according to our wickednesse.
Psalms 103:11 For loke how hye the heauen is in comparison of the earth, so greate is his mercy also towarde them that feare hym.
Psalms 103:12 Loke how wyde the East is from the West, so farre hath he set oure sinnes from vs.
Psalms 103:13 Yea, like as a father pitieth his owne children, euen so is the Lord mercifull vnto them that feare hym.
Psalms 103:14 For he knoweth whereof we be made, he remembreth that we are but dust.
Psalms 103:15 That a man in hys time is but as grasse, and florisheth as a floure of the felde.
Psalms 103:16 For as sone, as the wynde goeth ouer it, it is gone, and the place thereof knoweth it no more.
Psalms 103:17 But the mercyfull goodnesse of the Lorde endureth for euer and euer, vpon them that feare him, and his righteousnesse vpon their chyldren.
Psalms 103:18 Suche as kepe hys couenaunte, & thynke vpon hys commaundementes to do them.
Psalms 103:19 The Lorde hath prepared his seate in heauen, and his kingedome ruleth ouer all.
Psalms 103:20 O prayse the Lorde ye aungels of his, ye that be myghty in strength fulfyllynge hys commaundement that men may here the voice of hys wordes.
Psalms 103:21 O prayse the Lorde all ye his Hostes, yea seruauntes of his, that do hys pleasure.
Psalms 103:22 O speake good of the Lorde al ye workes of his, in euery place of his dominion: praise thou the Lorde, O my soule.

CHAPTER: 104

Psalms 104:1 Prayse the Lorde O my soule: O Lord my God, thou art become excedinge glorious, thou arte clothed with maiesty and honoure.
Psalms 104:2 Thou deckest thy self with light, as it were with a garment, thou spredest out the heauen lyke a curtayne.
Psalms 104:3 Thou voltest it aboue with waters, thou makest the cloudes thy charet, & goest vpon the wynges of the wynde.
Psalms 104:4 Thou makest thyne aungels sprites, and thy ministers flammes of fyre.
Psalms 104:5 Thou hast layed the earth vpon her foundacion, that it neuer moueth at any tyme.
Psalms 104:6 Thou couerest it with the depe lyke as wt a garmente, so that the waters stande aboue the hylles.
Psalms 104:7 But at thy rebuke they fle, at the voyce of thy thonder they are afrayed.
Psalms 104:8 (Then are the hylles sene alofte, and the valleis beneth in their place which thou hast appoynted for them.)
Psalms 104:9 Thou hast set them their boundes, which they maye not passe, that they turne not agayne to couer the earth.
Psalms 104:10 Thou causest the welles to sprynge vp amonge the valleys, and the waters to runne amonge the hylles.
Psalms 104:11 That all beastes of the felde maye haue drynke, & that the wilde asses maye quenche their thyrste.
Psalms 104:12 Aboue vpon the hylles haue the foules of the ayre their habitacion, and singe amonge the braunches.
Psalms 104:13 Thou waterest the hilles from aboue, the earth is filled wt the frutes of thy workes.
Psalms 104:14 Thou bringest forth grasse for the cattell, and grene herbes for the seruice of men. Thou bringest fode out of the earth:
Psalms 104:15 wyne to make glad the herte of man, oyle to make hym a chearfull countenaunce and bread to strength mans herte.
Psalms 104:16 The trees of the Lord are ful of sappe, euen the trees of Libamis whiche he hathe planted.
Psalms 104:17 There make the byrdes their nestes, & the fyrre hylles are a dwellyng for the storke.
Psalms 104:18 The hilles are a refuge for the wilde goates, & so are the stony rockes for the conyes.
Psalms 104:19 Thou hast appoynted the moone for certayne seasons, the sunne knoweth hys going doune.
Psalms 104:20 Thou makest darkenesse, that it maye be night, wherin all the beastes of the forest do moue.
Psalms 104:21 Yea, and the yonge lyons which roare after their praye, and seke their meate at God.
Psalms 104:22 But when the sunne aryseth, they get them awaye together, and lye them doune in their dennes.
Psalms 104:23 Then goeth man forth to hys worke, and to tyll hys lande vntyll the euenynge.
Psalms 104:24 O Lord, how manifolde are thy workes, right wisely hast thou made them al: yea, the earth is full of thy ryches.
Psalms 104:25 So is this great & wyde sea also, wherein are thynges creping innumerable, both smal and great beastes.
Psalms 104:26 There go the shippes ouer, and there is the Leuiathan, whom thou hast made, to take hys pastyme therein.
Psalms 104:27 They wayte all vpon the, that thou mayest geue them meate in due season.
Psalms 104:28 When thou geuest it them, they gather it: when thou openest thyne hande, they are filled with good.
Psalms 104:29 But when thou hydest thy face, they are sorowfull: if thou takest awaye their breth, they dye, & are turned agayne to their dust.
Psalms 104:30 Agayne, when thou lettest thy brethe goo forth, they are made, and so thou renuest the face of the earth.
Psalms 104:31 The glorious maiesty of the Lorde endureth for euer, & the Lorde reioyseth in hys workes.
Psalms 104:32 The earth trembleth at the loke of hym, he doethe but touche the hylles and they smoke.
Psalms 104:33 I wyll synge vnto the Lorde as longe as I lyue, I will prayse my God whyle I haue my beyng.
Psalms 104:34 O that my wordes might please hym, for my ioye is in the Lorde.
Psalms 104:35 As for synners, they shalbe consumed out of the earth, and the vngodlye shall come to an ende: but prayse thou the Lorde, O my soule. Prayse the euerlastynge.

CHAPTER: 105

Psalms 105:1 O geue thankes vnto the Lord, and cal vpon his name: tel the people what thynges he hath done.
Psalms 105:2 O let your songes be of him prayse hym, and let your talking be of al hys wonderous workes.
Psalms 105:3 Gyue hys holye name a good report lette their hertes reioyse that seke the Lord.
Psalms 105:4 Seke the Lord, and his strength, seke his face euermore.
Psalms 105:5 Remember the maruelous worckes that he hath done, his wonders and the iudgementes of his mouth.
Psalms 105:6 O ye sede of Abraham hys seruaunte, ye chyldren of Iacob hys chosen.
Psalms 105:7 He is the Lorde oure God, whose punishmentes are thorow oute all the worlde.
Psalms 105:8 He is alwaye myndeful of his couenaunt and promyse that he made to a thousand generations.
Psalms 105:9 Yea the couenant that he made with Abraham, and the oth that, he sware vnto Isaac,
Psalms 105:10 And appoynted the same vnto Iacob for a lawe, and to Israell for an euerlastynge testamente.
Psalms 105:11 Sayenge: vnto the wyl I geue the land of Canaan, the lot of your heritage.
Psalms 105:12 When there was yet but a fewe of them, and the straungers therin.
Psalms 105:13 What tyme as they wente from one nacyon to another, from one kyngedome to another.
Psalms 105:14 He suffered no man to hurt them, but reproued euen kynges for their sakes.
Psalms 105:15 Touch not myne anoynted, do my prophetes no harme.
Psalms 105:16 Moreouer he called for a dearth vpon the lande, and destroyed all the prouysyon of breade.
Psalms 105:17 But he had sente a man before them, euen Ioseph whiche was solde to be a bonde seruaunte.
Psalms 105:18 They hurte hys fete in the stockes the yron pearsed hys hert.
Psalms 105:19 Vntill the tyme that his worde, and tyll the word of the Lorde had tryed hym.
Psalms 105:20 Then sent the kyng & caused him to be deliuered, the prince of the people bad let him go
Psalms 105:21 He made him Lorde of hys house, and ruler of all hys substaunce.
Psalms 105:22 That he might enfourme his princes after hys wyl, & teach his Senatoures wisedom.
Psalms 105:23 Israell also came into Egipte, and Iacob was a straunger in the lande of Ham.
Psalms 105:24 But he increased hys people exceadyngly and made them stronger then their enemyes.
Psalms 105:25 Whose hert turned so that they hated his people: and dealt vntruly wt hys seruauntes.
Psalms 105:26 Then sente he Moses his seruaunte, and Aaron, whome he had chosen.
Psalms 105:27 These dyd his tokens amonge them, and wonders in the lande of Ham.
Psalms 105:28 He sente darcknesse and it was darcke, for they were not obedyent vnto hys worde.
Psalms 105:29 He turned their waters into bloude, and slew theyr fysh.
Psalms 105:30 Their land brought forth frogges, yea euen in their kynges chambers.
Psalms 105:31 He spake the worde, and their came all maner of flyes and lyce in al their quarter
Psalms 105:32 He gaue them hayle stones for rayne, and flammes of fyre in their land.
Psalms 105:33 He smot their vineyeardes & figge trees, & destroyed the trees that were in their coastes.
Psalms 105:34 He spake the worde, and ther were greshoppers and catyrpyllers innumerable.
Psalms 105:35 These eate vp all the grasse in their land, and deuoured their frutes of the grounde.
Psalms 105:36 He smote al the fyrst borne in the lande, euen the chefe of al their substaunce.
Psalms 105:37 He broughte them forth wyth syluer and gold, ther was not one feble person amonge theyr trybes.
Psalms 105:38 Egypte was glad of their departinge, for they were afrayed of them.
Psalms 105:39 He spred out a cloude to be a couerynge, and fyres to geue lyght in the nyght season.
Psalms 105:40 At their desyre, ther came quailes, and he fylled them wyth the breade of heauen.
Psalms 105:41 He opened the rocke of stone, and the waters flowed out: so that ryuers ranne in the wyldernesse.
Psalms 105:42 For why? he remembred his holy promes whyche he had made vnto Abraham his seruaunte.
Psalms 105:43 Thus he broughte forth hys people wyth ioy, and his chosen with gladnesse.
Psalms 105:44 And gaue them the landes of Heathen, where they toke the laboures of the people in possessyon.
Psalms 105:45 That they myghte kepe hys statutes, and obserue his lawes. Prayse the euerlastynge.

CHAPTER: 106

Psalms 106:1 Prayse the euerlastynge. O geue thankes vnto the Lorde, for he is gracyous, and hys mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 106:2 Who can expresse the noble actes of the Lord, or shewe forth al hys prayse?
Psalms 106:3 Blessed are they that allwaye kepe iudgement, and do ryghtuousnes.
Psalms 106:4 Remember vs, O Lorde, accordynge to the fauour that thou bearest vnto thy people O vyset vs wyth thy sauynge health.
Psalms 106:5 That we myght se the pleasure of thy chosen, that we myght reioyse in the gladnesse of thy people, and geue thanckes with thine enherytaunce.
Psalms 106:6 We haue synned wyth oure fathers, we haue done amysse, we haue dealt wyckedlye.
Psalms 106:7 Oure fathers regarded not thy wonders in Egypte, they kepte not thy great goodnes in remembraunce: but were dysobedyent at the sea, euen at the reed sea.
Psalms 106:8 Neuertheles, he helped them for hys names sake, that he myghte make hys power to be knowne.
Psalms 106:9 He rebuked the read sea, and it was dryed vp: so he led them thorowe the depe as in a wyldernes.
Psalms 106:10 Thus he saued them from the hand of the hater, and delyuered them from the hande of the enemye.
Psalms 106:11 As for those that troubled them the waters ouerwhelmed them, ther was not one of them left.
Psalms 106:12 Then beleued they in his worde, and sang prayse vnto hym.
Psalms 106:13 But within a whyle they forgat his workes, and wold not abyde his councel.
Psalms 106:14 A lust came vpon them in the wildernesse, so that they tempted God in the deserte.
Psalms 106:15 Yet he gaue them their desire, and sent them ynough at their wylles.
Psalms 106:16 They angred Moyses in the tentes, & Aaron the saynct of the Lord.
Psalms 106:17 So the earth opened & swalowed vp Dathan, & couered the congregatyon of Abyram.
Psalms 106:18 The fyre was kyndled in their companie, the flamme brent vp the vngodly.
Psalms 106:19 They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molten ymage.
Psalms 106:20 Thus they turned their glorye into the similitude of a calfe, that eateth hay.
Psalms 106:21 They forgat God their Sauiour, whyche had done so greate thynges in Egypte.
Psalms 106:22 Wonderous workes in the land of Ham and fearful thynges in the read sea.
Psalms 106:23 So he sayde he wuld haue destroyed them had not Moses hys chosen stand before him in that gappe: to turne awaye his wrathfull indignatyon, lest he should destroy them.
Psalms 106:24 Yea, they thought scorne of that pleasaunt lande, and gaue no credence vnto hys worde
Psalms 106:25 But murmured in their tentes, and herkened not vnto the voyce of the Lord.
Psalms 106:26 Then lyft he vp his hand against them to ouerthrowe them in the wildernes.
Psalms 106:27 To cast out their sede among the nacions. and to scatter them in the landes.
Psalms 106:28 They ioyned them selues vnto Baal Peor and eate the offeringes of the dead.
Psalms 106:29 Thus they prouoked him vnto anger with their owne inuencyons, and the plage was great among them.
Psalms 106:30 Then stode vp Phynehes and executed iustice, and so the plage ceased.
Psalms 106:31 And that was counted vnto him for ryghtuousnesse, amonge all posterityes for euermore.
Psalms 106:32 They angeryd hym also at the waters of strife, so that Moyses was punished for ther sakes.
Psalms 106:33 Because they prouoked his spirite, and he told them plainly with his lippes.
Psalms 106:34 Nether destroied they the Heathen, as the Lorde commaunded them.
Psalms 106:35 But were mingled among the Heathen, and lerned their workes.
Psalms 106:36 In so much that they worshipped their images, which turned to their owne decay.
Psalms 106:37 Yea they offred their sons and their daughters vnto deuels.
Psalms 106:38 And shed the innocent bloud of their sonnes and of their daughters, whom they offered vnto the ymages of Canaan, so that the land was defiled with bloud.
Psalms 106:39 Thus were they stayned with their owne workes, and went a whoring with their owne inuencyons.
Psalms 106:40 Therfore was the wrath of the Lord kindled agaynst hys people, in so much that he abhorred his owne enheritaunce.
Psalms 106:41 And gaue them ouer into the hand of the Heathen, and they that hated them, were lordes ouer them.
Psalms 106:42 Their enemyes oppressed them, and had them in subieccion.
Psalms 106:43 Many a tyme did he delyuer them but they prouoked him wyth theyr owne inuencyons and were broughte downe for theyr wyckednesse.
Psalms 106:44 Neuertheles when he saw their aduersitie he herd their complaynt.
Psalms 106:45 He thought vpon hys couenaunt, and pytyed them, accordyng vnto the multytude of hys mercyes.
Psalms 106:46 Yea he made all those that had led them awaye captyue, to pitiye them.
Psalms 106:47 Delyuer vs, O Lorde oure God, and gather vs from amonge the Heathen: that we maye geue thanckes to thy holye name, and make our boast of thy prayse.
Psalms 106:48 Blessed be the Lorde God of Israel from euerlastyng and world without ende, and let all people saye: Amen, Amen. Prayse the euerlastynge.

CHAPTER: 107

Psalms 107:1 O geue thankes vnto the Lord, for he is gracious, & his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 107:2 Let them geue thankes whome the Lord hath redemed, & deliuered from the hande of the enemye.
Psalms 107:3 And gathered them out of the landes, from the East, from the West, from the North and from the South.
Psalms 107:4 They went astraye in the wildernesse in an vntroden waye, and founde no cytye too dwell in.
Psalms 107:5 Hungry & thirsty, and their soule faynted in them.
Psalms 107:6 So they cryed vnto the Lorde in theyr trouble, and he deliuered them from theyr distresse.
Psalms 107:7 He ledde them forth by the ryghte waye, that they myghte go to the cytye where they dwelt.
Psalms 107:8 O that men wolde praise the goodnesse of the Lorde, and the wonders that he doth for the chyldren of men.
Psalms 107:9 For he satisfied the empty soule, & fylled the hungry soule with good.
Psalms 107:10 Such as sat in darkenesse and in the shadow of death, beyng fast bounde in mysery and yron.
Psalms 107:11 Because they were not obedient to the commaundementes of God, but lightely regarded the counsayll of the moost hyghest.
Psalms 107:12 Their hert was vexed with labour, they fel doune, and there was none to helpe them.
Psalms 107:13 So they cryed vnto the LORD in their trouble, and he deliuered them oute of theyr dystresse.
Psalms 107:14 He brought them out of darkenesse & oute of the shadow of death, & brake their bondes in sonder.
Psalms 107:15 O that men wolde prayse the goodnesse of the Lord, and the wonders that he doth for the chyldren of men.
Psalms 107:16 For he hath broken the gates of brasse, and smytten the barres of yron in sonder.
Psalms 107:17 Folysh men were plaged for their offence and because of their wickednesse.
Psalms 107:18 Their soule abhorred all maner of meate, they were euen harde at deaths dore.
Psalms 107:19 So they cryed vnto the Lorde in their trouble, and he deliuered them oute of theyr distresse.
Psalms 107:20 He sent hys worde and healed them, and saued them from destruccion.
Psalms 107:21 O that men woulde prayse the goodnesse of the Lord, and the wonders that he doth for the chyldren of men.
Psalms 107:22 That they wolde offre vnto him the sacrifice of thankesgeuyng, & tell out hys workes with gladnes.
Psalms 107:23 They that go doune to the sea in shippes, and occupy their businesse in great waters.
Psalms 107:24 These men se the workes of the Lorde, & his wonders in the deape.
Psalms 107:25 For at his worde, the stormy winde aryseth, and lifteth vp the waues therof.
Psalms 107:26 They are caryed vp to the heauen, & doun agayne too the deape, their soule melteth awaye in the trouble.
Psalms 107:27 They rele to and fro, they stacker lyke a droncken man, and are at their wittes ende.
Psalms 107:28 So they crye vnto the Lorde in their trouble, and he delyuereth them oute of their distresse.
Psalms 107:29 He maketh the storme to ceasse, so that the waues are styll.
Psalms 107:30 Then are they glad because they be at rest & so he bringeth them vnto the hauen, where they wolde be.
Psalms 107:31 O that men wolde prayse the goodnes of the Lorde, and the wondres that he doth for the chyldren of men.
Psalms 107:32 That they wolde exalte him in the congregacion of the people, & loane hym in the seate of the elders.
Psalms 107:33 Which turneth the floudes into drye land, and drieth vp the water sprynges.
Psalms 107:34 A frutefull lande maketh he baren, for the wickednesse of them that dwell therin.
Psalms 107:35 Agayn, he maketh the wildernes a standinge water, and water springes of a drye grounde.
Psalms 107:36 There he setteth the hongrye, that they maye buylde them a cytye to dwell in.
Psalms 107:37 That they may sow their grounde, plante vyneyardes, to yelde them frutes of increase.
Psalms 107:38 He blesseth them, so that they multiplye excedingly, and suffreth not their cattel to decrease.
Psalms 107:39 When they are minished & brought lowe thorowe oppression, thorowe any plage or trouble.
Psalms 107:40 Though he suffre them to be euell intreated thorow tyrauntes, or lette them wandre out of the waye in the wildernesse.
Psalms 107:41 Yet helpeth he the poore out of misery (at the last) and maket hym an housholde lyke a flocke of shepe.
Psalms 107:42 The righteous will considre this & reioyse, the mouth of all wyckednesse shalbe stopped.
Psalms 107:43 Who so is wyse, & pondreth these thynges well, shal vnderstande the louyng kyndnesses of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 108

Psalms 108:1 A songe of Psalme of Dauid. O God, my herte is ready to synge, and to geue prayse. Awake, O my glorye,
Psalms 108:2 awake lute and harpe, I my selfe wyll awake ryght early.
Psalms 108:3 I wyll geue thanckes vnto the, O Lord, amonge the people. I wil syng prayses vnto the among the Heathen.
Psalms 108:4 For the greatenesse of thy mercy is higher then the heauens, and thy faithfulnesse reacheth vnto the cloudes.
Psalms 108:5 Set vp thy selfe, O God, aboue the heauens, and thy glory aboue al the eartth.
Psalms 108:6 That thy beloued may be delyuered: helpe them with thy right hand and heare me
Psalms 108:7 God hath spoken in his Sanctuary, whych thyng reioyseth me. I wyll deuyde Sichem, and meate out the valley of Suchoth.
Psalms 108:8 Galaad is myne, Manasses is myne, Ephraym is the strength of my head, Iuda is my captaine.
Psalms 108:9 Moab is my washpotte, ouer Edom will I stretch oute my shue, Phylystea shall be glad of me.
Psalms 108:10 Who wyll lead me into the stronge cyty? Who wyll brynge me into Edom?
Psalms 108:11 Shalt not thou do it (O God) which hast cast vs: out thou God, that wentest not forth with our Hostes?
Psalms 108:12 O be thou our helpe in trouble, for vayne is the helpe of man.
Psalms 108:13 Thorow God we shal do great actes, for it is he that shal treade downe our enemyes.

CHAPTER: 109

Psalms 109:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauyd. Holde not thy tong: O God of my praise.
Psalms 109:2 For the mouth of the vngodlye yea and the mouth of the disceatfull is opened vpon me, and speake agaynste me wyth false tonges.
Psalms 109:3 They compase me aboute with wordes of hatred, and fight against me without a cause
Psalms 109:4 For the loue that I had vnto them, they take now my contrary parte, but I geue my selfe vnto prayer.
Psalms 109:5 Thus they reward me euel for good, and hatred for my god wyll.
Psalms 109:6 Set an vngodly man to be ruler ouer him and let Satan stande at his ryghte hande.
Psalms 109:7 When sentence is geuen vpon him, let him be condempned, and let his prayer be turned into synne.
Psalms 109:8 Let his daies be few, and his bishopricke let another take.
Psalms 109:9 Let hys chyldren be fatherlesse, and hys wyfe a wydowe.
Psalms 109:10 Let his children be vagabaundes, and bege their breade: lette them seke it, as they that be destroyed.
Psalms 109:11 Let the extorcioner consume al that he hath and let straungers spoyle his laboure.
Psalms 109:12 Let ther be no man to pytye, ner to haue compassyon vpon his fatherles chyldren.
Psalms 109:13 Let hys ende be destruccyon, & in the next generacion let his name be cleane put oute.
Psalms 109:14 Let the wickednesse of his fathers be had in remembraunce in the syght of the Lorde & and let not the synne of hys mother be done awaye.
Psalms 109:15 Let them alway be before the Lorde, but as for the memoryall of them selues, let it perysh from out of the earth.
Psalms 109:16 And that because hys mynde was not to do good. but persecuted the poore helplesse, and hym that was vexed at the harte, to slay hym.
Psalms 109:17 Hys delyte was in cursynge, and therfore shall it happen vnto hym: he loued not blessynge and that shall be far from hym.
Psalms 109:18 He clothed hym selfe wyth cursynge lyke as wyth a rayment: yea it wente into hys bowels lyke water, and lyke oile into his bone
Psalms 109:19 Let it be vnto hym as the cloke that he hath vpon hym, and as the gyrdle that he is gyrded with al.
Psalms 109:20 Let it thus happen from the Lorde vnto myne enemyes, and to those that speake euel agaynst my soule.
Psalms 109:21 But deale thou wyth me, O Lorde God, accordynge vnto thy name, for swete is thy mercy. O deliuer me,
Psalms 109:22 for I am helplesse, and pore and my herte is wounded within me.
Psalms 109:23 I go hence lyke the shadowe that departeth, & am driuen away as the greshoppers.
Psalms 109:24 My knees are weake thorow fastynge my flesh is dryed vp for want of fatnesse.
Psalms 109:25 I am become a rebuke vnto them, they loke vpon me and shake their heades.
Psalms 109:26 Helpe me, O Lorde my God, oh saue me for thy mercies sake.
Psalms 109:27 That they maye knowe, how that thys is thy hand, and that thou hast done it.
Psalms 109:28 Though they curse, yet blesse thou: and let them be confounded, that ryse vp agaynst me, but let thy seruaunt reioyse.
Psalms 109:29 Let myne aduersaryes be clothed wyth their owne shame, as with a cloke.
Psalms 109:30 As for me, I wyl geue thanckes vnto the Lord wyth my mouth, and praise hym among the multitude.
Psalms 109:31 For he standeth at the ryght hand of the pore, to saue hym from suche as condempne hys soule.

CHAPTER: 110

Psalms 110:1 A Psalme of Dauyd. The Lorde sayde vnto my Lord: Syt thou on my ryght hande, vntyll I make thyne enemies thy fotestole.
Psalms 110:2 The Lord shal sende the rod of thy power out of Sion; be thou ruler euen in the myddest amonge thyne enemyes.
Psalms 110:3 In the daye of thy power shal thy people offer the frewyll offerynges wyth an holye worshyppe, the dewe of thy byrthe is of the wombe of the mornynge.
Psalms 110:4 The Lorde sware, and wyll not repente: Thou arte a priest for euer after the order of Melchisedec.
Psalms 110:5 The Lorde vpon thy ryghte hande, shall smyte euen kinges in the daye of hys wrath.
Psalms 110:6 He shall be iudge amonge the Heathen, he shall fyl them wyth deade bodyes, and smite in sunder the heades ouer diuerse countres.
Psalms 110:7 He shall dryncke of the broke in the waye, therfore shall he lyft vp his head.

CHAPTER: 111

Psalms 111:1 Prayse the euerlastynge. I wyll geue thanckes vnto the Lorde wyth my whole herte: secretly amonge the faythful and in the congregacyon:
Psalms 111:2 The worckes of the Lorde are greate, sought oute of all them, that haue pleasure therin.
Psalms 111:3 Hys worcke is worthy to be praysed and had in honoure, and his rightuousnes endureth for euer.
Psalms 111:4 The mercyfull and gracyous Lord hath so done his maruelous workes, that they ought to be had in remembraunce.
Psalms 111:5 He geueth meat vnto them, that feare him he is euer myndfull of hys couenaunte.
Psalms 111:6 He sheweth hys people the power of hys worckes, that he may geue them the herytage of the Heathen.
Psalms 111:7 The worckes of his hands are veryte and iudgment, all hys commaundementes are true.
Psalms 111:8 They stand fast for euer and euer, and are done in truth and equyte.
Psalms 111:9 He sent redempcyon vnto hys people, he hath commaunded his couenaunte for euer, holy and reuerente is his name
Psalms 111:10 The feare of the Lorde is the beginning of wysdome, a good vnderstandyng haue al they that do therafter: the prayse of it endureth for euer.

CHAPTER: 112

Psalms 112:1 Prayse the euerlastynge. Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord, and hath great delite in hys commaundementes.
Psalms 112:2 Hys sede shal be mighty vpon earth the generacyon of the faythfull shalbe blessed.
Psalms 112:3 Ryches and, plenteousnesse shalbe in hys house, and hys ryghtuousnesse endureth for euer.
Psalms 112:4 Vnto the godly there aryseth vp lyghte in the darcknesse: he is mercyfull, louynge and ryghtuous.
Psalms 112:5 Well is he that is mercyfull, and lendeth gladly, and pondereth his wordes wyth discrecyon,
Psalms 112:6 For he shall neuer be moued, the ryghtuous shall be had in an euerlastynge remembraunce.
Psalms 112:7 He wyll not be afrayed for anye euyll tydynges, his herte standeth fast, and beleueth in the Lord.
Psalms 112:8 Hys hert is stablished, he wyl not shrynke, vntyl he se hys desyre vpon hys enemyes.
Psalms 112:9 He hath sparsed abrode, and geuen to the poore, hys ryghtuousnes remayneth for euer his horne shalbe exealted with honoure
Psalms 112:10 The vngodly shall se it, and it shall greue them: he shall gnash with his teeth, and consume awaye. and the desyre of the vngodlye shall perysh.

CHAPTER: 113

Psalms 113:1 Prayse the euerlastynge. Prayse the Lord (O ye seruauntes) O prayse the name of the Lorde.
Psalms 113:2 Blessed be the name of the lord, from this time forth euermore
Psalms 113:3 The Lords name is worthy to be praysed from the risynge vp of the Sun vnto the going downe of the same.
Psalms 113:4 The Lorde is hye aboue all Heathen, and his glory aboue the heauens.
Psalms 113:5 Who is lyke vnto the Lorde oure God, that hath his dwellynge so hye,
Psalms 113:6 whyche humbleth him selfe, to beholde that is in heauen and earth.
Psalms 113:7 Which taketh vp the simple out of the dust and lyfteth the poore out of the myre.
Psalms 113:8 That he may sette him amonge the prynces, euen amonge the prynces of hys people.
Psalms 113:9 Whyche maketh the baren woman to kepe house, and to be a ioyfull mothere of chyldren. Prayse the euerlastyng.

CHAPTER: 114

Psalms 114:1 When Israel came out of Egypt and the house of Iacob from among that straunge people.
Psalms 114:2 Iuda was his Sanctuary, Israell his domynyon.
Psalms 114:3 The sea saw that & fled, Iordan turned backe.
Psalms 114:4 The mountaynes skipped like rammes, and the lytle hylles like yong shepe.
Psalms 114:5 What ayled the, O thou sea, that thou fleddest so thou Iordan, that thou turnedest backe?
Psalms 114:6 Ye mountaynes that ye skypped lyke rammes: and ye litle hilles, like yong shepe?
Psalms 114:7 The earth trembled at the presence of the Lorde, at the presence of the God of Iacob.
Psalms 114:8 Whyche turned the harde rocke into a staudynge water, and the flynte stone into a spryngyng well.

CHAPTER: 115

Psalms 115:1 Not vnto vs, O Lorde not vnto vs. but vnto thy name geue the praise for thy louing mercye & faythfulnesse.
Psalms 115:2 Wherfore shal the Heathen say wher is now their God?
Psalms 115:3 As for oure God, he is in heauen, he doeth whatsoeuer it pleaseth him.
Psalms 115:4 Their ymages are but syluer and gold, euen the worke of mens handes.
Psalms 115:5 They haue mouthes, and speake not: eies haue they, but they se not.
Psalms 115:6 Thei haue eares, and heare not: noses haue they, but they smell not.
Psalms 115:7 They haue handes, and handle not, fete haue they, but they cannot goo, neyther can they speake thorow their throte.
Psalms 115:8 They that made them, are lyke vnto them and so are all suche as put theyr truste in them.
Psalms 115:9 But let Israell trust in the Lorde, for he is their succoure and defence.
Psalms 115:10 Let the house of Aaron put their truste in the Lorde for he is their succoure and defence
Psalms 115:11 They that feare the Lorde, lette them put their trust in the Lord, for he is their succour and defence.
Psalms 115:12 The Lorde is myndfull of vs, and blesseth vs: he blesseth the house of Israel, he blesseth the house of Aaron.
Psalms 115:13 Yea he blesseth al them that feare the Lord both smale and great.
Psalms 115:14 The Lorde encrease you more and more: you, and your children.
Psalms 115:15 For ye are the blessed of the Lord, whych made heauen and earth.
Psalms 115:16 Al the whole heauens are the Lordes, but the earth hath he geuen vnto the chyldren of men.
Psalms 115:17 The dead prayse not the (O Lorde) nether all they that go downe into sylence.
Psalms 115:18 But we wil prayse the Lord, from this time forth for euermore. Prayse the euerlastynge.

CHAPTER: 116

Psalms 116:1 I am wel pleased, that the Lord hath hearde the voyce of my prayer.
Psalms 116:2 That he hath enclyned his eare vnto me, therfore wil I cal vpon him as long as I lyue.
Psalms 116:3 The snares of death compased me round aboute, the paynes of hell gat hold vpon me I founde trouble and heauynesse.
Psalms 116:4 Then called I vpon the name of the Lord O Lorde: delyuer my soule.
Psalms 116:5 Gracious is the Lord, and rightuous, yea oure God is mercyfull.
Psalms 116:6 The Lorde preserueth the symple, I was brought downe, and he helped me.
Psalms 116:7 Turne agayne then vnto thy rest, O my soule, for the Lord hath geuen the thy desire.
Psalms 116:8 And why thou haste delyuered my soule from death, myne eyes from teares, and my fete from fawlyng.
Psalms 116:9 I wyll walcke before the Lorde, in the land of the lyuyng.
Psalms 116:10 I beleued, and therfore haue I spoken, but I was sore troubled.
Psalms 116:11 I sayde in my hast: Al men are liers.
Psalms 116:12 What rewarde shall I geue vnto the Lorde, for all the benyfytes that he hath done vnto me?
Psalms 116:13 I wyl receyue the, cuppe of saluacion, and call vpon the name of the Lord.
Psalms 116:14 I wyll paye my vowes in the presence of al his people,
Psalms 116:15 right deare in the syghte of the Lorde is the death of his saynctes.
Psalms 116:16 O Lorde, I am thy seruaunt, I am thy seruant, and the son of thy handmaide, thou hast broken my bondes in sonder.
Psalms 116:17 I wyl offre to the sacrifyce of thanckesgegeuynge, and wyll call vpon the name of the Lord.
Psalms 116:18 I wyll paye my vowes vnto the Lord in the syght of al his people,
Psalms 116:19 in the courtes of the Lordes house, euen in the middest of the, O Ierusalem. Prayse the euerlasting.

CHAPTER: 117

Psalms 117:1 O prayse the Lorde all ye Gentyles, laude him al ye people.
Psalms 117:2 For his mercyfull kyndnes is euer more and more toward vs, and the truth of the Lorde eudureth for euer. Prayse the euerlasting.

CHAPTER: 118

Psalms 118:1 O geue thankes vnto the Lord, for he is gracyous, & hys mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 118:2 Let Israel now confesse, that his mercy eudureth for euer.
Psalms 118:3 Let the house of Aaron now confesse, that his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 118:4 Yea let them now that feare the Lorde confesse, that his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 118:5 I called vpon the lord in trouble, and the lord heard me at large.
Psalms 118:6 The lord is my helper, I wyll not feare what man doeth vnto me.
Psalms 118:7 The lord is my helper, and I shall se my desyre vpon myne enemyes.
Psalms 118:8 It is better to trust in the lord, then to put any cofydence in man.
Psalms 118:9 It is better to trust in the lord then to put any confydence in prynces.
Psalms 118:10 All Heathen compassed me round about but in the name of the lorde wyll I destroye them.
Psalms 118:11 They kepe me in on euery side, but in the name of the lord, I wyll destroy them.
Psalms 118:12 They came aboute me lyke bees, and wer as hote as the fyre in the thornes, but in the name of the Lorde I wyll destroye them.
Psalms 118:13 They thrust at me, that I myght fall, but the lorde was my helpe.
Psalms 118:14 The lorde is my strength, and my songe and is become my saluation.
Psalms 118:15 The voice of ioy and meyth is in the dwellynges of the rightuous, for the ryght hand of the Lord hath gotten the victory.
Psalms 118:16 The ryght hande of the Lord hath the preemynence, the ryght hande of the Lorde hath gotten the victory.
Psalms 118:17 I wyll not dye, but lyue, and declare the workes of the lord.
Psalms 118:18 The Lorde hath chastened and correcte me, but he hath not geuen me ouer vnto deathe.
Psalms 118:19 Open me the gates of ryghtuousnes, that I maye go in there thorowe, and geue thanckes vnto the Lord.
Psalms 118:20 This is the dore of the Lorde, the rightuous shall enter in thorow it.
Psalms 118:21 I thancke, the that thou hast herd me, and are become my saluatyon.
Psalms 118:22 The same stone whych the builders refused, is become the heade stone in the corner
Psalms 118:23 Thys was the Lordes doynge, and it is maruelous in our eyes.
Psalms 118:24 This is the, daye whych the Lorde hath made, let vs reioyse and be glad in it.
Psalms 118:25 Helpe now O lord O, lord sende vs now prosperity.
Psalms 118:26 Blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lorde, we wysh you good lucke, ye that be of the house of the Lord.
Psalms 118:27 God is the lord, and hath shewed vs light O garnysh the solempne feaste wyth grene braunches, euen vnto the hornes of the aulter.
Psalms 118:28 Thou art my God, and I wil thancke the: thou art my God, and I wyll prayse the.
Psalms 118:29 O geue thanckes vnto the lorde, for he is gracyous, and his mercy endureth for euer.

CHAPTER: 119

Psalms 119:1 Aleph. Blessed are those that be vndefyled in the way: which walcke in the law of the Lord.
Psalms 119:2 Blessed are they that kepe hys testimonies, and seke him with their whole herte.
Psalms 119:3 Which walcke in hys wayes, and do no wickednes.
Psalms 119:4 Thou haste geuen strayte charge to kepe thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:5 O that my wayes were stablished to kepe thy statutes.
Psalms 119:6 So shoulde I not be confounded while I haue respecte vnto all thy commaundemente
Psalms 119:7 I wyll thancke the wyth an vnfayned herte, because I am learned in the iudgmentes of thy ryghtuousnesse.
Psalms 119:8 I wyll kepe thy statutes, O forsake me not vtterly.
Psalms 119:9 Beth. Where withall shall a yonge man clense his waye? Euen by rulynge hym selfe after thy worde.
Psalms 119:10 Wyth my whole herte do I seke the, O let me not go wronge out of thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:11 Thy wordes haue I hyd wythin my hert that I should not synne against the.
Psalms 119:12 Praysed be thou O Lorde, O teache me thy statutes.
Psalms 119:13 With my lippes wil I be tellyng out all the iudgmentes of thy mouth.
Psalms 119:14 I haue as greate delyte in the way of thy the testimonies, as in al maner of ryches.
Psalms 119:15 I wyl exercise my selfe in thy commaundementes, and haue respect vnto thy fotepathe
Psalms 119:16 My delite shalbe in thy statutes, I wyll not forget thy wordes.
Psalms 119:17 Gimel. O do well vnto thy seruant, that I maye lyue and kepe thy wordes.
Psalms 119:18 Open thou myne eyes, and so shall I spy out wonderous thynges in thy lawe.
Psalms 119:19 I am a straunger vpon earth, O hide not thy commaundementes fro me.
Psalms 119:20 My soule breaketh out, for the very feruent desire that I haue alwaie vnto the iudgementes.
Psalms 119:21 Thou rebukest the proud, cursed are they that departe from thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:22 O turne fro me shame and rebuke, for I kepe thy testimonies.
Psalms 119:23 Princes also syt and speake against me but thy seruaunt is occupied in thy statutes.
Psalms 119:24 In thy testomonyes is my delite, they are my councelers.
Psalms 119:25 Deleth. My soule cleaueth to the dust, O quicken thou me accordyng to thy word.
Psalms 119:26 I knowledged my waies, and thou herdest me, O teach me then thy statutes.
Psalms 119:27 Make me to vnderstand the waye of thy commaundementes, and so shall I talcke of thy wonderous workes.
Psalms 119:28 My soule melteth awaye for verye heuynesse, O set me vp accordyng vnto thy word
Psalms 119:29 Take fro me the waye of lyeng, and graunte me thy lawe.
Psalms 119:30 I haue chosen the way of truth, thy iudgementes haue I layed before me.
Psalms 119:31 I stycke vnto thy testimonies, O Lorde confound me not.
Psalms 119:32 I wyll runne the waye of thy commaundementes, when thou haste comforted my herte.
Psalms 119:33 He. Teach me O lord the way of thy statutes and I shall kepe it vnto the ende.
Psalms 119:34 O geue me vnderstandyng, & I shall kepe thy lawe, yea I shal kepe it wyth my whole herte.
Psalms 119:35 Leade me in the pathe of thy commaundmentes, for that is my desyre,
Psalms 119:36 Enclyne myne herte vnto thy testymonies, and not to couetousnes.
Psalms 119:37 O turne awaye myne eyes, leste they behold vanite, and quycken me in thy way.
Psalms 119:38 O stablish thy word in thy seruaunt, that I may feare the.
Psalms 119:39 Take awaie the rebuke that I am afraied of, for thy iudgmentes are amyable.
Psalms 119:40 Beholde, my delyte is in thy commaundementes, O quicken me in thy ryghtuousnesse.
Psalms 119:41 Vau. Let thy louynge mercy come vnto me, O Lorde, and thy sauynge health accordynge vnto thy worde.
Psalms 119:42 That I may geue answere vnto my blasphemers, for my trust is thy word.
Psalms 119:43 O take not the worde of treuth vtterly out of my my mouthe, for my hope is in thy iudgementes.
Psalms 119:44 So shall I alwaye kepe thy lawe, yea for euer and euer.
Psalms 119:45 And I wyll walcke at lybertye, for I seke thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:46 I wyll speake of thy testimonyes euen before kynges, and wyll not be ashamed.
Psalms 119:47 My delyte shalbe in thy commaundementes whych I loue.
Psalms 119:48 My handes also wyll I lyft vp vnto thy commaundementes which I loue, and my talkinge shalbe of thy statutes.
Psalms 119:49 Zain. O thyncke vpon thy seruaunt as concernynge thy worde, wherin thou haste caused me to put my trust.
Psalms 119:50 For it is my comfort in my trouble, yea thy word quyckeneth me.
Psalms 119:51 The proude haue me greatly in derysyon yet shryncke not I from thy law.
Psalms 119:52 I remember thyne euerlasting iudgementes O Lorde, and am comforted.
Psalms 119:53 I am horrible afraied for the vngodly, that forsake thy law.
Psalms 119:54 Thy statutes are my songes in the house of my pylgremage.
Psalms 119:55 I thyncke vpon thy name, O Lorde, in the nyghte esason, and kepe thy lawe.
Psalms 119:56 It is mine owne, for I kepe thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:57 Heth Thou art my porcion, O lord, I am purposed to kepe thy law.
Psalms 119:58 I make myne humble petycyon in thy presence wyth my whole herte, O be mercyfull vnto me accordynge vnto thy word.
Psalms 119:59 I cal myne owne wayes to remembrance, and turne my fete into thy testimonies.
Psalms 119:60 I make haste, and prolonge not the time, to kepe thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:61 The congregacyons of the vngodly haue robbed me, but I forget not thy law.
Psalms 119:62 At midnight stand I vp, to geue thanckes vnto the, for the iudgmentes of thy ryghtuousnesse.
Psalms 119:63 I am a companyon of all them that feare the, and kepe thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:64 The earth, O Lord, is ful of thy mercy. O teach me thy statutes.
Psalms 119:65 Teh. O Lord, thou hast dealt frendly wyth thy seruaunt, according vnto thy word.
Psalms 119:66 O learne me thy kyndnesse, nourtoure and knowlege, for I beleue thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:67 Before I was troubled, I wente wronge but now I kepe thy word.
Psalms 119:68 Thou art good & frendly, O teach me the statutes.
Psalms 119:69 The proud ymagyn lyes vpon me, but I kepe thy commaundementes with my whole herte.
Psalms 119:70 Their herte is as fat as brawne, but my delyte is in thy law.
Psalms 119:71 It is good for me that I haue bene in trouble, that I may learne thy statutes.
Psalms 119:72 The law of thy mouth is dearer vnto me, then thousandes of golde and siluer.
Psalms 119:73 Iod. Thy hands haue made me and fashyoned me, O geue me vnderstandyng, that I may learne thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:74 They that feare the, wyll be glad when they se me, because I put my truste in thy worde.
Psalms 119:75 I knowe, O Lorde, that thy iudgmentes are right, and that thou of very faithfulnes hast caused me to be troubled.
Psalms 119:76 O let thy mercyful kyndnesse be my comforte, accordynge to the promes that thou hast made vnto thy seruaunt.
Psalms 119:77 O let thy louyng mercies come vnto me, that I may lyue, for thy law is my delite.
Psalms 119:78 Let the proud be confounded, which handle me so falslye.
Psalms 119:79 But let such as feare the, and knowe the testimonies, be turned vnto me.
Psalms 119:80 O let myne herte be vndefyled in thy statutes that I be not ashamed.
Psalms 119:81 Caph. My soule longeth for thy sauynge health, for my trust is in thy word,
Psalms 119:82 Myne eyes long sore for thy word, saing: O when wylt thou comforte me?
Psalms 119:83 For I am become like a botel in the smoke, yet do not I forget thy statutes.
Psalms 119:84 How many are the dayes of thy seruaunt? When wilt thou be auenged of myne aduersaryes?
Psalms 119:85 The proude haue dygged pyttes for me, which are not after thy lawe.
Psalms 119:86 All thy commaundementes are true, they persecute me falsely, O be thou my helpe.
Psalms 119:87 They haue almooste made an ende of me vpon earth, but I forsake not thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:88 O quycken me after thy louynge kyndenes, and so shall I kepe the testimonyes of thy mouth.
Psalms 119:89 Lamed. O Lorde, thy worde endureth for euer in heauen.
Psalms 119:90 Thy trueth also remayneth from one generacion to another: thou hast layed the foundacion of the earth, and it abydeth.
Psalms 119:91 They contynue this daye accordinge too thyne ordinaunce, for all thinges serue the.
Psalms 119:92 If my delyte were not in thy lawe, I should perysh in my trouble.
Psalms 119:93 I will neuer forget thy commaundementes, for with them thou quickenest me.
Psalms 119:94 I am thyne, Oh helpe me, for I seke thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:95 The vngodly laye wayte for me too destroye me, but I considre thy testimonyes.
Psalms 119:96 I se that all thynges come to an ende, but thy commaundement is exeeadyng broade.
Psalms 119:97 Mem. O what loue haue I vnto thy law? all the daye longe is my talkyng of it.
Psalms 119:98 Thou thorow thy commaundement hast made me wyser then myne enemyes, for it is euer by me.
Psalms 119:99 I haue more vnderstandyng then all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my studye.
Psalms 119:100 Yea, I am wyser then the aged, for I kepe thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:101 I refrayne my fete from euery euell waye, that I maye kepe thy woordes.
Psalms 119:102 I shrynke not from thy iudgementes, for thou teachest me.
Psalms 119:103 O howe swete are thy woordes vnto my throte? Yea, more then hony vnto my mouth.
Psalms 119:104 Thorow thy commaundementes I gette vnderstandynge, therefore I hate all false wayes.
Psalms 119:105 Nun. Thy woorde is a lanterne vnto my fete and a light vnto my pathes.
Psalms 119:106 I haue sworne and am stedfastly purposed, to kepe the iudgementes of thy righteousnesse.
Psalms 119:107 I am troubled aboue measure, quycken me, O Lord, according vnto thy worde.
Psalms 119:108 Let the frewill offeringes of my mouthe please the, O Lorde, and teache me thy iudgementes.
Psalms 119:109 My soule is alwaye in my hande, yet do not I forget thy lawe.
Psalms 119:110 The vngodly haue layed a snare for me, but yet swarue not I from thy commaundmentes.
Psalms 119:111 Thy testimonyes haue I claymed as myne heritage for euer: and why? thei are the very ioye of my herte.
Psalms 119:112 I applye myne herte to fulfil thy statutes alwaye, euen vnto the ende.
Psalms 119:113 Samech. I hate the vngodly, but thy law do I loue.
Psalms 119:114 Thou art my defence & shylde, my truste is in thy woorde.
Psalms 119:115 Away fro me ye wycked, I will kepe the commaundementes of my God.
Psalms 119:116 O stablish me according vnto thy worde, that I maye lyue, & let me not be disapoynted of my hope.
Psalms 119:117 Holde thou me vp, and I shall be safe: yea I shall euer be talkyng of thy statutes.
Psalms 119:118 Thou treadest doune all them that departe from thy statutes, for they ymagin but disceate.
Psalms 119:119 Thou puttest awaye all the vngodly of the earth lyke drosse, therfore I loue thy testymonies,
Psalms 119:120 My flesh trembleth for feare of the, and I am afrayed of thy iudgementes.
Psalms 119:121 Ain. I deale wt the thinge that is lawfull & ryght, O geue me not ouer vnto mine oppressours.
Psalms 119:122 Be thou suertye for thy seruaunte too do hym good, that the proude do me no wronge.
Psalms 119:123 Myne eyes are waysted awaye with lokyng for thy health, and for the worde of thy righteousnesse.
Psalms 119:124 O deale with thy seruaunt according vnto thy louing mercy, & teach me thy statutes.
Psalms 119:125 I am thy seruaunt, O graunte me vnderstanding, that I may know thy testimonies.
Psalms 119:126 It is tyme for the (O Lord) to lay to thine hande, for they haue destroyed thy lawe.
Psalms 119:127 For I loue thy commaundementes aboue golde and precious stone.
Psalms 119:128 Therfore holde I streyght all thy commaundementes, and all false wayes I vtterly abhorre.
Psalms 119:129 Phe. Thy testimonyes are wonderfull, therefore doth my soule kepe them.
Psalms 119:130 When thy woorde goeth forthe, it geueth light & vnderstandyng, euen vnto babes.
Psalms 119:131 I open my mouth and draw in my breath, for I desyre thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:132 O loke thou vpon me, & be mercifull, as thou vsest to do vnto those that loue thy name.
Psalms 119:133 Ordre my goinges after thy woorde that no wickednesse raygne in me.
Psalms 119:134 O delyuer me from the wrongeous dealinges of men, and so shall I kepe thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:135 Shewe the light of thy countenaunce vnto thy seruaunt, and learne me thy statutes.
Psalms 119:136 Myne eyes gusshe out with water, because men kepe not thy lawe.
Psalms 119:137 Zade. Ryghteous art thou, O Lorde, and true is thy judgement.
Psalms 119:138 Thy testimonyes that thou hast commaunded are exceadyng, righteous and true.
Psalms 119:139 My zeale hath euen consumed me, because myne enemyes haue forgotten thy wordes.
Psalms 119:140 Thy worde is tryed to the vttermost, and thy seruaunt loueth it.
Psalms 119:141 I am small and of no reputacion, yet do not I forget thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:142 Thy righteousnesse is an euerlastyng righteousnes, and thy lawe is true.
Psalms 119:143 Trouble and heuynesse haue taken holde vpon me, yet is my delite in thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:144 The righteousnes of thy testimonyes is euerlastyng, O graunt me vnderstandinge, and I shall lyue.
Psalms 119:145 Koph. I call with my whole herte, heare me, O Lorde, I will kepe thy statutes.
Psalms 119:146 Yea, euen vpon the do I call, helpe me, & I shall kepe thy testimonies.
Psalms 119:147 Early in the mornyng do I crye vnto the, for in thy worde is my trust.
Psalms 119:148 Myne eyes preuente the night watches, that I might be occupyed in thy wordes.
Psalms 119:149 Heare my voyce, O Lorde, accordynge vnto thy louyng kyndnesse, quycken me accordyng as thou art wont.
Psalms 119:150 They drawe nye that of malyce persecute me, and are farre from thy lawe.
Psalms 119:151 Be thou nye at hande also, O Lorde, for thy promyses are faythfull.
Psalms 119:152 As concernynge thy testimonies, I haue knowen euer sens the beginnuing, that thou hast grounded them for euer.
Psalms 119:153 Res. O considre myne aduersite, & deliuer me, for I do not forget thy lawe.
Psalms 119:154 Manteyn thou my cause and defende me, quycken me according vnto thy worde.
Psalms 119:155 Health is farre from the vngodly, for thei regarde not thy statutes.
Psalms 119:156 Great is thy mercy, O Lorde, quicken me as thou art wont.
Psalms 119:157 Many there are that trouble me, & persecute me, yet do not I swarue from thy testimonies.
Psalms 119:158 It greueth me, when I se, that the transgressours kepe not thy law.
Psalms 119:159 Considre, O Lorde, how I loue thy commaundementes, O quycken me with thy louyng kyndnesse.
Psalms 119:160 Thy worde is true from euerlastyng, all the iudgementes of thy righteousnesse endure for euer more.
Psalms 119:161 Sin. The princes persecute me withoute cause, but my herte standeth in awe of thy woordes.
Psalms 119:162 I am as gladde of thy worde, as one that fyndeth great spoyles.
Psalms 119:163 As for lyes, I hate and abhorre them, but thy law do I loue.
Psalms 119:164 Seuen times a daye do I prayse the, because of thy righteous iudgementes.
Psalms 119:165 Great is the peace that they haue whych loue thy law, and they are not offended at it.
Psalms 119:166 Lord, I loke for thy sauynge healthe, and do after thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:167 My soule kepeth thy testimonies, and loueth them exceadingly.
Psalms 119:168 I kepe thy commaundementes and testimonies, for all my wayes are before the.
Psalms 119:169 Thau. Let my complaynte come before the, O Lorde, geue me vnderstanding, accordynge vnto thy worde.
Psalms 119:170 Oh let my supplicacion come before the, deliuer me according to thy promes.
Psalms 119:171 My lyppes shall speake of thy prayse, seyng thou hast taught me thy statutes.
Psalms 119:172 Yea, my tonge shall synge of thy worde, for all thy commaundementes are right.
Psalms 119:173 Let thine hande helpe me, for I haue chosen thy commaundementes.
Psalms 119:174 I longe for thy sauyng health, O Lorde, and in thy law is my delyte.
Psalms 119:175 Oh let my soule lyue and prayse the, that thy iudgementes maye helpe me.
Psalms 119:176 I go astraye, lyke a shepe that is lost: Oh seke thy seruaunt, for I do not forget thy commaundementes.

CHAPTER: 120

Psalms 120:1 The song of the steares When I am in trouble, I cal vpon the Lorde, and he answereth me.
Psalms 120:2 Delyuer my soule, O Lord from liyng lippes, and from a disceatful tonge.
Psalms 120:3 What rewarde shalbe geuen or done vnto the, thou false tonge.
Psalms 120:4 Euen myghty and sharpe arowes, wyth hote burnynge coales.
Psalms 120:5 Who is me that my banyshmente endureth so longe: I dwel in the tabernacles of the sorowfull.
Psalms 120:6 My soule hath long dwelt amonge them that be enemies vnto peace,
Psalms 120:7 I laboured for peace, but when I spake therof, they made them to battayle.

CHAPTER: 121

Psalms 121:1 The song of the steares. I lyft vp myne eyes vnto the hylles, from whence commeth my helpe.
Psalms 121:2 My helpe commeth euen from the Lord which hath made heauen and earth.
Psalms 121:3 He wyll not suffer thy fote to be moued, and he that kepeth the slepeth not.
Psalms 121:4 Beholde, he that kepeth Israell, doth nether slomber nor slepe.
Psalms 121:5 The Lorde him selfe is thy keper, the Lorde is thy defence vpon thy ryght hande.
Psalms 121:6 So that the sunne shall not burne the by daye, nether the mone by nyght.
Psalms 121:7 The Lorde preserueth the from all euyll, yea it is the Lorde that kepeth thy soule.
Psalms 121:8 The Lorde preserueth thy goyng out and thy commynge in, from thys tyme forth for euer more.

CHAPTER: 122

Psalms 122:1 The songe of the steares. I was glad, when they sayed vnto me: we wyll go into the house of the Lorde.
Psalms 122:2 Oure fete shall stande in thy gates O Ierusalem.
Psalms 122:3 Ierusalem is buylded as a cytye, that is at vnyte in it selfe.
Psalms 122:4 For ther the tribes go vp, euen the tribes of the Lorde: to testyfye vnto Israel, to geue thanckes vnto the name of the Lorde.
Psalms 122:5 For there is the seate of iudgmente, euen the seate of the house of Dauyd.
Psalms 122:6 O praye for the peace of Ierusalem, they shall prospere that loue the.
Psalms 122:7 Peace be wyth thy walles, and plenteousnes within thy palaces.
Psalms 122:8 For my brethren and companions sakes, I wyll wysh the prosperite.
Psalms 122:9 Yea because of the house of the Lord oure God, I wyll seke to do the good.

CHAPTER: 123

Psalms 123:1 The songe of the steares. Vnto the lyft I vp mine eies, thou that dwelleste in the heauens.
Psalms 123:2 Beholde euen, as the eyes of seruauntes loke vnto the handes of their maysters: and as the eyes of a maiden vnto the handes of her mastresse, euen so oure eyes wayte vpon the Lorde our God vntylll he haue mercy vpon vs.
Psalms 123:3 Haue mercy vpon vs, O Lord, haue mercy vpon vs, for we are vtterly despysed.
Psalms 123:4 Our soule is filled with the scornefull reprofe of the welthy, and wyth the despitefulnes of the proude.

CHAPTER: 124

Psalms 124:1 The songe of the steares. If the Lord had not bene of oure side (now may Israel say)
Psalms 124:2 If the Lord had not bene of oure syde when men rose vp against vs.
Psalms 124:3 They had swalowed vs vp quicke when thei were so wrathfully displeased at vs.
Psalms 124:4 Yea the waters had drowned vs, the streame had gone ouer oure soule.
Psalms 124:5 The depe waters of the proud had gon euen vnto our soule.
Psalms 124:6 But praysed be the Lord, which hath not geuen vs ouer for a praie vnto their teeth.
Psalms 124:7 Oure soule is escaped, euen as a byrde out of the snare of the fouler: the snare is broken and we are delyuered.
Psalms 124:8 Oure helpe standeth in the name of the Lord, which hath made heauen and earth.

CHAPTER: 125

Psalms 125:1 The song of the steares. They that put their truste in the Lord, are euen as the mounte Syon, which may not be remoued, but standeth fast for euer.
Psalms 125:2 The hylles stande about Ierusalem, euen so standeth the Lorde rounde about hys people, from this tyme forthe for euermore.
Psalms 125:3 That the rodd of the vngodly come not into the lot of the righteous, lest the righteous put their hande vnto wickednesse.
Psalms 125:4 Do wel, O Lord, vnto those that be good and true of herte.
Psalms 125:5 As for suche as turne backe vnto their owne wickednesse, the Lorde shall leade them forth with the euell doers: but peace be vpon Israell.

CHAPTER: 126

Psalms 126:1 The songe of the steares. When the Lorde turneth agayn the captiuitie of Syon, then shall we be lyke vnto them that dreame.
Psalms 126:2 Then shal our mouth be filled wyth laughter, and oure tonge with ioye. Then shall it be sayd among the Heathen: the Lord hath done greate thynges for them.
Psalms 126:3 Yea, the Lorde hath done greate thynges for vs all ready, wherof we reioyse.
Psalms 126:4 Turne oure captiuitie, O Lorde, as the ryuers in the south.
Psalms 126:5 They that sowe in teares, shall reape in ioye.
Psalms 126:6 He that now goeth in hys waye wepyng and beareth forthe good sede, shall come agayne with ioye, & bryng hys sheaues wyth hym.

CHAPTER: 127

Psalms 127:1 The song of the steares. Except the Lord buylde the house, their laboure is but loste that buylde it. Except the Lord kepe the cytye, the watchman waketh but in vayne.
Psalms 127:2 It is but lost labour that ye ryse vp early and take no rest, but eate the breade of carefulnesse: for loke to whom it pleaseth him, he geueth it in slepe.
Psalms 127:3 Lo, chyldren & the frute of the wombe are an heritage & gift, that commeth of the Lorde.
Psalms 127:4 Lyke as the arrowes in the hande of the gyaunt, euen so are the yonge chyldren.
Psalms 127:5 Happy is the man, that hathe his quyuerful of them: they shal not be ashamed, when they speake with their enemyes in the gate.

CHAPTER: 128

Psalms 128:1 The song of the steares. Blessed are all they that feare the Lord, & walke in his wayes.
Psalms 128:2 For thou shalte eate the laboures of thyne owne handes: O well is the, happy art thou.
Psalms 128:3 Thy wyfe shalbe as the frutefull vyne vpon the walles of thy house. Thy chyldren lyke the Olyue braunches rounde about thy table.
Psalms 128:4 Lo, thus shal the man be blessed, that feareth the lorde.
Psalms 128:5 The lord shall so blesse the out of Syon, that thou shalt se Hierusalem in prosperytie all thy lyfe longe.
Psalms 128:6 Yea, that thou shalt se thy chylders chyldren, and peace vpon Israel.

CHAPTER: 129

Psalms 129:1 The song of the steares. Many tyme haue they foughte agaynst me fro my youth vp (may Israel now saye.)
Psalms 129:2 Yea, many a tyme haue they fought gaainst me fro my youth vp, but thei haue not ouercome me.
Psalms 129:3 The plowers plowed vpon my backe, & made longe forowes.
Psalms 129:4 But the righteous lorde hath hewen the yocke of the vngodly in peces.
Psalms 129:5 Let them be confounded & turned backewarde, as many as haue euell will at Syon.
Psalms 129:6 Let them be euen as the haye vppon the house toppes, whyche wythereth afore it be pluckte vp.
Psalms 129:7 Wherof the mower fylleth not his hande, neither he that byndeth vp the sheaues, hys bosome.
Psalms 129:8 So that they which go by, saye not so much as: the Lord prospere you, we wish you good lucke in the name of the Lord.

CHAPTER: 130

Psalms 130:1 The song of the steares. Ovt of the depe cal I vnto the O Lord,
Psalms 130:2 Lord heare my voice Oh let thyne eares consider wel the voice of my complaint
Psalms 130:3 If thou Lorde wylte be extreme to marke what is done amysse. Oh Lord who may abide it?
Psalms 130:4 But ther is mercy wyth the, that thou maiest be feared.
Psalms 130:5 I loke for the Lord, my soule doth wayte for hym, and in his word is my trust.
Psalms 130:6 My soule doth paciently abide the Lorde from the one morning to the other.
Psalms 130:7 Let Israel trust in the Lord, for wyth the Lorde there is mercy and plenteouse redempcyon.
Psalms 130:8 And he shal redeme Israel from al his synnes.

CHAPTER: 131

Psalms 131:1 The songe of the steares. Lorde, I am not hye mynded, I haue no proude lokes. I do not exercise my selfe in greate matters, whych are hye for me.
Psalms 131:2 But I refrayne my soule and kepe it lowlye as a childe that is weaned from his mother: yea my soule is euen as a weaned child
Psalms 131:3 Let Israel trust in the Lord, from this time forth for euermore.

CHAPTER: 132

Psalms 132:1 The song of the steares. Lorde, remember Dauyd and all his trouble.
Psalms 132:2 How he swore vnto the Lorde, and vowed a vowe vnto the allmyghty one of Iacob:
Psalms 132:3 I wyll not come within the tabernacle of my house, nor clyme vp in my bedde.
Psalms 132:4 I wyll not suffer myne eyes to slepe, nor myne eye lyddes to slomber.
Psalms 132:5 Vntill I fynde out a place for the Lorde, an habitacion for the mightye one of Iacob.
Psalms 132:6 Lo we herde of the same at Ephrata, and found it in the woode.
Psalms 132:7 We wyll go into hys tabernacle, and fall downe before his fote stole.
Psalms 132:8 Aryse, O Lord, into thy restynge place, thou and the arcke of thy strength.
Psalms 132:9 Let thy Preastes be clothed wyth rightuousnesse, and let thy saynctes reioyse.
Psalms 132:10 For thy seruaunte Dauyds sake turne not awaye the presence of thyne anoynted.
Psalms 132:11 The Lord hath made a faythful ooth vnto Dauyd, and he shall not shrynke from it Of the frute of thy body shal I set vpon thy seate.
Psalms 132:12 If thy chyldren wyll kepe my couenaunt, and my testimony that I shal lerne them: their chyldren also shal syt vpon thy seate for euermore.
Psalms 132:13 For the Lord hath chosen Syon, to be an habitacyon for him selfe hath he chosen her.
Psalms 132:14 This shalbe my rest, here wyll I dwel for I haue a delyte therin.
Psalms 132:15 I wyll blesse her vytalles wyth increase, and wyll satysfye her poore with bread.
Psalms 132:16 I wyl decke her Preastes with health and her saynctes shall reioyse and be glad.
Psalms 132:17 Ther shall I make the horne of Dauid to floryshe, I haue ordeyned a lanterne for myne anoynted.
Psalms 132:18 As for hys enemyes, I shall clothe them wyth shame, but vpon hym selfe shall hys crowne florysh.

CHAPTER: 133

Psalms 133:1 The song of the steares of Dauyd. Behold, how good and ioyfull a thinge it is, brethren to dwel together in vnitie.
Psalms 133:2 It is like the preacious oyntment vpon the heade, that ranne downe vnto the beard: euen vnto Aarons bearde, and wente downe to the skyrtes of his clothyng.
Psalms 133:3 Like the dewe of Hermon, which fell vpon the hil of Sion. For there the Lorde promysed hys blesyng, and lyfe for euermoe.

CHAPTER: 134

Psalms 134:1 The song of the steares Behold, O praise the Lord, al ye seruantes of the Lorde, ye that by night stande in the house of the Lord.
Psalms 134:2 O lyfte vp youre handes in the Sanctuary, and prayse the Lorde.
Psalms 134:3 The lorde that made heauen and earthe blesse the out of Sion.

CHAPTER: 135

Psalms 135:1 Prayse the euerlastynge. O praise the name of the Lord prayse it O ye seruauntes of the Lorde.
Psalms 135:2 Ye that stande in the house of the Lorde, in the courtes of the house of our God.
Psalms 135:3 O prayse the lord for the lord is gracious: O sing prayses vnto hys name, for it is louely.
Psalms 135:4 For why the Lorde hath chosen Iacob vnto hym selfe, and Israel for his owne possession.
Psalms 135:5 For I know that the Lorde is greate, and that our Lorde is aboue all goddes.
Psalms 135:6 Whatsoeuer the Lord pleaseth that doth he in heauen and in earth, in the sea, and in all deape places.
Psalms 135:7 He bryngeth forth the cloudes from the endes of the worlde, he turneth the lyghtenynges vnto rayne, bryngynge the wyndes out of their treasuryes.
Psalms 135:8 Which smote the fyrst borne of Egypte both of man and of beast.
Psalms 135:9 He hath sent tokens and wonders into the middest of the, O thou lande of Egypt, vpon Pharao and al his seruauntes.
Psalms 135:10 Whych smote dyuerse nacyons, and slew myghty Kynges.
Psalms 135:11 Sehon Kynge of the Amorytes, Og the Kynge of Basan, and all the Kyngdomes of Canaan.
Psalms 135:12 And gaue their land for an heritage, for an heritage vnto Israel his people.
Psalms 135:13 Thy name. O Lorde, endureth for euer, so doeth thy memoryall, O Lorde, from one generacyon to another.
Psalms 135:14 For the Lorde wil auenge his people, and be gracyous vnto hys seruauntes.
Psalms 135:15 As for the ymages of the Heathen, they are but siluer and golde, the worcke of mens handes.
Psalms 135:16 They haue mouthes, and speake not: eyes haue they, but they se not.
Psalms 135:17 They haue eares, and yet they heare not, neyther is ther any breath in their mouthes.
Psalms 135:18 They that make them, are lyke vnto them, and so are all they that put their trust in them.
Psalms 135:19 Prayse the Lord ye house of Israel, praise the Lorde ye house of Aaron.
Psalms 135:20 Prayse the Lorde, ye house of Leui, ye that feare the Lorde, prayse the Lorde.
Psalms 135:21 Praysed be the Lord out of Sion, whych dwelleth at Ierusalem. Praise the euerlastynge.

CHAPTER: 136

Psalms 136:1 O geue thankes vnto the Lord, for he is gracious, and his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:2 O geue thankes vnto the God of all goddes, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:3 O thancke the Lord of all Lordes, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:4 Whych only doth greate wonders, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:5 Which by hys wisdome made the heauens for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:6 Which layed out the earth aboue the waters, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:7 Whych hath made great lyghtes, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:8 The sunne to rule the daye, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:9 The mone and the starres to gouerne the nyght, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:10 Whych smote Egypt wyth their fyrste borne, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:11 And brought out Israell from among them, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:12 With a myghtye hand and stretcheth out arme, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:13 Whych deuyded the reed sea into partes, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:14 And made Israell to go thorow the myddest of it, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:15 But as for Pharao, and his host, he ouerthrewe them in the read sea, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:16 Which led hys people thorow the wyldernesse, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:17 Whiche smote greate Kynges, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:18 Yea, and slue myghtye Kynges, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:19 Sehon Kyng of the Amorytes, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:20 And Og the Kyng of Basan, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:21 And gaue awaye their lande for an herytage, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:22 Euen for an heritage vnto Israel hys seruaunt, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:23 Which remembreth vs, when we are in trouble, for hys mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:24 n/a
Psalms 136:25 Which geueth fode vnto al flesh, for his mercy endureth for euer.
Psalms 136:26 O geue thankes vnto the God of heauen, for his mercy endureth for euer.

CHAPTER: 137

Psalms 137:1 By the waters of Babylon we sat downe and weapte, when we remembred Syon.
Psalms 137:2 As for our harpes, we hanged them vpon the trees, that are therin.
Psalms 137:3 Then they that led vs awaye captyue, requyred of vs a songe and melody in our heauynes: synge vs one of the songes of Syon.
Psalms 137:4 How shall we synge the Lordes songe in a straunge land?
Psalms 137:5 If I forget the, O Ierusalem, let my right hande be forgotten.
Psalms 137:6 If I do not remember the, lette my tonge cleue to the rofe of my mouth: yea, if I preferre not Ierusalem in my myrth.
Psalms 137:7 Remember the children of Edom, O Lorde in the daye of Ierusalem, howe they sayde: doune wyth it, doune wyth it: euen to the grounde.
Psalms 137:8 O daughter of Babilon, thou shalt come to mysery thyselfe: yea, happye shall he be, that rewardeth the as thou hast serued vs.
Psalms 137:9 Blessed shall he be, that taketh thy chyldren, and throweth them agaynst the stones.

CHAPTER: 138

Psalms 138:1 Of Dauid. I wyll geue thankes vnto the. O Lord, wyth my whole herte, euen before the Gods, wil I singe prayses vnto the.
Psalms 138:2 I wyll worshyp toward thy holy temple and prayse thy name, because of thy louyng kyndenesse and trueth, for thou hast magnyfyed thy worde, accordyng vnto thy greate name.
Psalms 138:3 When I call vpon the, thou hearest me, & endewest my soule wyth muche strength.
Psalms 138:4 All the Kynges of the earthe shall prayse the, O Lord, when they heare the wordes of thy mouth.
Psalms 138:5 Yea, they shall singe in the wayes of the Lorde, that great is the glory of the Lord.
Psalms 138:6 For though the Lorde be hye, yet hath he respecte vnto the lowly: as for the proude, he beholdeth theim a farre of.
Psalms 138:7 Though I walke in the middest of trouble, yet shalte thou refreshe me: thou shalte stretche forth thyne hande vpon the furiousnes of myne enemyes, and thy righte hande shall saue me.
Psalms 138:8 The Lord shall make good for me, yea, thy mercy, O LORDE, endureth for euer despyse not then the worcke of thyne awne handes.

CHAPTER: 139

Psalms 139:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. O Lorde, thou searchest me out, and knowest me.
Psalms 139:2 Thou knowest my doune sittyng and myne vprysinge, thou vnderstandest my thoughtes a farre of.
Psalms 139:3 Thou art about my path & about my bed and spyest out all my wayes.
Psalms 139:4 For lo, there is not a worde in my tonge, but thou, O Lorde knowest it altogether.
Psalms 139:5 Thou hast fashioned me behynde and before, and layed thyne hande vpon me.
Psalms 139:6 Such knowlege is to wonderfull and excellent for me, I can not atteyne vnto it.
Psalms 139:7 Whither shal I go then from thy sprete? or, whyther shall I go then frome thy presence?
Psalms 139:8 If I clyme vp into heauen, thou art there if I go doune to hel, thou art there also.
Psalms 139:9 If I take the wynges of the mornynge, & remayne in the vttermost parte of the sea:
Psalms 139:10 Euen there also shall thy hande leade me, and thy right hand shall holde me.
Psalms 139:11 If I saye: peraduenture the darkenesse shall couer me, then shall my nyghte be turned to daye.
Psalms 139:12 Yea, the darkenesse is no darkenesse with the, but the nyght is as cleare as the day, the darkenesse and light are both a lyke.
Psalms 139:13 For my reynes are thyne, thou hast couered me in my mothers wombe.
Psalms 139:14 I will geue thankes vnto the, for I am wonderously made: maruelous are thy workes, & that my soule knoweth right well.
Psalms 139:15 My bones are not hyd from the, though I be made secretly, and fashyoned beneth in the earth.
Psalms 139:16 Thyne eyes se myne vnperfectnesse, they stande all written in thy boke: my dayes were fashyoned, when as yet there was not one of them.
Psalms 139:17 How deare are thy counsails vnto me O God? O how greate is the summe of them?
Psalms 139:18 If I tell them, they are mo in numbre then the sande: when I wake vp, I am presente with the.
Psalms 139:19 Wylt thou not slaye the wycked (Oh God) that the bloudthyrsty myghte departe fro me?
Psalms 139:20 For they speake vnright of the, thyne enemyes exalte them selfes presumpteously.
Psalms 139:21 I hate them, O Lorde, that hate the: and I maye not awaye wyth those that ryse vp agaynst the.
Psalms 139:22 Yea I hate them right sore, therefore are they myne enemyes.
Psalms 139:23 Trye me, O God, and seke the grounde of myne herte: proue me, and examen my thoughtes.
Psalms 139:24 Loke well if there be any way of wickednesse in me, and leade me in the way euerlastynge.

CHAPTER: 140

Psalms 140:1 To the chaunter, a Psalme of Dauid. Deliuer me, O Lorde, from the euel men, Oh preserue me from the wycked men.
Psalms 140:2 Which ymagin mischief in their hertes, and stere vp strife all the daye longe.
Psalms 140:3 They sharpen their tonges lyke a serpent: adders poyson is vnder their lippes. Selah.
Psalms 140:4 Kepe me, O Lorde, from the hande of the vngodly: preserue me from the wycked men, which are purposed to ouerthrowe my goynges.
Psalms 140:5 The proude haue layed a snare for me, & spred a net abroade wyth coardes, yea, and set trappes in my waye. Selah.
Psalms 140:6 But my sayinge is vnto the Lorde: thou art my God, heare the voyce of my prayer O Lord.
Psalms 140:7 O Lord God, thou strength of my health thou hast couered my head in the day of battayle.
Psalms 140:8 Let not the vngodly haue hys desyre, O Lord, let him not haue hys purpose, lest they be to proude. Selah.
Psalms 140:9 Let the mischief of their owne lippes fall vpon the head of theym, that compase me about.
Psalms 140:10 Let hote burnyng coales fall vpon them let them be cast into the fyre, & into the pytte, that they neuer ryse vp agayne.
Psalms 140:11 A man full of woordes shall not prospere vpon the earth: a malicious & wicked person shalbe hunted awaye, and destroyed.
Psalms 140:12 Sure I am, that the Lorde wyll auenge the poore, & maynteyne the cause of the helpelesse.
Psalms 140:13 The righteous also shall geue thanckes vnto thy name, and the iust shall continue in thy sight.

CHAPTER: 141

Psalms 141:1 A Psalme of Dauid. Lorde, I call vpon the: hast the vnto me, & consider my voyce, when I crye vnto the.
Psalms 141:2 Let my prayer be setforth in thy sight as the incense, and let the lifting vp of my handes be an euenynge sacrifice.
Psalms 141:3 Set a watch, O lorde, before my mouth, yea, a watch at the dore of my lippes.
Psalms 141:4 O let not myne herte be enclyned to any euell thyng, to be mynded as the vngodly or wicked men, lest I eate of suche thynges as please them.
Psalms 141:5 Let the righteous rather smite me frindly, & reproue me: so will I take it, as though he had poured oyle vpon my head: it shall not hurt my head, yea, I will praye yet for theyr wickednesse.
Psalms 141:6 Their iudges stomble at the stone, yet heare they my wordes, that they be ioyfull.
Psalms 141:7 Oure bones lye scatered before the pyt, lyke as when one graueth and dyggeth vp the grounde.
Psalms 141:8 But myne eyes loke vnto the, O Lorde God: in the is my trust, Oh caste not out my soule.
Psalms 141:9 Kepe me from the snare whiche they haue layed for me, and from the trappes of the wicked doers.
Psalms 141:10 Let the vngodly fall into their owne nettes together, vntyll I be gone by them.

CHAPTER: 142

Psalms 142:1 The instruccion of Dauid, a prayer when he was in the caue. I crye vnto the Lorde with my voyce, yea, euen vnto the Lord do I make my supplicacion.
Psalms 142:2 I poure out my complaynte before hym, and shewe hym of my trouble.
Psalms 142:3 When my sprete is in heuynesse, for thou knowest my path: in the way wherin I walke haue they preuely layed a snare for me.
Psalms 142:4 I loke vpon my right hande, & se, there is no man that will know me. I haue no place to fle vnto, no man careth for my soule.
Psalms 142:5 Therfore do I crye vnto the, O Lorde, & say: thou art my hope and my porcion in the londe of the liuing.
Psalms 142:6 Considre my complaynt, for I am brought very lowe. O deliuer me fro my persecuters, for thei are to stronge for me.
Psalms 142:7 Bryng my soule out of pryson, that I may geue thankes vnto thy name: which thyng if thou wilt graunt me, then shall the righteous resorte vnto my company.

CHAPTER: 143

Psalms 143:1 A Psalme of Dauid. Heare my prayer, O Lord, considre my desire: aunswere me for thy trueth and righteousnesse sake.
Psalms 143:2 And entre not into iudgement with thy seruaunt, for in thy sighte shall no man lyuyng be iustefied.
Psalms 143:3 For the enemye persecuteth my soule, he smyteth my lyfe doune too the grounde, he layeth me in the darkenesse, as the dead men of the worlde.
Psalms 143:4 Therefore is my sprete vexed within me, and my herte within me is desolate.
Psalms 143:5 Yet do I remembre the times past, I muse vpon all thy workes, yea, I exercise my selfe in the workes of thy handes.
Psalms 143:6 I stretche forthe myne handes vnto the, my soule cryeth vnto the oute of the thyrstye lande. Selah.
Psalms 143:7 Heare me, O Lorde, & that soone, for my sprete waxeth faynte: hyde not thy face fro me, lest I be lyke vnto theym that go doune into the graue.
Psalms 143:8 O let me heare thy louyng kyndnesse by tymes in the morning, for in the is my trust: shew thou me the waye that I should walke in, for I lift vp my soule vnto the.
Psalms 143:9 Deliuer me, O Lord, fro myne enemies, for I resorte vnto the.
Psalms 143:10 Teache me to do the thynge that pleaseth the, for thou arte my God: lette thy louinge sprete leade me forth vnto the lande of righteousnes.
Psalms 143:11 Quicken me, O Lord, for thy names sake and for thy righteousnesse sake brynge my soule out of trouble.
Psalms 143:12 And of thy goodnesse scater myne enemyes abroade, & destroye all them that vexe my soule, for I am thy seruaunt.

CHAPTER: 144

Psalms 144:1 Of Dauid. Blessed be the Lorde my refuge which teacheth my handes to warre, and my fyngers too fyght.
Psalms 144:2 My hope and my castell, my defence and my deliuerer, my shylde in whome I trust, which gouerneth the people that is vnder me.
Psalms 144:3 Lorde what is man, that thou hast suche respect vnto hym? Or the sonne of man, that thou so regardest hym?
Psalms 144:4 Man is like a thing of naught, hys tyme passeth awaye like a shadow.
Psalms 144:5 Bowe thy heauens, O Lorde, & come doune, touche the mountaynes, that thei may smoke with all.
Psalms 144:6 Sende forthe the lightenynge and scater them, shute out thyne arrowes, and consume them.
Psalms 144:7 Sende doune thyne hande from aboue, deliuer me, & take me out of the greate waters, from the hande of straunge chyldren.
Psalms 144:8 Whose mouth talketh of vanitie, & theyr right hande is a right hande of falsede,
Psalms 144:9 That I maye singe a new songe vnto the O God, and singe prayses vnto the vpon a tenstrynged lute.
Psalms 144:10 Thou that geuest victory vnto kynges, & hast deliuered Dauid thy seruaunt from the parell of the swerde.
Psalms 144:11 Saue me, and deliuer me from the hande of straunge chyldren, whose mouth talketh of vanitie, and their ryght hande is a ryghte hande of falsede.
Psalms 144:12 That oure sonnes maye growe vp as the yong plantes, & that our daughters may be as the polyshed corners of the temple.
Psalms 144:13 That oure garners may be full and plenteous with all maner of stoare: that oure shepe maye brynge forth thousandes and hundreth thousandes in our vyllages.
Psalms 144:14 That our oxen may be strong to laboure, that there be no mischaunce, no decaye, & no complaynyng in our stretes.
Psalms 144:15 Happy are the people that be in suche a case: yea, blessed are the people, whiche haue the Lord for their God.

CHAPTER: 145

Psalms 145:1 A prayse of Dauid. I wyll magnifie the, O God my kyng, I wil prayse thy name for euer & euer.
Psalms 145:2 Euery daye wil I geue thankes vnto the, & praise thy name for euer and euer.
Psalms 145:3 Great is the Lord, & maruelous worthy to be praysed, there is no ende of his greatenesse.
Psalms 145:4 One generacion shall prayse thy workes vnto another, and declare thy power.
Psalms 145:5 As for me I will be talkynge of thy worshyp, thy glory, thy prayse, and wonderous workes.
Psalms 145:6 So that men shal speake of the myght of thy maruelous actes, and tell of thy greatenes.
Psalms 145:7 The memorial of thyne aboundant kyndnes shalbe shewed, & men shall synge of thy righteousnesse.
Psalms 145:8 The Lord is gracious and merciful, longe sufferyng, and of great goodnesse.
Psalms 145:9 The Lorde is louynge vnto euery man, & hys mercy is ouer all hys workes.
Psalms 145:10 All thy workes prayse the (O Lorde) and thy saynctes geue thankes vnto the.
Psalms 145:11 They shew the glory of the kyngdome, & talke of thy power.
Psalms 145:12 That thy power, thy glory & mightinesse of thy kyngedome myghte be knowen vnto men.
Psalms 145:13 Thy kyngdome is an euerlastyng kyngedome, and thy dominion endureth thorowe out all ages.
Psalms 145:14 The Lord vpholdeth all such as shoulde fall, and lifteth vp all those that be doune.
Psalms 145:15 The eyes of all wayte vpon the, and thou geuest them their meate in due season.
Psalms 145:16 Thou openest thyne hande, and fyllest all thinges liuing with plenteousnesse.
Psalms 145:17 The Lord is righteous in all his wayes, and holy in all hys workes.
Psalms 145:18 The Lord is nye vnto them that call vpon him, yea, al such as call vpon hym faithfully.
Psalms 145:19 He fulfilleth the desire of them that feare him, he heareth their crie, and helpeth them.
Psalms 145:20 The Lord preserueth all theym that loue hym, but scatreth abroade all the vngodly.
Psalms 145:21 My mouth shall speake the prayse of the Lord, and let all flesh geue thankes vnto his holy name for euer and euer. Prayse the euerlastynge.

CHAPTER: 146

Psalms 146:1 Prayse the euerlastyng. Prayse the Lorde, O my soule:
Psalms 146:2 whyle I lyue will I prayse the Lorde: yea, as longe as I haue any beyng, I will sing prayses vnto my God.
Psalms 146:3 O put not your trust in prynces, nor in any chylde of man, for there is no helpe in them.
Psalms 146:4 For when the breath of man goeth forth, he shall turne agayne to his earth, and so all hys thoughtes perysh.
Psalms 146:5 Blessed is he that hath the God of Iacob for his helpe, and whose hope is in the Lord hys God.
Psalms 146:6 Which made heauen and earth, the sea, & all that therin is, which kepeth hys promise for euer.
Psalms 146:7 Which helpeth them to righte that suffre wrong, which fedeth the hongry. The Lord louseth men out of pryson,
Psalms 146:8 the Lord geueth sight to the blynde. The Lorde helpeth them vp that are fallen, the Lord loueth the righteous.
Psalms 146:9 The Lorde careth for the straungers, he defendeth the fatherlesse and wydow: as for the way of the vngodly, he turneth it vpside doune.
Psalms 146:10 The Lord thy God, O Syon, is kyng for euermore, & thorow out all generacions. Prayse the euerlastynge.

CHAPTER: 147

Psalms 147:1 Prayse the euerlastyng. O prayse the Lord, for it is a good thyng to sing prayses vnto our God: yea, a ioyful & pleasaunt thing is it to be thankeful.
Psalms 147:2 The Lorde shall buylde vp Hierusalem, & gather together the outcastes of Israel.
Psalms 147:3 He healeth the contryte in herte, and byndeth vp their woundes.
Psalms 147:4 He telleth the numbre of the starres, and calleth them all by their names.
Psalms 147:5 Great is our Lord, & great is his power: yea, hys wysdome is infinitie.
Psalms 147:6 The Lord setteth vp the meke, and bryngeth the vngodly doune to the grounde.
Psalms 147:7 O singe vnto the Lorde with thankesgeuyng, sing prayses vpon the harpe vnto our God.
Psalms 147:8 Which couereth the heauen wyth cloudes, prepareth rayn for the earth, & maketh the grasse to growe vpon the mountaynes.
Psalms 147:9 Which geueth fodre vnto the cattell, and fedeth the yong rauens that call vpon hym.
Psalms 147:10 He hath no pleasure in the strengthe of an horse, neither deliteth he in any mans legges.
Psalms 147:11 But the Lordes delyte is in them that feare hym, and put their trust in his mercy.
Psalms 147:12 Prayse the Lord O Ierusalem, prayse thy God O Sion.
Psalms 147:13 For he maketh fast the barres of the gates, and blesseth the chyldren within the.
Psalms 147:14 He maketh peace in thy borders, & filleth the with the floure of wheate.
Psalms 147:15 He sendeth forth hys commaundemente vpon earth, his worde runneth swyftly.
Psalms 147:16 He geueth snow lyke wolle, & scatereth the hore frost lyke ashes.
Psalms 147:17 He casteth forth hys yse lyke morsels, who is able to abyde hys frost?
Psalms 147:18 He sendeth out hys woorde and mealteth them, he bloweth with hys wynd, & the waters flowe.
Psalms 147:19 He sheweth hys woorde vnto Iacob, hys statutes and ordinaunces vnto Israel.
Psalms 147:20 He hath not dealte so with all the Heathen, neither haue they knowlege of hys lawes. Prayse the euerlastyng.

CHAPTER: 148

Psalms 148:1 Prayse the euerlastyng. O prayse the Lorde of heauen, prayse hym in the heygth.
Psalms 148:2 Prayse hym all ye aungels of hys, prayse hym all hys hoost.
Psalms 148:3 Prayse hym Sunne and Moone, prayse hym all ye starres and light.
Psalms 148:4 Prayse hym all ye heauens, and ye waters that be vnder the heauens.
Psalms 148:5 Let them prayse the name of the Lorde, for he commaunded, and they were made.
Psalms 148:6 He hath made them fast for euer and euer, he hath geuen them a lawe whiche shall not be broken.
Psalms 148:7 Prayse the Lord vpon earth, ye whalfysshes, and al depes.
Psalms 148:8 Fyre and hayle, snow and vapors, wynde and storme, fulfillynge his worde.
Psalms 148:9 Mountaynes and al hilles, fruteful trees and all Cedres.
Psalms 148:10 Beastes and cattel, wormes and fethered foules.
Psalms 148:11 Kynges of the earth and all people, Prynces and iudges of the worlde.
Psalms 148:12 Yonge men and maydens, olde men and chyldren:
Psalms 148:13 let them prayse the name of the Lord, for his name only is excellent, and his prayse aboue heauen and earth.
Psalms 148:14 He exalteth the horne of his people, all hys saynctes shall prayse hym, the chyldren of Israell, euen the people that serueth him. Prayse the euerlastyng.

CHAPTER: 149

Psalms 149:1 Prayse the euerlastynge. O synge vnto the Lorde a newe songe, let the congregacion of saynctes prayse hym.
Psalms 149:2 Let Israell reioyse in hym that made hym, & let the chyldren of Sion be ioyfull in their kyng.
Psalms 149:3 Let them prayse his name in the daunce, let them singe prayses vnto hym with tabrettes and harpes.
Psalms 149:4 For the Lorde hath pleasure in hys people, and helpeth the meke harted.
Psalms 149:5 Let the saynctes be ioyfull with glory, let them reioyse in their beddes.
Psalms 149:6 Let the prayses of God be in their mouth and sharpe swerdes in their handes.
Psalms 149:7 To be auenged of the Heathen, and to rebuke the people.
Psalms 149:8 To bynde their Kynges in cheynes, and their nobles with lynckes of yron.
Psalms 149:9 That they may be auenged of them, as it is written, such honour haue all his saynctes. Prayse the euerlastynge.

CHAPTER: 150

Psalms 150:1 Prayse the euerlastyng. O prayse the Lord in his Sanctuary, prayse hym in the fyrmament of hys power.
Psalms 150:2 Prayse hym in his noble actes, prayse him in hys excellent greatnesse.
Psalms 150:3 Prayse hym in the sounde of the trompet, prayse hym vpon the lute and harpe.
Psalms 150:4 Prayse hym in the cymbales and daunse prayse hym vpon the strynges and pype.
Psalms 150:5 Prayse hym vpon the weltuned cymbals prayse him vpon the loude cymbales.
Psalms 150:6 Let euery thing that hath breth, prayse the Lorde. Prayse the euerlastynge.

BOOK: Proverbs

CHAPTER: 1

Proverbs 1:1 The Prouerbes of Salomon the sonne of Dauid king of Israell:
Proverbs 1:2 too lerne wisdome instruccion, vnderstanding prudence,
Proverbs 1:3 righteousnesse, iudgement & equite.
Proverbs 1:4 That the very babes might haue wit, and that yongmen might haue knowlege & vnderstanding.
Proverbs 1:5 By hearing, the wyse man shall come by more wysedome: & by experience
Proverbs 1:6 he shalbe more apte to vnderstande a parable, & the interpretacion therof, the wordes of the wise, & the darke speaches of the same.
Proverbs 1:7 The feare of the Lord is the begynnynge of wysdome. But fooles despise wysdome & destruccion.
Proverbs 1:8 My sonne, heare thy fathers doctryne, & forsake not the lawe of thy mother:
Proverbs 1:9 for that shall bryng grace vnto thy head, & shall be a cheyne about thy necke.
Proverbs 1:10 My sonne, consent not vnto sinners,
Proverbs 1:11 if they entise the, & say: come with vs, let vs leye wayte for bloud, and lurke preuely for the innocent without a cause:
Proverbs 1:12 let vs swalow them vp like the hel, let vs deuour them quicke & whole, as those that go doune into the pyt.
Proverbs 1:13 So shal we finde al maner of costely riches, & fil our houses wt spoiles.
Proverbs 1:14 Cast in thy lot among vs, we shall haue all one purse.
Proverbs 1:15 My sonne, walke not thou with them, refrayn thy fote from their ways.
Proverbs 1:16 For their fete runne to euel, & are hasty to shed bloud.
Proverbs 1:17 But in vayn is the net laied forth before the byrdes eyes.
Proverbs 1:18 Yea, they themselfes laye wayte one for anothers bloud, & one of them wolde sley another.
Proverbs 1:19 These are the ways of all suche as be couetous, that one wolde rauish anothers life.
Proverbs 1:20 Wisdome crieth without, & putteth forth her voyce in the stretes.
Proverbs 1:21 She calleth before the congregacion in the open gates, & sheweth her wordes thorow the citie, saying:
Proverbs 1:22 O ye chyldren, how longe will ye loue chyldyshnesse? how long wil the, scorners delite in scorning & the vnwise be enemies vnto knowlege?
Proverbs 1:23 O turne you vnto my correccion: lo. I wil expres my mynde vnto you, & make you vnderstande my wordes.
Proverbs 1:24 Seing then that I haue called & ye refused it: I haue stretched out my hand, & no man regarded it,
Proverbs 1:25 but all my counsayls haue ye despysed, & set my corrections at naught.
Proverbs 1:26 Therfore shall I also laugh in your destruccion, & mocke you, when the thyng that ye feare cometh vpon you:
Proverbs 1:27 euen when the thing that ye be afrayed of, falleth in sodenly lyke a storme, & your miseri like a tempest: yea, when trouble & heuinesse commeth vpon you.
Proverbs 1:28 Then shal they call vpon me, but I will not heare: they shal seke me early, but thei shal not find me:
Proverbs 1:29 And that because thei hated knowlege, & receyued not the feare of the Lord,
Proverbs 1:30 but abhorred my counsail, & despised my correction.
Proverbs 1:31 Therfore shal they eate the frutes of their owne way, & be filled with their oune counsayls:
Proverbs 1:32 for the turning away of the vnwyse shal sley them, & the prosperitie of foles shalbe their owne destruccion.
Proverbs 1:33 But who so harkeneth vnto me shal dwel safely, and haue ynough without any feare of euell.

CHAPTER: 2

Proverbs 2:1 My sonne, if thou wilt receyue my wordes, & kepe my commaundementes by the,
Proverbs 2:2 that thyne eare may herken vnto wisdome, applie thyne hert then to vnderstanding.
Proverbs 2:3 For if thou cryest after wysdome, & callest for knowledge:
Proverbs 2:4 if thou sekest after her as after money, & dyggest for her as for treasure:
Proverbs 2:5 then shalt thou vnderstande the feare of the Lord, & fynde the knowlege of God.
Proverbs 2:6 For it is the Lord that geueth wysdome, out of hys mouth commeth knowlege & vnderstandyng.
Proverbs 2:7 He preserueth the welfare of the righteous, & defendeth them that walke innocently:
Proverbs 2:8 he kepeth them in the right path, & preserueth the waye of his saynctes.
Proverbs 2:9 Then shalt thou vnderstande righteousnesse, iudgement and equite, yea, & euery good path.
Proverbs 2:10 If wisdome entre into thyne hert, and thy soule delyte in knowlege:
Proverbs 2:11 then shall counsayl preserue the, & vnderstanding shall kepe the.
Proverbs 2:12 That thou mayest be delyuered from the euell waye, & from the man that speaketh frowarde thinges
Proverbs 2:13 From suche as leaue the hye strete, & walke in the wayes of darkenesse:
Proverbs 2:14 whiche reioyse in doinge euel, and delite in wicked thinges:
Proverbs 2:15 whose wayes are croked, and their pathes sclaunderous.
Proverbs 2:16 That thou mayest be deliuered also from the straunge woman, & frome her that is not thyne owne: whiche geueth swete woordes,
Proverbs 2:17 forsaketh the housbande of her youth, & forgetteth the couenaunt of her God.
Proverbs 2:18 For her house is enclined vnto death, & her pathes vnto hel.
Proverbs 2:19 Al thei that go in vnto her, come not agayn, neither take they holde of the way of lyfe.
Proverbs 2:20 That thou mayest walke in the good way, & kepe the pathes of the righteous.
Proverbs 2:21 For the iust shal dwell in the lande, & the innocentes shall remayne in it:
Proverbs 2:22 but the vngodly shalbe roted oute of the lande, and the wicked doers shalbe taken out of it.

CHAPTER: 3

Proverbs 3:1 O my sonne, forget not my law but se that thyne hert kepe my commaundementes.
Proverbs 3:2 For they shall prolong the dayes & yeares of thy life, & bring the peace.
Proverbs 3:3 Let mercy & faythfulnes neuer go from the: bynde them about thy necke, & write them in the tables of thyne hert.
Proverbs 3:4 So shalt thou fynde fauour & good vnderstanding in the sight of God & men.
Proverbs 3:5 Put thy trust in the Lord wyth all thyne hert, and leane not vnto thyne own vnderstandinge.
Proverbs 3:6 In all thy wayes haue respecte vnto hym, & he shal ordre thy goinges.
Proverbs 3:7 Be not wyse in thyne own conceyte, but feare the Lord, & departe from euell:
Proverbs 3:8 so shall thy nauell be whole, & thy bones strong.
Proverbs 3:9 Honour the Lord with thy substaunce, & with the firstlinges of all thyne encrease:
Proverbs 3:10 so shall thy barnes be filled with plenteousnesse, and thy presses shall flowe ouer with swete wyne.
Proverbs 3:11 My sonne, despise not the chastening of the Lorde, neyther faynte when thou arte rebuked of hym.
Proverbs 3:12 For whome the Lord loueth hym he chasteneth: & yet deliteth in him euen as a father in his owne sonne.
Proverbs 3:13 Well is hym that findeth wysdome, and opteyneth vnderstandinge,
Proverbs 3:14 for the gettinge of it is better then any marchaundise of syluer, and the profet of it is better then golde.
Proverbs 3:15 Wysdome is more worth then precyous stones, and all thinges that thou canste desyre, are not to be compared vnto her.
Proverbs 3:16 Vpon her righte hande is longe lyfe, and vppon her lefte hande is ryches and honour.
Proverbs 3:17 Her wayes are pleasaunte wayes, and al her pathes are peaceable.
Proverbs 3:18 She is a tree of lyfe to them that laye holde vpon her, and blessed are they that kepe her fast.
Proverbs 3:19 With wysdome hath the Lorde layed the foundacion of the earth, & thorow vnderstanding hath he stablished the heauens.
Proverbs 3:20 Thorow hys wysdome the deapthes breake vp, and the cloudes droppe downe of the dewe.
Proverbs 3:21 My sonne, let not these thinges depart from thyne eyes, but kepe my lawe and my councel:
Proverbs 3:22 so shal it be life vnto thy soule, and grace vnto thy mouth.
Proverbs 3:23 Then shalt thou walke safely in thy waye, and thy fote shal not stomble.
Proverbs 3:24 If thou slepest, thou shalt not be afraied, but shalt take thy rest and slepe swetelye.
Proverbs 3:25 Thou nedest not to be afrayed of any sodaine feare nether for the vyolent rushynge in of the vngodly, when it commeth.
Proverbs 3:26 For the Lorde shal be besiege the, and kepe thy fote that thou be not taken.
Proverbs 3:27 Refuse not to do good vnto hym that shoulde haue it, so longe as thyne hande is able to do it.
Proverbs 3:28 Say not vnto thy neyghbour go thy waye and come agayne, to morowe wyll I geue the:
Proverbs 3:29 where as thou hast nowe to geue him. Intend no hurt vnto thy neighbour seing he hopeth to dwel in rest by the.
Proverbs 3:30 Striue not lightely with any man, wher as he hath done the harme.
Proverbs 3:31 Folowe not a wycked man, and chose none of hys wayes:
Proverbs 3:32 for the Lorde abhorreth the froward, but hys secrete is amonge the rightuous.
Proverbs 3:33 The curse of the Lord is in the house of the vngodly, but he blessed the dwellynges of the rightuous.
Proverbs 3:34 As for the scornefull, he shall laugh them to scorne, but he shal geue grace vnto the lowly.
Proverbs 3:35 The wise shall haue honour in possession, but shame is the promocion that foles shall haue.

CHAPTER: 4

Proverbs 4:1 Heare, O ye children, the fatherly exhortation, and take good hede, that ye maye learne wysdome.
Proverbs 4:2 Yea I shall geue you a good rewarde, if ye wyll not for sake my lawe.
Proverbs 4:3 For when I my selfe was my fathers deare sonne, and tenderlye beloued of my mother,
Proverbs 4:4 he taughte me also, saiyng: Let thyne herte receaue my wordes, kepe my commaundementes, and thou shalt lyue.
Proverbs 4:5 Get the wysdome, get the vnderstanding forget not the wordes of my mouth, & shrinke not from them.
Proverbs 4:6 Forsake her not, she shall preserue the: loue her, and she shal kepe the.
Proverbs 4:7 The chyefe poynte of wisdom is, that thou be willing to optayne wysdome, and before all thy goodes to gett the vnderstandynge.
Proverbs 4:8 Make muche of her and she shall promote the: Yea if thou embrace her, she shall brynge the vnto honoure.
Proverbs 4:9 She shall make the a gracyous head, and garnyshe the wyth a crowne of glorye.
Proverbs 4:10 Heare my sone, and receyue my wordes, that the yeares of thy lyfe maye be many.
Proverbs 4:11 I wyll shewe the, the waye of wysdome, and leade the in the ryght pathes,
Proverbs 4:12 So that if thou goost therin, ther shall not straytenesse hynder the and when thou runnest thou shalte not fall,
Proverbs 4:13 Take fast holde of doctryne, let her not go: kepe her, for she is thy lyfe.
Proverbs 4:14 Come not in the path of the vngodly, and walke not in the waye of the wycked.
Proverbs 4:15 Eschue it, and go not therein: departe a syde, and passe ouer by it.
Proverbs 4:16 For they can not slepe, except they haue first done some myschefe: neither take they anye rest, except they haue fyrst done some harme
Proverbs 4:17 For they eate the breade of wickednesse, and dryncke the wyne of robberye.
Proverbs 4:18 The path of the ryghtuous shyneth as the lyghte, and is euer brighter and brighter vnto the perfecte daye.
Proverbs 4:19 But the waye of the vngodly is as the darcknes, wherin men fal, or thei be aware.
Proverbs 4:20 My sonne, marcke my words, and encline thyne eare vnto my saiynges.
Proverbs 4:21 Let them not depart from thine eyes, kepe them euen in the myddest of thyne herte.
Proverbs 4:22 For they are lyfe vnto all those that fynde them, and health vnto all their bodyes.
Proverbs 4:23 Kepe thyne herte wyth all dilygence, for there vpon hangeth lyfe.
Proverbs 4:24 Put awaye from the a frowarde mouth, and let the lippes of sclander be farre from the.
Proverbs 4:25 Let thyne eyes beholde the thinge that is righte, and let thine eye liddes loke straight before the.
Proverbs 4:26 Pondre the path of thy fete, so shal al thy waies be sure.
Proverbs 4:27 Turne not a side, neither to the righte hande ner to the lefte, but withholde thy fote from euel.

CHAPTER: 5

Proverbs 5:1 O my sonne, geue hede vnto my wysdome, and bow thyne eare vnto my prudence:
Proverbs 5:2 that thou mayest regarde good councel, and that thy lyppes may kepe nourtoure.
Proverbs 5:3 For the lyppes of an harlot are a droppynge combe, and her throte is softer then oyle.
Proverbs 5:4 But at the laste she is as bytter as worme wode, and as sharpe as a two edged sweard.
Proverbs 5:5 Her fete go downe vnto death, and her steps pearse thorow vnto hel.
Proverbs 5:6 She regardeth not the path of life, so vnstedfast are her waies, that thou canst not know them.
Proverbs 5:7 Heare me therefore (O my sonne) and departe not from the wordes of my mouth.
Proverbs 5:8 Kepe thy way far from her, and come not nye the dores of her house.
Proverbs 5:9 That thou geue not thyne honoure vnto another, and thy yeares to the cruell.
Proverbs 5:10 That other men be not filled wt thy goods & that thy labours come not in a strang house.
Proverbs 5:11 Yea that thou mourne not at the last (when thou hast spent thy body & goods)
Proverbs 5:12 and then say: Alas why hated I nourtoure? why dyd my herte despys correction.
Proverbs 5:13 Wherfore was not I obedyente vnto the voyce of my teachers, & herkened not vnto them that infourmed me?
Proverbs 5:14 I am come almoste into all mysfortune, in the middest of the multytude and congregacion.
Proverbs 5:15 Drinke of the water of thine owne wel, and of the riuers that runne out of thine owne springes.
Proverbs 5:16 Let thy welles flowe out abroad, that ther may be ryuers of water in the stretes:
Proverbs 5:17 but let them be only thyne owne, and not strangers wyth the.
Proverbs 5:18 Let thy well be blessed, and be glad wyth the wyfe of thy youth.
Proverbs 5:19 Louyng is the hind, & frendly is the Roo: let her brestes alway satisfye the, and holde the euer content wyth her loue.
Proverbs 5:20 My sonne, why wilt thou haue pleasure in an harlotte, and embrace the bosome of another woman?
Proverbs 5:21 For euery mannes waies are open in the sight of the Lorde, and he pondreth all their goynges.
Proverbs 5:22 The wyckednesses of the vngodly shal catch him selfe, and with the snares of of his owne synnes shall he be trapped.
Proverbs 5:23 Because he wold not be refourmed he shall dye: and for his greate folyshnesse he shalbe destroyed.

CHAPTER: 6

Proverbs 6:1 My son, if thou be suerty for thy neyghboure, thou hast fastened thyne hand wyth another man:
Proverbs 6:2 yet thou art bound with thyne owne wordes, & taken wt thine owne speache.
Proverbs 6:3 Therfore, my sonne, do thys discharge thy selfe, for thou art come into thy neyghboures daunger. Go thy way then sone and intreate thy neighbour:
Proverbs 6:4 let not thine eies slepe ner thyne eye lyddes slomber.
Proverbs 6:5 Saue thy selfe as a doo from the hande, and as a byrde from the handes of the fouler.
Proverbs 6:6 Go to the Emmet (thou slogard) consyder her wayes, and lerne to be wise.
Proverbs 6:7 She hath no guide, no teacher, no leader:
Proverbs 6:8 yet in the Sommer she prouideth her meate, and gathereth her foode together in the haruest,
Proverbs 6:9 How longe wilt thou slepe? thou slogysh man? When wylte thou aryse out of thy slepe?
Proverbs 6:10 Yea slepe on stil a litle, slomber a lytle, folde thyne handes together yet a lytle, that thou mayest slepe:
Proverbs 6:11 so shall pouerte come vnto the as one that trauaileth by the way, and necessitie lyke a weaponed man.
Proverbs 6:12 A dissembling person, a wycked man goeth with a frowarde mouth,
Proverbs 6:13 he wyncketh wyth hys eyes, he tokeneth wyth hys fete, he poynteth wyth his fingers,
Proverbs 6:14 he is euer ymagining mischefe and frowardnesse in his hert, & causeth dsscord.
Proverbs 6:15 Therfore shal his destruccyon come hastely vpon him, sodenly shal he be al to broken, and not be healed.
Proverbs 6:16 There be sixe thinges which the Lorde hateth, and the seuenth he vtterly abhorreth:
Proverbs 6:17 A proude loke, a dyssemblynge tonge, handes that shede innocent bloud,
Proverbs 6:18 an hert that goeth about with wicked ymaginacions, fet that be swift in rening to do mischefe,
Proverbs 6:19 a false witnes that bringeth vp lies, and such one as soweth dyscord amonge brethren,
Proverbs 6:20 My son kepe thy fathers commandementes, and forsake not the law of thy mother.
Proverbs 6:21 Put them vp together in thine herte, and bind them about the neck.
Proverbs 6:22 That they may leade the where thou goest, preserue the when thou art a sleape, and that when thou awakest, thou maiest talke of them
Proverbs 6:23 For the commaundement is a lanterne, and the lawe a lyghtie, a chastening, and nurtour is the waye of lyfe:
Proverbs 6:24 that they maye kepe the from the euell woman, and from the flattering tong of the harlot:
Proverbs 6:25 that thou lust not after he beuty in thine herte, & lest thou be taken wt her fayre lokes.
Proverbs 6:26 An harlot will make a man to begge his breade, but a maried woman wyl hunte for the precyous lyfe.
Proverbs 6:27 May a man take fyre in his bosome and his clothes not be brent?
Proverbs 6:28 Or can one go vpon hoate coales, & hys fete not be hurte?
Proverbs 6:29 Euen so, whosoeuer goeth into hys neyghbours wyfe, and toucheth her can not be vngilty.
Proverbs 6:30 Men do not vtterly despise a thefe that stealeth to satisfye hys soule, when he is hongry:
Proverbs 6:31 but if he may be gotten, he restoreth agayne seuen tymes as muche, or els he maketh recompense with al the good of his house
Proverbs 6:32 But who so comitteth aduoutry wyth a womanne, he is a fole, and bringeth hys lyfe to destruccyon.
Proverbs 6:33 He getteth him selfe also shame & dishonour, such as shal neuer be put out.
Proverbs 6:34 For the gelousy and wrath of the man wil not be intreated,
Proverbs 6:35 no though thou woldest offer him greate giftes to make amendes, he wyll not receiue them.

CHAPTER: 7

Proverbs 7:1 My sonne, kepe my wordes, and lay vp my commaundements by the.
Proverbs 7:2 Kepe my commaundementes and my lawe, euen as the apple of thyne eie, and thou shalt liue.
Proverbs 7:3 Bind them vpon thy fingers, and wryte them in the table of thyne herte.
Proverbs 7:4 Saye vnto wysdome: thou art my sister, and cal vnderstandyng thy kynswoman:
Proverbs 7:5 that she may kepe the from the starnge woman, and from the harlot which geueth swete wordes,
Proverbs 7:6 For out of the window of my house I loked thorow the trealesse,
Proverbs 7:7 & beheld the simple people: and among other yong folkes I spyed one yonge fole
Proverbs 7:8 going ouer the stretes, by the corner in the way toward the harlots house
Proverbs 7:9 in the twylight of the euening, when it beganne now to be nyght and darke.
Proverbs 7:10 And beholde, ther met him a woman in an harlots apparel,
Proverbs 7:11 a dysceatful, wanton & vnstedfast woman: whose fet could not abide in the house,
Proverbs 7:12 now is she without, now in the stretes, lurketh in euery corner,
Proverbs 7:13 she caught the yonge man, kyssed hym, & was not ashamed, sayinge:
Proverbs 7:14 I had a vowe to paye, & thys daye I perfourme it.
Proverbs 7:15 Therfore came I forth to mete the, that I mighte seke thy face, and so I haue founde the.
Proverbs 7:16 I haue deckte my bed with couerynges & clothes of Egypte.
Proverbs 7:17 My bed haue I made to smell of myrre, Aloes, and Cynamon.
Proverbs 7:18 Come let vs lye together, and take our pleasure tyll it be daye lyghte.
Proverbs 7:19 For the good man is not at home, he is gone farre of.
Proverbs 7:20 He hath taken the bagge of money with hym: who can tell when he commeth home?
Proverbs 7:21 Thus with many swete woordes she ouercome hym, and with her flatteryng lippes she wanne hym.
Proverbs 7:22 Immediatly he folowed her, as it were an oxe led to the slaughter (& lyke as it were to the stockes, where foles are punyshed)
Proverbs 7:23 so longe tyll she had wounded hys lyuer with her dart: like as if a byrde hasted to the snare not knowyng that the parell of his lyfe lieth therupon.
Proverbs 7:24 Heare me now therfore (O my sonne) and marke the wordes of my mouth.
Proverbs 7:25 Let not thyne herte wandre in her wayes, & be not thou disceyued in her pathes.
Proverbs 7:26 For many one hath she wounded and cast doune yea, many a stronge man hath she slayne.
Proverbs 7:27 Her house is the waye vnto hell, where men go doune into the chambers of death.

CHAPTER: 8

Proverbs 8:1 Doth not wysdome crye? doeth not vnderstanding put forth her voyce?
Proverbs 8:2 Standeth she not in the hye places in the stretes & ways
Proverbs 8:3 doth she not crie before the whole citie, and in the gates where men go out & in?
Proverbs 8:4 It is you, O ye men (saieth she) whom I cal? Vnto you (O ye chyldren of men) lyft I vp my voyce.
Proverbs 8:5 Take hede vnto knowlege O ye ignoraunt, be wyse in hert O ye foles.
Proverbs 8:6 Geue eare, for I will speake of great matters, and open my lyppes to tell thinges that be right.
Proverbs 8:7 For my throte shalbe talking of the trueth, & my lyppes abhorre vngodlinesse.
Proverbs 8:8 All the wordes of my mouth are righteous, there is no frowardenesse nor falsede therin.
Proverbs 8:9 They are all playne to suche as will vnderstande, and ryght to them that fynde knowlege.
Proverbs 8:10 Receiue my doctrine therfore, & not siluer: & my knowledge, more then fyne golde.
Proverbs 8:11 For wysdome is more worth then precious stones, yea, all the thinges that thou canst desire, are not to be compared vnto it.
Proverbs 8:12 I wysdome haue my dwelling wt knowledge, & prudent counsaill is myne owne.
Proverbs 8:13 With me is the feare of the Lorde, and the eschuyng of euell. As for pryde, dysdayne, & euell waye, & a mouth that speaketh wicked thinges, I vtterly abhorre them.
Proverbs 8:14 I can geue counsayl, & be a gyde: I haue vnderstanding I haue strength.
Proverbs 8:15 Thorow me, kinges reygn: thorow me, prynces make iust lawes.
Proverbs 8:16 Thorow me, lordes beare rule, and all iudges of the earth execute iudgement.
Proverbs 8:17 I am louyngevnto those that loue me, & they that seke me early, shall fynde me.
Proverbs 8:18 Riches and honoure are with me, yea, excellent goodes & righteousnes.
Proverbs 8:19 My frute is better then golde & precious stone, & myne encrease more worth then fyne siluer.
Proverbs 8:20 I walke in the waye of righteousnes, and in the strete of iudgement.
Proverbs 8:21 That I may sende prosperitie to those that loue me, & to encrease their treasure.
Proverbs 8:22 The Lord hym self had me in possession in the begynning of hys wayes, or euer he beganne hys workes afore tyme.
Proverbs 8:23 I haue bene ordeyned from euerlasting, & from the beginning or euer the earthe was made.
Proverbs 8:24 When I was borne, there were nether depthes nor springs of water.
Proverbs 8:25 Before the foundacions of the mountaynes were layed, yea, before al hylles was I borne.
Proverbs 8:26 The earth & all that is vpon the earth was not yet made, no not the grounde it selfe.
Proverbs 8:27 For when he made the heauens, I was present: when he sette vp the depthes in ordre:
Proverbs 8:28 when he hanged the cloudes aboue: when he fastened the sprynges of the depe:
Proverbs 8:29 When he shut the sea within certayn boundes, that the waters should not go ouer their markes. When he layed the foundacions of the earth
Proverbs 8:30 I was with hym, ordering all thinges, delytynge dayly, and reioysinge all waye before hym.
Proverbs 8:31 As for the rounde compase of his worlde, I make it ioyfull: for my delyte is to be among the chyldren of men.
Proverbs 8:32 Therfore herken vnto me, O ye chyldren, for blessed are they that kepe my wayes.
Proverbs 8:33 O geue eare vnto nurtour, be wyse, and refuse it not.
Proverbs 8:34 Blessed is the man that heareth me, watchynge dayly at my gates, & geuynge attendaunce at the postes of my dores.
Proverbs 8:35 For who so findeth me, findeth life and shall obtayne fauour of the Lorde.
Proverbs 8:36 But who so offendeth agaynste me, hurteth hys owne soule. All they that hate me, are the louers of death.

CHAPTER: 9

Proverbs 9:1 Wysdome hath buylded her selfe an house, & hewen out seuen pyllers:
Proverbs 9:2 she hath kylled her vitayles, poured out her wyne, & prepared her table.
Proverbs 9:3 She hath sent forth her maydens to crye vpon the hyest place of the citie:
Proverbs 9:4 Who so is ignoraunt, let hym come hither. And to the vnwise she sayd:
Proverbs 9:5 O come on your way, eat my bred, & drinke my wyne, which I haue poured out for you.
Proverbs 9:6 Forsake ignoraunce, & ye shall lyue: & se that ye go in the way of vnderstandinge.
Proverbs 9:7 Who so reproueth a scornefull personne, getteth hym self dishonour: & he that rebuketh the vngodly stayneth him self.
Proverbs 9:8 Reproue not a scorner, lest he owe the euel wil: but rebuke a wise man, & he wil loue the.
Proverbs 9:9 Geue a discrete man but an occasion, & he wilbe the wiser, teache a righteous man, and he will increase.
Proverbs 9:10 The feare of the Lorde is the beginning of wisdome, and the knowledge of holy thinges is vnderstandynge.
Proverbs 9:11 For thorow me thy dayes shalbe prolonged, and the yeares of thy lyfe shalbe manye.
Proverbs 9:12 If thou be wyse thy wysdome shall do thy selfe good: but if thou thynckeste scorne therof, it shalbe thyne owne harme.
Proverbs 9:13 A folysh restles woman, ful of words, and such one as hath no knowledge,
Proverbs 9:14 sitteth in the dores of her house vpon a stoole aboue in the cytye,
Proverbs 9:15 to cal such as go by, & walke streght in their waies,
Proverbs 9:16 Who so is ignorant (sayeth she) let him come hyther, and to the vnwyse she sayeth:
Proverbs 9:17 stollen waters are swete, and the bread that is preuely eaten, hath a good tast.
Proverbs 9:18 But they consyder not that death is there, and that her gestes go doune to hell.

CHAPTER: 10

Proverbs 10:1 The Parables of Salomon. A wyse sonne maketh a glad father, but an vndiscrete sonne is the heuinesse of hys mother.
Proverbs 10:2 Treasures that are wyckedlye gotten, profit nothing, but rightuousnesse deliuereth from death,
Proverbs 10:3 The lorde wyll not let the soule of the ryghtuous suffer honger, but he putteth the vngodly from his desire.
Proverbs 10:4 An ydle hand maketh pore, but a quicke laboryng hand maketh ryche.
Proverbs 10:5 Who so gathereth in Sommer, is wyse: but he that is slougysh in haruest, bryngeth him selfe to confusyon.
Proverbs 10:6 Louynge and fauourable is the face of the rightuous, but the forehead of the vngodly is past shame and presumptuous.
Proverbs 10:7 The memoryall of the iust shall haue a good reporte but the name of the vngodly shal styncke.
Proverbs 10:8 A wyse man wyll receyue warnyng, but a fole wyll soner be smytten in the face.
Proverbs 10:9 He that leadeth an innocente lyfe, walketh surelye: but who so goeth a wrong way, shalbe knowne,
Proverbs 10:10 He that wyncketh wyth hys eye, wyl do some harme: but he that hath a folysh mouth shalbe beaten.
Proverbs 10:11 The mouth of a ryghtuos man is a wele of lyfe, but the mouth of the vngodly is past shame, and presumptuous.
Proverbs 10:12 Euyll wyll stereth vp strife, but loue couereth the multytude of synnes.
Proverbs 10:13 In the lyppes of hym that hath vnderstandynge a man shall fynde wysdome, but the rod belongeth to the backe of the folysh.
Proverbs 10:14 Wyse men laie vp knowledge, but the mouth of the folysh is nye destruction.
Proverbs 10:15 The rich mans goodes are his strong hold, but pouerte oppresseth the poore.
Proverbs 10:16 The ryghtwyse laboureth to do good, but the vngodly vseth his encrease vnto sinne.
Proverbs 10:17 To take hede vnto the chastenyng of nurtoure, is the way of lyfe: but he that refuseth to be refourmed, goeth wrong.
Proverbs 10:18 Dissembling lippes kepe hatred secretly, and he that speaketh any sclander, is a foole.
Proverbs 10:19 Where much babling is, ther must nedes be offence: he that refraineth his lippes is wisest of all.
Proverbs 10:20 An innocent tong is a noble treasure, but the hert of the vngodly is nothynge worthe.
Proverbs 10:21 The lyppes of the rightuous fed a whole multitude, but foles shal die in their owne folye.
Proverbs 10:22 The blessing of the Lord maketh rich men, as for carefull trauayle, it doth nothynge therto.
Proverbs 10:23 A fole doth wyckedly and maketh but a sport of it: neuerthelesse it is wysdome for a man to beware of suche.
Proverbs 10:24 The thinge that the vngodly are afrayed of, shall come vpon them, but the rightuous shall haue their desyre.
Proverbs 10:25 The vngodly is lyke a tempest that passeth ouer, and is no more sene but the rightuous remayneth sure for eue
Proverbs 10:26 As vyneger is to the tethe, and as smoke is vnto the eyes, euen so sa slougysh person to them that send him forth.
Proverbs 10:27 The feare of the Lorde maketh a long lyfe but the yeares of the vngodly shalbe shortened.
Proverbs 10:28 The paciente abydynge of the rightuous shalbe turned to gladness, but the hope of the vngodli shal perish.
Proverbs 10:29 The waye of the Lorde geueth a corage vnto the godly, but it is a fear for wicked doers
Proverbs 10:30 The righteuous shall neuer be ouerthrowen but the vngodly shal remaine in the land.
Proverbs 10:31 The mouth of the iust wilbe talkyng of wisdome, but the tonge of the frowarde shall perysh.
Proverbs 10:32 The lyppes of the ryghtuous are occupied in acceptable thinges, but the mouth of the vngodly take them to the worst.

CHAPTER: 11

Proverbs 11:1 A false balance is an abhomynation vnto the Lord, but a true weight pleaseth him.
Proverbs 11:2 Wher pryde is, ther is shame also and confusion: but where as is lowlynes, there is wysdome.
Proverbs 11:3 The innocente dealyng of the iust shal leade them, but the vnfaithfulnesse of the despisers shalbe their owne destruccion
Proverbs 11:4 Riches helpe not in the day of vengeaunce, but rightuousnes deliuereth from death.
Proverbs 11:5 The rightuousnes of the innocent ordereth his way, but the vngodly shall fall in his owne wyckednesse.
Proverbs 11:6 The rightuousnes of the iuste shall delyuer them, but the despisers shalbe taken in their owne vngodlynesse.
Proverbs 11:7 When an vngodlie man dieth, his hope is gone, the confydence of ryches shal perish
Proverbs 11:8 The rightuous shalbe delyuered out of trouble, and the vngodly shal come in his steade.
Proverbs 11:9 Thorow the mouth of the dyssembler is hys neyghboure destroyed, but thorowe knowledge shall the iust be deliuered.
Proverbs 11:10 When it goeth well with the righteous, the cytye is mery: and when the vngodly perish, there is gladnesse.
Proverbs 11:11 When the iust are in wealth, the citie prospereth: but when the vngodly haue the rule, it decayeth.
Proverbs 11:12 A foole bringeth vp a sclaunder of his neyghbour, but a wyse man wil kepe it secrete.
Proverbs 11:13 A dissembling person will discouer preuy thinges, but he that is of a faythful hert, wil kepe counsayl.
Proverbs 11:14 Where no good counsail is there the people decaye: but where as many are that can geue counsayll, there is wealth.
Proverbs 11:15 He that is suerty for a straunger, hurteth him self: but he that medleth not with suertiship, is sure.
Proverbs 11:16 A gracious woman manteyneth honesty, as for the mighty, they manteyne ryches.
Proverbs 11:17 He that hath a gentle liberall stomack is merciful: but who so hurteth hys neyghbour, is a tyraunt.
Proverbs 11:18 The labour of the vngodly prospereth not, but he that soweth righteousnes, shal receyue a sure rewarde.
Proverbs 11:19 Like as righteousnes bringeth lyfe: euen so to cleue vnto euel, bringeth death.
Proverbs 11:20 The Lord abhorreth a fayned hert, but he hath pleasur in them that are vndefiled.
Proverbs 11:21 It shal not helpe the wicked, though they laye all their handes together, but the sede of the righteous shalbe preserued.
Proverbs 11:22 A fayre woman without discrete maners, is like a ringe of golde in a swynes snoute.
Proverbs 11:23 The iust labour for peace and tranquyllite, but the vngodly for disquietnesse.
Proverbs 11:24 Some man geueth out hys goodes, & is the rycher, but the nygard (hauyng ynough) will departe from nothynge, and yet is euer in pouerty.
Proverbs 11:25 He that is liberal in geuyng, shal haue plentye: and he that watereth, shalbe watered also him self.
Proverbs 11:26 Who so hoordeth vp hys corne, shalbe cursed amonge the people: but blessing shall light vppon hys head that selleth it.
Proverbs 11:27 He that laboureth for honesty findeth hys desire: but who so seketh after mischiefe, shall happen vnto hym.
Proverbs 11:28 He that trusteth in hys ryches shall haue a fall, but the righteous shall florish as the grene leaf.
Proverbs 11:29 Who so maketh disquyetnes is his owne house, he shall haue wynde for hys heritage, and the foole shalbe seruant to the wyse.
Proverbs 11:30 The frute of the righteous is as the tree of lyfe, a wyse man also wynneth mens soules.
Proverbs 11:31 If the righteous be recompensed vppon earth, how much more then the vngodly and the sinner?

CHAPTER: 12

Proverbs 12:1 Who so loueth wysdome, wil be content to be refourmed: but he that hateth to be reproued, is a foole.
Proverbs 12:2 A good man is acceptable vnto the Lord, but the wicked will he condempne.
Proverbs 12:3 A man can not endure in vngodlinesse, but the rote of the righteous shall not be moued.
Proverbs 12:4 A stedfast woman is a croune vnto her husband: but she that behaueth her selfe vnhonestly is a corrupcion in hys bones.
Proverbs 12:5 The thoughtes of the righteous are righte, but the ymaginacion of the vngodly are disceatfull.
Proverbs 12:6 The talkyng of the vngodlye is howe they maye laye wayte for bloud, but the mouthe of the righteous wyll deliuer them.
Proverbs 12:7 Or euer thou canst turne the about, the vngodly shalbe ouerthrowen: but the house of the righteous shall stande.
Proverbs 12:8 A man shalbe commended for hys wysdome, but a fole shalbe despised.
Proverbs 12:9 A simple man which laboureth & worketh, is better then one that is gorgyous and wanteth bread.
Proverbs 12:10 A righteous man regardeth the lyfe of his cattell, but the vngodly haue cruel hertes.
Proverbs 12:11 He that tilleth his lande, shal haue plenteousnesse of bread: but he that foloweth ydelnes, is a very foole.
Proverbs 12:12 The desyre of the vngodly hunteth after mischief, but the rote of the righteous bryngeth forth frute.
Proverbs 12:13 The wicked falleth into the snare thorow the malyce of his own mouth, but the iust shal escape out of parel.
Proverbs 12:14 Euery man shall enioye good accordinge to the innocency of his mouth, & after the workes of his handes shal he be rewarded.
Proverbs 12:15 Loke what a foole taketh in hande, he thynketh it wel done: but he that is wyse, wil be counsayled.
Proverbs 12:16 A foole vttereth his wrath in all the hast, but a discrete man forgeueth wrong.
Proverbs 12:17 A iust man wil tel the trueth, & shewe the thynge that is right: but a false witnesse disceyueth.
Proverbs 12:18 A sclaunderous personne pricketh like a swerd, but a wise mans tonge is wholsome.
Proverbs 12:19 A true mouth is euer constant, but a dissemblyng tonge is soone chaunged.
Proverbs 12:20 They that ymagyn euell in their mynde, will disceyue: but the counsaylers of peace shall haue ioy folowing them.
Proverbs 12:21 There shall no misfortune happen vnto the iust but the vngodly shalbe filled with misery.
Proverbs 12:22 The Lord abhorreth disceatful lyppes, but they that laboure for trueth please hym.
Proverbs 12:23 He that hath vnderstanding, can hyde his wisdome: but an vndiscrete hert telleth oute hys folishnesse.
Proverbs 12:24 A diligent hande shal beare rule, but the ydle shalbe vnder tribute.
Proverbs 12:25 Heauinesse discorageth the hert of man, but a good worde maketh it glad again.
Proverbs 12:26 The righteous is liberall vnto hys neyghbour, but the waye of the vngodly will disceyue them selfs.
Proverbs 12:27 A disceatfull man shall fynde no vauntage, but he that is content with that he hath, is more worthe then golde.
Proverbs 12:28 In the waye of righteousnesse there is lyfe, as for any other waye it is the pathe vnto death.

CHAPTER: 13

Proverbs 13:1 A wyse sonne wyll receaue hys fathers warnynge, but he that is scornefull, wyl not heare when he is reproued.
Proverbs 13:2 A good man shall enioye the fruite of hys mouth, but he that hath a froward mind shalbe spoyled.
Proverbs 13:3 He that kepeth his mouth, kepeth his lyfe: but who so speaketh vnaduised findeth harme.
Proverbs 13:4 The slogarde woulde fayne haue, and can not get his dsyre: but the soule of the diligente shall haue plenty.
Proverbs 13:5 A ryghtuous man abhorreth lyes, but the vngodlye shameth both other and hym selfe.
Proverbs 13:6 Ryghtuousnesse kepeth the innocente in the waye, but vngodlynesse shal ouerthrow the sinner.
Proverbs 13:7 Some men are rych, thoughe they haue nothynge: againe some men are pore hauing greate ryches.
Proverbs 13:8 With goodes euery man deliuereth his lyfe, and the poore wyll not be reproued.
Proverbs 13:9 The lyght of the rightuous maketh ioyfull, but the candle of the vngodly shalbe put out.
Proverbs 13:10 Among the proud ther is euer strife, but amonge those that do all thynges wyth aduysemente, ther is wysdome.
Proverbs 13:11 Hastely gotten goodes are sone spent, but they that be gathered together with the hand, shall increase
Proverbs 13:12 Longe taryenge for a thing that is differed, greueth the hert: but when the desyre commeth, it is a tre of lyfe.
Proverbs 13:13 Who so despiseth the word destroyeth hym selfe: but he that feareth the commaundemente shal haue peace.
Proverbs 13:14 The law is a wel of life vnto the wise, that it may kepe him from the snares of death,
Proverbs 13:15 Good vnderstanding geueth fauour, but hard is the way of the despisers.
Proverbs 13:16 A wyse man doth al thinges with dyscrecyon, but a foole wyl declare his folly.
Proverbs 13:17 An vngodly messanger bryngeth myschyefe, but a faythfull embassytour is wholsome.
Proverbs 13:18 He that thynketh scorne to be refourmed, commeth to pouertie & shame: but who so receaueth correction, shal come to honou
Proverbs 13:19 When a desyre, is brought to passe, it delyteth the soule: but fooles abhorre him that eschueth euell.
Proverbs 13:20 He that goeth in the company of wyse men, shalbe wyse: but who so is a companyon of foles, shalbe hurte.
Proverbs 13:21 Mischefe foloweth vpon synners, but the ryghtuous shal haue a god reward.
Proverbs 13:22 Which their chylders chyldren shal haue in possession, for the riches of the synner is layed vp for the iuste.
Proverbs 13:23 Ther is plentuousnesse of fode in the feldes of the pore, and shalbe increased out of measure.
Proverbs 13:24 He that spareth the rod, hateth hys son: but who so loueth hym, holdeth hym euer in nurtoure.
Proverbs 13:25 The ryghtuous eateth, and is satisfied, but the belly of the vngodly hath neuer ynough.

CHAPTER: 14

Proverbs 14:1 A wise woman vpholdeth her house but a folish wife plucketh it doun
Proverbs 14:2 Who so feareth the Lorde, walketh in the ryght path: and regardeth not hym that abhorreth the wayes of the Lord.
Proverbs 14:3 In the mouth of the folyshe is the boastynge of lordshyppe, but the lyppes of the wyse wylbe ware of such.
Proverbs 14:4 Where no oxen are, ther the cribbe is empty: but where the oxen labour ther is much frute.
Proverbs 14:5 A faithful witnesse will not dyssemble, but a false recorde wyll make a lye.
Proverbs 14:6 A scorneful body seketh wisdom, and findeth it not: but knowlege is easy to come by, vnto him that wyl vnderstand
Proverbs 14:7 Se that thou meddle not with a foole, and do as though thou haddest no knowledge.
Proverbs 14:8 The wysdome of hym that hath vnderstanding is, to take hede vnto hys way but the folyshnes of the vnwyse disceaueth.
Proverbs 14:9 Foles make but a sporte of synne, but ther is fauourable loue amonge the rightuous.
Proverbs 14:10 The hert of him that hath vnderstandyng wyll neyther dyspaire for any sorow, ner be to presumptuous for any sodaine ioy.
Proverbs 14:11 The houses of the vngodly shalbe ouerthrowne, but the tabernacles of the rightuous shal florish.
Proverbs 14:12 Ther is a waye whiche some men thinke to be ryght, but the ende thereof leadeth vnto death.
Proverbs 14:13 The herte is sorowfull euen in a laughter, and the ende of mirth is heuinesse.
Proverbs 14:14 An vnfaythful personne shalbe filled wyth hys owne wayes, but a good man wyl beware of suche.
Proverbs 14:15 An ignoraunt boddy beleueth all thynges, but who so hath vnderstandyng, loketh well to his goinges.
Proverbs 14:16 A wyse man feareth, and departeth from euel, but a foole goeth on presumptuously.
Proverbs 14:17 An vnpacient man dealeth folyshly, but he that is well aduysed doth other wayes.
Proverbs 14:18 The ignoraunte haue folyshnes in possession, but the wyse are crowned with knowledge.
Proverbs 14:19 The euel shal bow hem selues before the good, and the vngodly shall wayte at the dores of the ryghtuous.
Proverbs 14:20 The poore is hated euen of his owne neyghbours, but the rich hath many frends.
Proverbs 14:21 Who so despyseth his neyghbour, doth amysse: but blessed is he that hath pytye of the poore.
Proverbs 14:22 They that ymagyn wyckednes, shall be disapoynted: but they that muse vpon good thinges, vnto suche shall happen mercy and faythfulnesse.
Proverbs 14:23 Diligent laboure bringeth ryches, but wher many vayne wordes are, trulye ther is scarcenesse.
Proverbs 14:24 Ryches are an ornamente vnto the wyse, but the ignoraunce of fooles is very folyshnesse,
Proverbs 14:25 A faythfull wytnesse delyuereth soules, but a lyar disceaueth them,
Proverbs 14:26 The feare of the Lord in a strong hold for vnto his he wyl be a sure defence,
Proverbs 14:27 The feare of the lorde is a well of lyfe, to auoide the snares of death.
Proverbs 14:28 The increase and prosperite of the commens is the Kynges honoure, but the decaye of the people is the confusion of the Prince.
Proverbs 14:29 Pacyence is a token of wisdom, but wrath & hasty displasure is a token of folyshnesse.
Proverbs 14:30 A merye hert is the life of the bodye, but rancoure consumeth awaye the bones.
Proverbs 14:31 He that doeth a poore man wrong, blasphemeth hys maker: but who so hathe pytye of the poore, doeth honoure vnto God,
Proverbs 14:32 The vngodlye is afrayed of euery parel, but the ryghtuous hath a good hope euen in death.
Proverbs 14:33 Wysdome resteth in the herte of him that hath vnderstandynge, and he wyll teach theym that are vnlearned.
Proverbs 14:34 Ryghtuousnes setteth vp the people, vut wickednes bringeth folke to destruccyon.
Proverbs 14:35 A dyscrete seruaunt is a pleasure vnto the Kynge, but one that is not honest prouoketh hym vnto wrath.

CHAPTER: 15

Proverbs 15:1 A soft answere putteth downe displeasure. but frowarde words prouoke vnto anger.
Proverbs 15:2 A wise tonge commendeth knowledg, a folysh mouth blabbeth oute no thynge but folyshnesse.
Proverbs 15:3 The eyes of the Lord loke on euery place, both vpon the good and badde.
Proverbs 15:4 A wholsome tonge is a tree of lyfe but he that abuseth it, hath a broken mynde.
Proverbs 15:5 A foole despyseth hys fathers correccyon, but he that taketh hede whan he is reproued shalhaue the more vnderstandyng.
Proverbs 15:6 In the house of the ryghtuous are greate rytches, but in the increase of the vngodlye ther is mysorder.
Proverbs 15:7 A wyse mouth poureth out knowledge, but the herte of the folysh doth not so.
Proverbs 15:8 The Lorde aborreth the sacryfyce of the vngodlye, but the prayer of the rightuous is acceptable vnto hym.
Proverbs 15:9 The waye of the vngodlye is an abhomynacyon vnto the Lorde, but who so foloweth rightuousnesse, hym he loueth.
Proverbs 15:10 He that forsaketh the ryghte strete, shalbe sore punyshed: and who so hateth correccyon, falleth into death.
Proverbs 15:11 The hell wyth her payne is knowne vnto the Lorde, howe muche more then, the hertes of men?
Proverbs 15:12 A scorneful body loueth not one that rebuketh hym, nether wyll he come amonge the wyse.
Proverbs 15:13 A mery hert maketh a chearful countinance but an vnquiet mynd maketh it heuy.
Proverbs 15:14 A wise hert wil seke after knowledge, but the mouth of foles medleth with folishnesse.
Proverbs 15:15 All the dayes of the pore are myserable, but a quyet herte is as a continnual feaste.
Proverbs 15:16 Better is a litle with the feare of the Lord then great tresure, for they are not without sorowe.
Proverbs 15:17 Better is a messe of potage with loue, then a far oxe wyth euel wyll.
Proverbs 15:18 An angry man stereth vp strife, but he that is pacient stilleth discord.
Proverbs 15:19 The way of the slouthful is ful of thornes, but the strete of the rightuous is wel cleansed.
Proverbs 15:20 A wyse son maketh a glad father, but an vndiscrete body shameth hys mother.
Proverbs 15:21 A foole reioiseth in folyshe thynges but awyse man loketh wel to hys own goinges.
Proverbs 15:22 Vnaduised thoughts shal come to naught but wher as men are that can geue councel, ther is stedfastnes.
Proverbs 15:23 O howe ioyfull a thing is it, a man to geue a conuenyente answere? O how pleasaunt is a word spoken in due season.
Proverbs 15:24 The waye of lyfe leadeth vnto heauen, that a man shoulde beware of hell beneth.
Proverbs 15:25 The Lord wyl breake downe the house of the proud, but he shal make fast the borders of the widdowe,
Proverbs 15:26 The Lorde abhorreth the ymaginacons of the wycked, but pure wordes are pleasaunt vnto him.
Proverbs 15:27 The couetous man roteth vp his owne house, but who so hateth rewardes shall liue.
Proverbs 15:28 A ryghtuous man museth in hys mynde howe to do good, but the mynde of the vngodly ymagineth, howe he may do harme,
Proverbs 15:29 The Lorde is farre from the vngodly, but he heareth the praier of the rightuous.
Proverbs 15:30 Lyke as the clearenesse of the eyes reioiseth the herte so doth a good name fede the bones.
Proverbs 15:31 The eare that herkeneth vnto wholsome warnnynge, and enclyneth therto, shal dwell amonge the wyse.
Proverbs 15:32 He that refuseth to be refourmed, despyseth his owne soule: but he that submytteth hym selfe to correccyon, is wyse.
Proverbs 15:33 The feare of the Lord is the righte scyence of wysdome, and lowlines goeth before honure.

CHAPTER: 16

Proverbs 16:1 A man may wel purpose a thinge in his herte, but the answere of the tong commeth of the Lord,
Proverbs 16:2 A man thynketh al his waies to be cleane, but it is the Lord that fashyoneth the mindes
Proverbs 16:3 Commit thy workes the Lord, and loke what thou deuisest, it shal prospere.
Proverbs 16:4 The Lorde doth al thynges for hys owne sake, yea when he kepeth the vngodly for the day of wrath.
Proverbs 16:5 The Lorde abhorreth all presumptuous & proude hertes, ther may neyther strength ner powere scape.
Proverbs 16:6 With louyng mercye and fayethfulnesse synnes be forgeuen, and who so feareth the Lorde, he eschueth euell.
Proverbs 16:7 When a mans ways please the Lord, he maketh his very enemies to be hys frendes.
Proverbs 16:8 Better is it to haue a lyttle thinge with rightuousnes, then greate rentes wrngeously gotten.
Proverbs 16:9 A man deuyseth awaye in his herte, but it is the Lorde that ordreth hys goynges.
Proverbs 16:10 When the prophecye is in the lyppes of the kynge, hys mouth shal not go wronge in iudgment.
Proverbs 16:11 A true measure and a true balaunce are the Lordes, he maketh all weightes.
Proverbs 16:12 It is a great abhominatyon when kynges are wycked, for a kinges seat should be holden vp wyth ryghtuousnesse
Proverbs 16:13 Ryghtuous lyppes are pleasaunte vnto kynges, and they loue hym that speaketh the trueth.
Proverbs 16:14 The kynges dyspleasure is a messaunger of deathe, but a wyse man wyll pacyfye hym.
Proverbs 16:15 The chearefull conntenaunce of the kynge is lyfe, and hys louynge fauoure is as the euenynge dewe.
Proverbs 16:16 To haue wysdome in possesstion is better then gold, & to get vnderstanding is more worth then siluer.
Proverbs 16:17 The path of the rightuous eschueth euel, & who so loketh wel to his waies, kepeth hys owne soule.
Proverbs 16:18 Presumptuousnes goth before destruction, & after aproud stomake ther foloweth a fall.
Proverbs 16:19 Better is it to be of humble mynde with the lowly, then to deuyde the spoyles wyth the proud.
Proverbs 16:20 He that handleth a matter wisely, opteineth good: and blessed is he, that putteth his trust in the Lord
Proverbs 16:21 Who so hath a wyse vnderstanding, is called to councel but he that canne speake faire getteth more riches.
Proverbs 16:22 Vnderstanding is a wel of lyfe vnto him that hath it, as for the chastenyng of foles, it is but folishnesse.
Proverbs 16:23 The hert of the wyse enfourm his moueth, and amendeth the doctryne in his lyps.
Proverbs 16:24 Fayre wordes are an hony combe, a refreshynge of the mynde, and helth of the bones.
Proverbs 16:25 Ther is away that men thinke to be right but the ende thereof leadeth vnto death.
Proverbs 16:26 A troublous soule dysquyeteth her selfe, for her owne mouth hath brought her therto.
Proverbs 16:27 An vngodly personne styreth vp euell, and in hys lipps he is as an whote burnyng fyre.
Proverbs 16:28 A frowarde bodye causeth stryfe, and he that is a blabbe of his tonge, maketh deuisyon amonge princes.
Proverbs 16:29 A wycked man begyleth hys neyghbour, and leadeth hym the waye that is not good.
Proverbs 16:30 He that wyncketh wyth his eyes, ymagineth mischife: and he that byteth his lyppes wyll do some harme.
Proverbs 16:31 Age is a crowne of worshippe, if it be founde in the waye of ryghtuousnes.
Proverbs 16:32 A pacyente man is better then one stronge: and he that can rule him selfe, is more worth then he that winneth a city.
Proverbs 16:33 The lotts are caste into the lappe, but there fal standeth in the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 17

Proverbs 17:1 Better is a dry morsell with quietnes, then a full house and many fat catell with stryfe.
Proverbs 17:2 A discrete seruaunt shall haue more rule then the sonnes that haue no wysdom, and shal haue like heritage with the brethren.
Proverbs 17:3 Lyke as syluer is tryed in the fyre and golde in the fornace, euen so doeth the Lorde proue the hertes.
Proverbs 17:4 A wycked bodye holdeth muche of false lippes, and a dissemblyng personne geueth eare to a dysceatefull tonge.
Proverbs 17:5 Who so laugheth the pore to scorne blasphemeth hys maker: & he that is glad of another mans hurt, shall not be vnpunished.
Proverbs 17:6 Chylders chyldren are a worshyppe vnto the elders, & the fathers are the honoure of the children.
Proverbs 17:7 An eloquent speach becommeth not a fole, a dissemblyng mouth also besemeth not a prince.
Proverbs 17:8 Liberalite is a precyous stone vnto hym that hath it, for whersoeuer he becometh, he prospereth.
Proverbs 17:9 Who so couereth another mans offence seketh loue: but he that discloseth the faut setteth frends at variance.
Proverbs 17:10 One reprofe only doth more good to him that hath vnderstandinge then an .C. stripes vnto a fole.
Proverbs 17:11 A sedicious personne seketh myschefe, but a cruell messaunger shall be sent against hym.
Proverbs 17:12 It were better to come against a shee Bere robbed of her whelpes, then agaynst a fole in his foolyshnes.
Proverbs 17:13 Who so rewardeth euell for good, the plage shall not departe frome hys house.
Proverbs 17:14 He that soweth discord & strife, is lyke one that dyggeth vp a water broke: but an open enemy is like the water that breaketh out & renneth abroad.
Proverbs 17:15 The Lord hateth as wel hym that iustifyeth the vngodly, as him that condemneth the innocent,
Proverbs 17:16 What helpeth it to geue a foole mony in his hand, wher as he hath no mind to bye wysdome?
Proverbs 17:17 He is a frende that alway loueth, and in aduersite a man shal know who is hys brother.
Proverbs 17:18 Whoso promyseth by the hande, and is suertye: or another, he is a foole.
Proverbs 17:19 He that loueth stryfe, delyteth in synne: & who so setteth his dore to hye, seketh after a fall.
Proverbs 17:20 Who so hath a frowarde herte obtayneth no good: & he that hath an ouerthwarte tonge, shall fall into myschyefe.
Proverbs 17:21 An vnwyse body bringeth him selfe into sorow, and the father of a foole can haue no ioye.
Proverbs 17:22 A merye hert maketh a lusty age, but a sorowful mind dryeth vp the bones.
Proverbs 17:23 The vngodlye taketh gyftes out of the bosome, to wrest the waies of iudgment.
Proverbs 17:24 Wysdome shineth in the face of hym that hath vnderstanding, but the eies of fooles wander thorow out all landes.
Proverbs 17:25 An vndiscrete sonne is a grefe vnto his father, & an heuynesse vnto hys mother that bare him
Proverbs 17:26 To punish the innocent, and to smite the princes that geue true iudgmente, are both euell.
Proverbs 17:27 He is wyse and discrete, that tempereth his wordes: and he is a man of vnderstandinge, that maketh much of his spirite.
Proverbs 17:28 Yea a verye foole (when he holdeth his tonge) is counted wyse, and to haue vnderstandinge, when he shutteth his lyppes.

CHAPTER: 18

Proverbs 18:1 Who so hath pleasure to sow dyscorde, pyketh a quarel in euery thyng.
Proverbs 18:2 A foole hath no delite in understanding, but only in those thynges wherin his herte reioyseth.
Proverbs 18:3 Wher vngodlynes is, there is also disdayne: and so there foloweth shame and dishonoure.
Proverbs 18:4 The wordes of mans mouth are lyke depe waters, and the well of wysdome is lyke a full streame.
Proverbs 18:5 It is not good to a regarde the personne of the vngodly, or to put backe the ryghteous in iudgmente.
Proverbs 18:6 A fooles lippes are euer brawling, and his mouth prouoketh vnto battayll.
Proverbs 18:7 A fooles mouth is hys owne destruccion and his lippes are the snare for his owne soule.
Proverbs 18:8 The words of a sclanderer are very woundes, and go thorow vnto the inmost parts of the body.
Proverbs 18:9 Who so is slouthful & slacke in his laboure, is the brother of him that is a waster.
Proverbs 18:10 The name of the Lord is a strong castel, the righteous flieth vnto it, and shalbe saued.
Proverbs 18:11 But the rich mans goods are his strong hold, yea he taketh them for an hie wall rounde aboute hym.
Proverbs 18:12 After pryde commeth destruccion, and honour after lowlines.
Proverbs 18:13 He that geueth sentence in a matter before he heare it, is a foole, & worthy to be confounded.
Proverbs 18:14 A good stomacke driueth awaye a mans disease, but when the sptrite is vexed, who may abide it?
Proverbs 18:15 A wyse herte laboureth for knowledge, and a prudent eare seketh vnderstanding
Proverbs 18:16 Liberalitye bryngeth a man to honoure and worship, and setteth him among great men.
Proverbs 18:17 The rightuous accuseth hym selfe firste of al, if his neyghbour come, he shal fynd him.
Proverbs 18:18 The lot pacifieth the variaunce, and parteth the mighty a sunder.
Proverbs 18:19 The vnitie of brethren is stronger then a castel, and they that hold together are like the barre of a palayce.
Proverbs 18:20 A mans belly shalbe satisfied wyth the fruyte of hys owne mouthe, and wyth the increase of hys lyppes shall he be fylled.
Proverbs 18:21 Death & lyfe stand in the power of the tong, he that loueth it shal enioy the frute thereof.
Proverbs 18:22 Who so fyndeth a wyfe fyndeth a good thynge, and receyueth an wholsome benefyte of the Lord.
Proverbs 18:23 The poore maketh supplicacyon & prayeth mekelye, but the ryche geueth a rough aunswere.
Proverbs 18:24 A frende that delyteth in loue, doeth a man more frenshyppe, and stycketh faster vnto hym then a brother.

CHAPTER: 19

Proverbs 19:1 Better is the poore that lyueth godly then the blasphemer that is but a foole.
Proverbs 19:2 Where no discrecion is, ther the soule is not well: and who so is swyft on fote, stombleth hastly,
Proverbs 19:3 Folyshuesse maketh a man to go out of his waye, and then is his hert vnpacient agaynst the Lorde.
Proverbs 19:4 Ryches make many frendes, but the poore is forsaken of his own frendes.
Proverbs 19:5 A false witnesse shall not remayne vnpunished, & he that speaketh lyes shal not escape.
Proverbs 19:6 The multitude hangeth vpon great men, and euery man fauoureth him that geueth rewardes.
Proverbs 19:7 As for the poore, he is hated amonge all hys brethren: yea, hys owne frendes forsake hym, & he that geueth credence vnto wordes getteth nothyng.
Proverbs 19:8 He that is wyse, loueth his owne soule: & who so hath vnderstandynge, shall prospere.
Proverbs 19:9 A false witnesse shall not remayne vnpunished, & he that speaketh lyes shal perish.
Proverbs 19:10 Delicate ease becommeth not a foole much more vnsemely is it, a bonde man too haue the rule of princes.
Proverbs 19:11 A wyse man putteth of displeasure, & it is his honour to let some fautes passe.
Proverbs 19:12 The kynges disfauour is lyke the roaryng of a Lyon, but hys frendship is lyke the dewe vpon the grasse.
Proverbs 19:13 An vndiscrete sonne is the heuynes of hys father, & a braulyng wyfe is lyke the top of an house, where thorow it is euer droppyng.
Proverbs 19:14 House & ryches maye a man haue by the heritage of hys elders, but a discrete woman is the gifte of the Lord.
Proverbs 19:15 Slouthfulnes bringeth slepe, & an ydel soule shall suffer hunger.
Proverbs 19:16 Who so kepeth the commaundement, kepeth hys owne soule: but he that regardeth not hys way, shal dye.
Proverbs 19:17 He that hath pittie vppon the poore, lendeth vnto the Lord: & loke what he layeth oute, it shalbe payed hym agayn.
Proverbs 19:18 Chasten thy sonne whyle there is hope, but let not thy soule be moued to sleye hym.
Proverbs 19:19 For great wrath bryngeth harme, therfore let hym go, & so mayest thou teache hym more nurtoure.
Proverbs 19:20 O geue eare vnto good counsayll, & be content to be refourmed, that thou mayest be wyse here after.
Proverbs 19:21 There are many deuises in a mans hert, neuertheles the counsayll of the Lorde shall stande.
Proverbs 19:22 It is a mans worship to do good & better it is to be a poore man, then dissembler.
Proverbs 19:23 The feare of the Lord preserueth the life yea, it geueth plenteousnes, without the visitacion of any plage.
Proverbs 19:24 A slouthful body shuteth hys hande into hys bosome, so that he cannot put it to his mouth.
Proverbs 19:25 If thou smitest a scorneful personne, the ignoraunt shall take better hede: & if thou reprouest one that hath vnderstanding, he will be the wyser.
Proverbs 19:26 He that hurteth hys father or shuteth out his mother, is a shamefull & an vnworthy sonne.
Proverbs 19:27 My sonne, heare nomore the doctrine that leadeth the awaye from the wordes of vnderstandyng.
Proverbs 19:28 A false witnes laugheth iudgement to scorn & the mouth of the vngodly eateth vp wickednes.
Proverbs 19:29 Punishmentes are ordeyned for the scornefull, and strypes for fooles backes.

CHAPTER: 20

Proverbs 20:1 Wine is a volupteous thynge, & dronckennes causeth sedicion: who so deliteth therin, shal neuer be wyse.
Proverbs 20:2 The kyng oughte to be feared as the roarynge of a Lyon, who so prouoketh hym vnto anger, offendeth agaynst hys owne soule.
Proverbs 20:3 It is a mans honour to kepe him selfe from stryfe, but they that haue pleasure in braulinge, are fooles euery one.
Proverbs 20:4 A slouthfull body will not go to plowe for colde, therefore shall he go a beggynge in Sommer, and haue nothynge.
Proverbs 20:5 Wyse counsayll in the herte of man is lyke a water in the depe of the earth, but he that hathe vnderstanding, bringeth it forth.
Proverbs 20:6 Many there be that are called good doers, but whereshal one fynde a true faythful man?
Proverbs 20:7 Who so leadeth a godly and an innocent lyfe, happy shal his chyldren be whome he leaueth behynde hym.
Proverbs 20:8 A kynge that sitteth in iudgement, and loketh well aboute hym, dryueth awaye all euell.
Proverbs 20:9 Who can saye: my herte is cleane, I am innocent from sinne?
Proverbs 20:10 To vse two maner of weyghtes, or twoo maner of measures, both these are abhominable vnto the Lorde.
Proverbs 20:11 A chylde is knowen by hys conuersacion, whether hys workes be pure & right.
Proverbs 20:12 As for the hearing of the eare & the sight of the eye, the Lord hath made them both.
Proverbs 20:13 Delyte not thou in slepe, lest thou come vnto pouerte: but open thyne eyes, and thou shalt haue bread ynough.
Proverbs 20:14 It is naught, It is naught (say men) when they haue it, but when it is gone, they geue it a good woorde.
Proverbs 20:15 A mouth of vnderstanding is more worth then gold, many precious stones, & costly iewels.
Proverbs 20:16 Take his garment that is suerty for a straunger, & take a pledge of him for the vnknowen mans sake.
Proverbs 20:17 Euery man liketh the bread that is gotten with disceate, but at the laste hys mouth shalbe filled with grauell.
Proverbs 20:18 Thorow counsayl the thynges that men deuise go forward: and with discrecion ought warres to be taken in hande.
Proverbs 20:19 Medle not with hym that bewrayeth secretes, and is a sclaunderer, and disceaueth with hys lippes.
Proverbs 20:20 Whoso curseth hys father and mother, hys lyght shalbe put outin the myddest of darcknesse.
Proverbs 20:21 The herytage that commeth to hastely at the fyrste, shall not be praised at the ende.
Proverbs 20:22 Saye not thou: I wyll recompence euel, but put thy truste in the Lorde, and he shall defende the.
Proverbs 20:23 The Lorde, abhorreth two maner of weyghtes, and a false balaunce is an euell thinge.
Proverbs 20:24 The Lorde ordreth euery mans goinges, for what is he that vnderstandeth his owne wayes?
Proverbs 20:25 It is a snare for a man to to blaspheme that which is holy, and then to go aboute wyth vowes.
Proverbs 20:26 A wyse kynge destroyeth the vngodly, & bringeth the whele ouer them.
Proverbs 20:27 The lanterne of the Lord is the breath of man, and goeth thorow al the inward partes of the body.
Proverbs 20:28 Mercy and faithfulnes preserue the kynge, and wyth louyng kyndnes his seate is holden vp.
Proverbs 20:29 The strength of yong men is their worship, and a gray head, is an honour vnto the aged.
Proverbs 20:30 Woundes dryue away euel, and so do strips the inward partes of the body.

CHAPTER: 21

Proverbs 21:1 The kinges hert is in the hand of the Lord, lyke as are the ryuers of water: he maye turne it whether so euer he wyll.
Proverbs 21:2 Euery man thynketh hys owne waye to be ryght, but the Lord iudgeth the herts.
Proverbs 21:3 To do ryghtuousnes & iudgment is more acceptable to the Lorde then sacrifyce.
Proverbs 21:4 A presumptuous loke, a proude stomacke, and the lanterne of the vngodly is synne.
Proverbs 21:5 The deuyces of one that is diligente, brynge plentuousnes: but he that is vnaduised, commeth vnto pouerte.
Proverbs 21:6 Who so hoordeth vp ryches wyth the disceatfulnes of his tonge, he is a foole, and lyke vnto them that seke their own death.
Proverbs 21:7 the robberies of the vngodlye shalbe their owne destruccyon, for they wolde not do the thinge that was right.
Proverbs 21:8 The waies of the froward are straunge, but the worckes of him that is cleane, are ryght
Proverbs 21:9 It is better to dwell in a corner vnder the house toppe, then wyth a braulynge woman in a wyde house.
Proverbs 21:10 The soule of the vngodlye wysheth euell, and hath no pytye vpon hys neyghboure.
Proverbs 21:11 When the scornefull is punyshed, the ignoraunt take the better hede: and when a wyse man is warned, he wyll receaue the more vnderstandynge.
Proverbs 21:12 The ryghtuous enfourmeth the house of the vngodlye, but the vngodlye goo on styll after their owne wyckednesse.
Proverbs 21:13 Who so stoppeth hys eare at the cryenge of the pore he shal cry him selfe and not be herd
Proverbs 21:14 A preuy rewarde pacyfyeth displeasure & a gift in the bosome stilleth furiousnes.
Proverbs 21:15 The iust delyteth in doinge the thing that is ryghte, but the worckers of wyckednesse abhorre the same.
Proverbs 21:16 The man that wandereth out of the way of wysdome, shall remayne in the congregacion of the dead.
Proverbs 21:17 He that hath pleasure in banckettes, shalbe a poore man: Who so deliteth in wyne and delicates, shall not be ryche.
Proverbs 21:18 The vngodlye shalbe geuen for the ryghtuous, and the wicked for the iust.
Proverbs 21:19 It is better to dwell in a wyldernesse, then wyth a chidynge and an angrye woman.
Proverbs 21:20 In a wyse mans house there is a greate treasure and a plenteousnesse, but a foolish body spendeth vp all.
Proverbs 21:21 Who so foloweth ryghtuousnes and mercy, fyndeth both life, ryghtuousnes and honoure.
Proverbs 21:22 A wyse man wynneth the citye of the mighty, and as for strength that they trust in, he bryngeth it downe.
Proverbs 21:23 Who so kepeth his mouth and his tong, the same kepeth hys soule from troubles.
Proverbs 21:24 He that is proud & presumptuous, is called a scorneful man, whyche in wrath darre worke malycyouslye.
Proverbs 21:25 The voluptuousnesse of the slouthfull is hys owne death, for hys handes wyll not laboure.
Proverbs 21:26 He coueteth and desyreth all the day longe, but the ryghtuous is alwaye geuynge, and kepeth nothynge backe.
Proverbs 21:27 The sacrifyce of the vngodly is abhominacion, for they offer the thyng that is gotten with wickednes.
Proverbs 21:28 A false witnesse shall perish, but he that wilbe content to heare, shall alway haue power to speake him selfe.
Proverbs 21:29 An vngodly man goeth forth rashlye, but the iuste refourmeth his owne waie.
Proverbs 21:30 There is no wysdome ther is no vnderstandyng, there is no councell agaynste the Lorde.
Proverbs 21:31 The horse is prepared against the day of battail, but the Lord geueth the victory.

CHAPTER: 22

Proverbs 22:1 A good name is more worthe then greate ryches. and louyng fauoure is better then siluer and golde.
Proverbs 22:2 Whether ryches or pouerty do mete vs, it commeth al of God.
Proverbs 22:3 A wise man seith the plage and hideth him self, but the folysh go on styl and are punished.
Proverbs 22:4 The ende of lowlines and the feare of God, is riches, honour, prosperity and health.
Proverbs 22:5 Speres and snares are in the way of the froward, bot he that wyll kepe his soule, let hym fle from such.
Proverbs 22:6 If thou teachest a child in his youth what waye he shuld go, he shal not leaue it when he is old
Proverbs 22:7 The rich ruleth the pore, & the borower is seruant to the lender.
Proverbs 22:8 He that soweth wickednes shal repe sorow, & the rod of his plage shal destroy him
Proverbs 22:9 A louing eie shalbe blessed, for he geueth of his bread vnto the pore.
Proverbs 22:10 Cast out the scorneful man, & so shal strife go out wt him, yea variance & sclander shal cease.
Proverbs 22:11 Who so deliteth to be of a cleane herte and of gracious lyppes, the king shall be his frend.
Proverbs 22:12 The eies of the Lord preserue knowledge, but as for the words of the despyteful, he bringeth them to naught.
Proverbs 22:13 The slouthful body sayeth: ther is a lyon wythoute, I myghte be slayne in the strete.
Proverbs 22:14 The mouth of an harlot is a depe pyt, wherein he falleth that the Lorde is angrye wyth all.
Proverbs 22:15 Foolishnes sticketh in the herte of the lad, but the rod of correccion dryueth it awaye.
Proverbs 22:16 Who so doth a pore man wrong to increase his owne riches, geueth (commenly) vnto the rych, & at the last commeth to pouerte him selfe.
Proverbs 22:17 My sonne, bow down thine eare, and herken vnto the wordes of wysdome, applye thy mynde vnto my doctryne:
Proverbs 22:18 for it is a plesaunt thyng if thou kepe it in thyne hert, and practise it in thy mouth:
Proverbs 22:19 that thou mayest alwaye put thy truste in the Lorde.
Proverbs 22:20 Haue not I warned the very oft with counsel & lerning?
Proverbs 22:21 that I might shew the truth andt that thou with the verity myghtest answere them that lay any thynge agaynst the?
Proverbs 22:22 Se that thou robbe not the pore because he is weake, & oppresse not the simple in iudgment:
Proverbs 22:23 for the Lorde him selfe wyll defende their cause, and do vyolence vnto them that haue vsed vyolence.
Proverbs 22:24 Make no frendship with an angry wilful man, and kepe no company wt the furious:
Proverbs 22:25 lest thou learne hys wayes, and receaue hurte vnto thy soule.
Proverbs 22:26 Be not thou one of them that bind their hand vpon promyse, and are suerttye: for dett:
Proverbs 22:27 for if thou hast nothing to paye, he shall take awaye thy bed from vnder the.
Proverbs 22:28 Thou shalte not remoue the lande marke, which thy fore elders haue sette.
Proverbs 22:29 Seyst thou nat, that they whyche be diligent in ther busines stand before kinges and not among the simple people?

CHAPTER: 23

Proverbs 23:1 When thou syttest at the table to eate with a lorde, order thy selfe manerly with the thinges that are set before the.
Proverbs 23:2 Measure thine appetite: and if thou wilt rule thyne owne selfe,
Proverbs 23:3 be not ouer gredye of his meate, for meate begyleth and disceaueth
Proverbs 23:4 Take not ouer greate trauayle and labour to be ryche, beware of suche a purpose.
Proverbs 23:5 Why wylt thou set thyne eie vpon the thing, which sodenly vanysheth awaye? For ryches make them selues wynges, & take their flight lyke an Aegle into the ayre.
Proverbs 23:6 Eat not thou wt the enuious, & desire not his meat,
Proverbs 23:7 for he hath a meruelus hert. He saith vnto the: eate & drinke as wher, as his hert is not wt the.
Proverbs 23:8 Yea, the morsels that thou hast eaten shalt thou perbrake, & lese those swete wordes.
Proverbs 23:9 Tel nothyng into the eares of a fole, for he wyll despise the wysdome of thy wordes.
Proverbs 23:10 Remoue not the olde lande marke, and come not within the feld of the fatherles
Proverbs 23:11 For he that delyuereth them is myghty, euen he shall defend their cause agaynste the.
Proverbs 23:12 Applie thine herte vnto learning, and thine eare to the words of knowledge.
Proverbs 23:13 With holde not correction from the childe, for if thou beatest him with the rodde, he shall not dye thereof.
Proverbs 23:14 Thou smitest him with the rod. but thou deliuerest his soule from hel.
Proverbs 23:15 My son, if thy herte receaue wysdome, my herte also shal reioyce
Proverbs 23:16 yea my reines shalbe very gladde, if thy lyppes speake the thynge that is ryght.
Proverbs 23:17 Let not thine herte be gelous to folowe synners, but kepe the styl in the feare of the Lord al the daye long:
Proverbs 23:18 for the ende is not yet come & thy pacient abydyng shal not be in vaine.
Proverbs 23:19 My sone, geue eare and be wise, so shal thine herte prospere in the way.
Proverbs 23:20 Kepe no company with wine bybbers & ryotous eaters of flesh
Proverbs 23:21 for such as be dronkards & riotous shal come to pouerte, & he that is geuen to much slepe shall go wt a ragged cote.
Proverbs 23:22 Geue eare vnto thy father that begat the, & despise not thy mother when she is olde.
Proverbs 23:23 Labour for to get the truth: sell not away wisdome, nurtour and vnderstanding
Proverbs 23:24 (for a rightuous father is maruelous glad of a wyse son, and deliteth in him)
Proverbs 23:25 so shal thy father be glad, & thy mother that bare the shal reioyse.
Proverbs 23:26 My sonne, geue thyne hert, & let thyne eies haue pleasure in my wayes.
Proverbs 23:27 For an whore is a depe graue, and an harlot is a narow pyt.
Proverbs 23:28 She lurketh lyke a thefe, and those that be not aware she bryngeth vnto her.
Proverbs 23:29 Wher is wo? wher is sorow? where is strife? where is brauling? wher are wounds without cause? wher be reed eies?
Proverbs 23:30 Euen among those that be euer at the wyne, and seke out where the best is.
Proverbs 23:31 Loke not thou vpon the wyne, how redde it is, & what a coloure it geueth in the glasse
Proverbs 23:32 It goeth downe softly, but at the laste it byteth lyke a serpent, & styngeth, as an Adder.
Proverbs 23:33 So shall thyne eyes loke vnto straunge wemen, and thyne herte shal muse vpon froward thyngs.
Proverbs 23:34 Yea thou shalt be as thoughe thou sleptest in the middest of that sea, or vpon the toppe of the mast.
Proverbs 23:35 They wounded me (shalte thou say) but it hath not hurte me, they smote me, but I felt it not. When I am well wakened, I will go to the dryncke agayne.

CHAPTER: 24

Proverbs 24:1 Be not thou gelous ouer wycked men, and desyre not thou to be among them.
Proverbs 24:2 For their herte imagineth to do hurte, and their lippes talke of mischiefe.
Proverbs 24:3 Thorow wysdome an house shalbe builded, & wt vnderstandyng shalbe set vp.
Proverbs 24:4 Thorow discrecion shal the chambers he fylled wyth al costly & plesant ryches.
Proverbs 24:5 A wise man is strong, yea a man of vnderstanding is better then he that is myghti of strength
Proverbs 24:6 For wt discrecion must warres be taken in hand, & wher as are many thou can geue councell, there is the victorye.
Proverbs 24:7 Wisdome is an hye thyng, yea euen to the foole for he dar not open his mouth in the gate.
Proverbs 24:8 He that Imagyneth myschefe, maye welbe called an vngracious personne.
Proverbs 24:9 The thoughte of the folysh is synne, & the scorneful is an abhominacion vnto men.
Proverbs 24:10 If thou be ouersene & negligent in tyme of nede, then is thy strength but smale
Proverbs 24:11 Delyuer them that go into death, and are led away to be slayne, & be not negligent therin.
Proverbs 24:12 If thou wylt saye: I knewe not of it. Thinkest thou that he which made the herts, doth not consider it? & that he which regardeth thy soule, seyth it not? Shall not he recompence euerye man accordynge to his workes?
Proverbs 24:13 My sonne, thou eatest hony & the swete hony combe. because it is good & swete in thy mouthe.
Proverbs 24:14 Euen so shall the knowledge of wysedome be vnto thy soule, as soone as thou hast gotten it. And there is good hope, yea thy hope shall not be in vanyte.
Proverbs 24:15 Laye no preuy waite wyckedly vpon the house of the rightuous, and disquiete not his resting place.
Proverbs 24:16 For a iust man falleth seuen tymes, and riseth vp againe, but the vngodly fal into wickednes.
Proverbs 24:17 Reioyce not thou at the fall of thyne enemye, and let not thyne herte be glad when he stombleth.
Proverbs 24:18 Lest the Lord (when he seyth it) be angrie, & turne hys wrath from him vnto the.
Proverbs 24:19 Let not thy wrath and gelosy moue the, to folowe the wycked and vngodlye.
Proverbs 24:20 And why? the wycked hath nothyng to hope for, and the candle of the vngodly shal be put oute.
Proverbs 24:21 My sonne, feare thou the Lord and the kyng, and kepe no company with the sclaunderous:
Proverbs 24:22 for their destruccion shal come sodenly, and who knoweth the far of them both?
Proverbs 24:23 These are also the sayenges of the wyse. it is not good, to haue respect ofe any person in iudgment.
Proverbs 24:24 He that saieth to the vngodly: thou art rightuous, him shal the people curse yea the comenty shal abhorre hym.
Proverbs 24:25 But they that rebuke the vngodly shalbe commended and a ryche blessynge shall come vpon them.
Proverbs 24:26 He maketh him selfe to be well loued, that geueth a good answere.
Proverbs 24:27 Fyrste make vp thy worke that is wythout, & loke wel vnto that which thou hast in the felde, & then buyld thyne house.
Proverbs 24:28 Be no false witnesse against thy neighbour hurte hym not with thy lyppes.
Proverbs 24:29 Saye not I wil handle him, euen as he hath delte wt me and wil reward euery man according to his dedes.
Proverbs 24:30 I went by the felde of the slouthful, and by the vineiarde of the feld of the slouthful and by the vyneyeardes of the folish man.
Proverbs 24:31 And lo, it was all couered wyth nettels, and stode ful of thistles. and the stone wall was broken doune.
Proverbs 24:32 Thys I saw, and consydered it well I loked vpon it, and toke it for a warnyng.
Proverbs 24:33 Yea slepe on styl a lytle, slomber a lytle, fold thyne handes together yet a lytle,
Proverbs 24:34 so shal pouertye come vnto the as one that trauayleth by the way, and necessite like a weapened man.

CHAPTER: 25

Proverbs 25:1 These also are the sayinges of Salomon, which the men of Ezekiah Kynge of Iuda gathered together.
Proverbs 25:2 It is the honour of God to kepe a thing secret, but the kings honour is to serch out a thing
Proverbs 25:3 The heauen is hye, the earth is depe, the kings hert is vnsearcheable.
Proverbs 25:4 Take the drosse from the syluer, and ther shalbe a cleane vessel therof.
Proverbs 25:5 Take awaye vngodlynes from the king, & his seat shalbe stablished wt ryghtuousnes
Proverbs 25:6 Put not forth thy self in the presence of the king, & prayse not into the place of great men.
Proverbs 25:7 Better is it that it be sayde vnto the: come vp hyther, then thou to be set doun in the presence of the prince whom thou seist with thine eyes.
Proverbs 25:8 Be not hastye to go to the law, lest happely thou order thy selfe so at the laste, that thy neighbour put the to shame.
Proverbs 25:9 Handle thy mater wt thy neyghbour him self, and dyscouer not an other mans secrete:
Proverbs 25:10 lest when men heare therof, it turne to thy dishonoure, and lest thine euell name do not ceasse.
Proverbs 25:11 A worde speken in due season, is lyke apples of golde in a syluer dish.
Proverbs 25:12 The correction of the wise is to an obedient eare, a golden cheine & a Iewel of gold.
Proverbs 25:13 Lyke as the wynter coole in the haruest, so is a faithfull messenger to him that sent him, & refresheth his masters mynd.
Proverbs 25:14 Whoso maketh great boasts & geueth nothing, is like cloudes & wind without rain.
Proverbs 25:15 With pacience may a prince be pacified, & wt a soft tong may rigoriousnes be broken.
Proverbs 25:16 If thou findest hony, eate so much as is sufficient forth lest thou be ouerful, & perbrake it out agayne.
Proverbs 25:17 Wythdraw thy fote from thy neighbours house, lest he be wery of the, and so abhor the.
Proverbs 25:18 Who so beareth false wytnesse agaynst hys neyghboure, he is a verye speare, a swearde, and a sharpe arowe.
Proverbs 25:19 The hope of the vngodlye in tyme of neade, is lyke a rotten toth and a slippery fote.
Proverbs 25:20 Who so singeth a song to a wycked her hert, clotheth him wt rags in the cold & poureth vynegar vpon chalke.
Proverbs 25:21 If thyne enemy honger, fead him: if he thyrst, geue hym drinke:
Proverbs 25:22 for so shalt thou heape coles of fyre vpon his head, and the Lord shal reward the.
Proverbs 25:23 The North wind driueth away the raine, euen so doth an earnest sober countenances backbyters tong.
Proverbs 25:24 It is better to sit in a corner vnder the rose, then wt a brauling woman in a wide house
Proverbs 25:25 A good reporte out of a farre contre, is like could water to a thirsty soule.
Proverbs 25:26 A ryghtuous man falling down before the vngodlye, is like a troubled wel & a spring that is destroyed.
Proverbs 25:27 Like as it is not good to eate to much hony, euen so he that wil search out hyghe things, it shalbe to heuy for him.
Proverbs 25:28 He that can not rule him self, is like a city which is broken doune, & hath no walles.

CHAPTER: 26

Proverbs 26:1 Like as snow is not mete in sommer, nor raine in haruest: euen so is worship vnsemelye for a foole
Proverbs 26:2 Like as the bryd and the swalowe take their flyght and fle here and ther, so the curse that is geuen in vayne, shall not lighte vpon a man.
Proverbs 26:3 Vnto the horse belongeth a whyppe, to the Asse a brydle, and a rodde to the fooles backe.
Proverbs 26:4 Geue not the foole an answere after hys folyshnesse, lest thou become lyke vnto hym:
Proverbs 26:5 but make the fole an answer to his folishnes, lest he be wise in his own conceat.
Proverbs 26:6 He is lame of his fete yea dronken is he in vanite, that committeth any thing to a fole.
Proverbs 26:7 Like as it is an vnsemely thing to haue legs & yet to halt euen so is a parable in the foles mouthe.
Proverbs 26:8 He that setteth a foole in hye dignity, that is euen as if a man did cast a precious stone vp on the gallous.
Proverbs 26:9 A parable in a fooles mouth is lyke a thorne that prycketh a dronken man in the hand.
Proverbs 26:10 A man of experience dyscerneth all thynges well, but whoso hyreth a foole, hyreth such one as will take no hede.
Proverbs 26:11 Lyke as the dogge turueth agayne to hys vomyte, euen so a foole beginneth hys folishnesse agayne a fresh.
Proverbs 26:12 If thou seiest a man that is wyse in his owne conceate, there is more hope in a fole then in him.
Proverbs 26:13 The slouthful sayeth: there is a leopard in the way, and a lion in the myddest of the stretes.
Proverbs 26:14 Lyke as the dore turneth aboute vpon the thresholde, euen so doth the slouthfull welter hym self in his bedde.
Proverbs 26:15 The slouthful bodye thrusteth his hand into his bosome, and it greueth him to put it agayne to his mouth.
Proverbs 26:16 The slogard thynketh hym selfe wyser then? .vij. men that sit & teach.
Proverbs 26:17 Who so goeth by & medleth wyth other mens stryfe, he is lyke one that taketh a dog by the eares.
Proverbs 26:18 Lyke os one shutteth deadly arowes and dartes out of a preuy place, euen so doth a dissembler wyth his neighboure.
Proverbs 26:19 And then saith he: I dyd it but in sporte.
Proverbs 26:20 Where no wodde is, there the fyre goeth oute: and where the backcbyter is taken awaye, there the stryfe ceaseth.
Proverbs 26:21 Coales kyndle heate, and wode the fire: euen so doth a braulynge felowe stere vp varyaunce.
Proverbs 26:22 A slaunderers wordes are lyke flaterye, but they pearse the inwarde partes of the bodye.
Proverbs 26:23 Venimous lippes and a wicked herte, are lyke a potsherde couered with syluer drosse.
Proverbs 26:24 An enemy dissembleth with hys lyps, and in the meane season he ymagineth mischefe:
Proverbs 26:25 but when he speaketh fayre, beleue hym not, for ther are seuen abhomynacons in hys herte.
Proverbs 26:26 Who so kepeth euel wil, secretly to do hurte, his malice shalbe shewed before the whole congregacion.
Proverbs 26:27 Who diggeth vp a pyt, shal fal therin: and he that weltreth a stone shal stomble vpon it him selfe.
Proverbs 26:28 A dissembling tong hateth one that rebuketh hym, and a flattering mouth worketh mischefe.

CHAPTER: 27

Proverbs 27:1 Make not thy boaste of to morow, for thou knowest not what maye happen to day.
Proverbs 27:2 Let another man praise the, & not thine own mouth yea other folkes lips, & not thine.
Proverbs 27:3 The stone is heuy, and the sand weyghty: but a foles wrath is heuier then then they both
Proverbs 27:4 Wrath is a cruel thing, and furyousnesse is a verye tempeste: yea who is able to abyde enuye?
Proverbs 27:5 An open rebuke is beter then a secrete loue.
Proverbs 27:6 Faythfull are the woundes of a louer, but the kysses of an enemy are disceatful
Proverbs 27:7 He that is ful, abhorreth an hony combe: but vnto him that is hongry, euery sower thing is swete.
Proverbs 27:8 He that oft times flytteth, is like a bird that forsaketh her nest.
Proverbs 27:9 The hert is glad of a swet ointment and sauoure, but a stomake that can geue good councel, reioiseth a mans neyghboure.
Proverbs 27:10 Thine owne frend, and thy fathers frend se thou forsake not, but go not into thy brothers house in tyme of thy trouble. Better is a frend at hand, then a brother far of.
Proverbs 27:11 My son, be wyse, and thou shalt make me a glad herte: so that I shall make answere vnto my rebukers.
Proverbs 27:12 A wyse man seynge the plage wyll hyde hym selfe, as for fooles they go on styll, and suffer harme.
Proverbs 27:13 Take hys garmente that is suertye for a straunger, & take a pledge of him for the vnknowne mans sake.
Proverbs 27:14 He that is to hasty to prayse his neyghbour aboue measure, shalbe taken as one that geueth hym and euel report.
Proverbs 27:15 A braulling woman and the rose of the house dropping in a rainy day may wel be compared together.
Proverbs 27:16 He that refrayneth her, refrayneth the wynde, and holdeth oyle fast in hys hande.
Proverbs 27:17 Lyke as one yron whetteth another, so doth one man conforte another.
Proverbs 27:18 Who so kepeth his fyggetre, shall enioye the fruytes therof he that wayteth vpon hys master, shal come to honoure.
Proverbs 27:19 Lyke as in one water there appeare diuerse faces, euen so diuerse men haue dyuerse hertes.
Proverbs 27:20 Lyke as hell and destruccyon are neuer full, euen so the eyes of men canne neuer be satysfyed.
Proverbs 27:21 Siluer is tryed in the mold, and golde in the fornace and so is a man, when he is openlye praysed to his face.
Proverbs 27:22 Though thou shouldest bray a foole wyth a pestell in morter like otemel, yet wyll not his folyshnesse go from hym.
Proverbs 27:23 Se that thou know the number of thy catell thy selfe, and loke wel to thy flockes.
Proverbs 27:24 For riches abyde not alway, & the crowne endureth not for euer.
Proverbs 27:25 The hey groweth, the grasse commeth vp, & herbes are gathered in the mountaynes.
Proverbs 27:26 The lambes shall clothe the, and for the gotes
Proverbs 27:27 thou shalt haue goates mylcke ynough to fede the, to vpholde thy housholde, and to susteyne thy maydens.

CHAPTER: 28

Proverbs 28:1 The vngodly flyeth no man chasyng him, but the rightuous standeth styf as lyon.
Proverbs 28:2 Because of synne the lande doth oft chang her prynce: but thorowe men of vnderstandynge and wysdome a realme endureth long.
Proverbs 28:3 One pore man oppressinge another by uiolence is lyke a continuall rayne that destroieth the fruyte.
Proverbs 28:4 They that forsake the lawe, prayse the vngodly: but such as kepe the law abhorre them.
Proverbs 28:5 Wycked men discerue not the thynge that is ryght, but they that seke after the Lord, discusse al thynges.
Proverbs 28:6 A poore man leadyng a godly lyfe, is better then the rych that goeth in froward wayes.
Proverbs 28:7 Who so kepeth the lawe, is a childe of vnderstandynge: but he that fedeth ryotous men shameth hys father.
Proverbs 28:8 Who so increaseth hys ryches by vauntage and wynnynge, let hym gather them to helpe the poore wyth al.
Proverbs 28:9 He that turneth away his eare from hearing the lawe, his prayer shalbe abhorred.
Proverbs 28:10 Who so leadeth the ryghtuous into an euel waye, shal fal into his owne pit, but, the iust shall haue the good in possession.
Proverbs 28:11 The rych man thyncketh him selfe to be wyse, but the poore that hath vnderstandynge can perceaue him well ynough.
Proverbs 28:12 When ryghtuous men are in prosperite, then doth honoure floryshe: but when the vngodly come vp, the state of men chaungeth.
Proverbs 28:13 He that hydeth hys synnes, shall not prospere: but who so knowledgeth them and forsaketh them shal haue mercy.
Proverbs 28:14 Well is hym that standeth alwaye in awe: as for hym that hardeneth his hert, he shall fal into myschyefe.
Proverbs 28:15 Lyke as a roarynge lyon and an hongry beare, euen so is an vngodly prynce ouer the pore people.
Proverbs 28:16 Wher the prynce is wythout vnderstandyng, ther is greate oppression and wronge: but if he be such one as hateth couetousnesse he shall longe raygne.
Proverbs 28:17 He that by vyolence sheddeth anye mannes bloude, shall be a rennagate vnto his graue, and no man shall be able to succoure hym.
Proverbs 28:18 Who so leadetth a godly and an inocent life, shalbe, safe: but he that goeth frowarde wayes, shall once haue a fall.
Proverbs 28:19 He that tylleth his lande, shall haue plenteousnesse of bread: but he that foloweth ydilnesse, shall haue pouerte ynough.
Proverbs 28:20 A faithfull man is greatlye to be commended, but he that maketh to much haste for to be rych, shall not be vngyltye.
Proverbs 28:21 To haue respecte of persons in iudgment is not good: And why? he wil do wrong, yea euen for a pece of bread.
Proverbs 28:22 He that wyll be ritch all to soone, hath an euell eye, and considereth not, that pouertye shall come vpon him.
Proverbs 28:23 He that rebuketh a man, shal fynde more fauoure at the laste, then he that flattereth him.
Proverbs 28:24 Who so robbeth hys father and mother, and sayeth it is no synne: the same is like vnto a murtherer.
Proverbs 28:25 He that is of a proud stomacke, stereth vp strife but he that putteth hys truste in the Lorde, shalbe wel fedde.
Proverbs 28:26 He that trusteth in his own hert, is a foole: but he that dealeth wysely, shal be safe.
Proverbs 28:27 He that geueth vnto the poore, shall not wante: but he that turneth awaye hys eyes from suche as be in necessytye, shal suffer greate pouertye hym selfe.
Proverbs 28:28 When the vngodlye are come vp, men are fayne to hyde them selues: but when they perysh, the ryghtuous increase.

CHAPTER: 29

Proverbs 29:1 He that is styfnecked and wyll not be refourmed, shal sodenly be destroied without any helpe
Proverbs 29:2 Wher the rightuous haue the ouer hand the people are in prosperitye: but wher the vngodly beareth rule, ther the people mourne.
Proverbs 29:3 Who so loueth wysdome, maketh his father a glad man: but he that kepeth harlottes, spendeth away that he hath.
Proverbs 29:4 With true iudgment the kyng setteth vp the land, but if he be a man that taketh giftes, he turneth it vpsyde downe.
Proverbs 29:5 Whoso flattereth hys neyghboure, layeth a nette for hys fete.
Proverbs 29:6 The synne of the wycked is his owne snare, but the ryghtuons shall be glad and reioyse.
Proverbs 29:7 The rightuous consydereth the cause of the poore, but the vngodly regardeth no vnderstandynge.
Proverbs 29:8 Wycked people brynge a cytye in decay, but wyse men sette it vp agayne.
Proverbs 29:9 If a wyse man go to lawe wyth a foole (whether he deale wyth hym frendly or roughly) he getteth no rest.
Proverbs 29:10 The bloude thyrstye hate the ryghtuous, but the iust seke his soule.
Proverbs 29:11 A foole poureth out his spirit altogether, but a wyse man kepeth it in till afterwarde.
Proverbs 29:12 If a prynce delyte iu lyes, all his seruauntes are vngodly.
Proverbs 29:13 The pore and the lender mete together, the Lord lyghteneth both their eies
Proverbs 29:14 The seate of the Kynge that faythfully iudgeth the poore, shall contynue sure for euermore.
Proverbs 29:15 The rod and correction myuister wysdome, but if a chylde be not loked vnto, he bringeth his mother to shame.
Proverbs 29:16 When the vngodly come vp, wyckednesse increaseth: but the rightuous shall se their fal.
Proverbs 29:17 Nurtour thy sonne with correction, and he shall comforte the, yea he shall do the good at thyne herte.
Proverbs 29:18 Wher no Prophete is ther the people perysh: but wel is hym that kepeth the law.
Proverbs 29:19 A seruaunte wyll not be the better for wordes for thoughe he vnderstande, yet wyll he not regarde them,
Proverbs 29:20 Yf thou seist a man that is hastye to speake vnaduysed, thou, mayest trust a foole more then hym.
Proverbs 29:21 He that delicately bringeth vp his seruaunt from a chyld, shall make hym hys master at length.
Proverbs 29:22 An angrye man stereth vp stryfe, and he that beareth euell wyll in hys mynde, doeth muche euill.
Proverbs 29:23 After pryde commeth a fal, but a lowly spirit bringeth great worshippe.
Proverbs 29:24 Who so kepeth companye wyth a thyefe, hateth hys owne soule: he heareth blasphemyes, and telleth it not fourth.
Proverbs 29:25 He that feareth men, shall haue a fall: but whoso putteth his trust in the Lorde shall come to honoure.
Proverbs 29:26 Manye there be that seke the Princes fauoure, but euery mans iudgement commeth from the Lorde.
Proverbs 29:27 The ryghtuous abhorreth the vngodlye: but as for those that be in the ryght way, the wicked hate them.

CHAPTER: 30

Proverbs 30:1 The wordes of Agur the sunne. of Iakeh. The prophecye of a true faithful man, whom God hath helped, whom God had comforted and norished.
Proverbs 30:2 For though I am the least of al, & haue no mans vnderstanding
Proverbs 30:3 (for I neuer learned wysdom) yet haue I vnderstanding, & am wel infourmed in godly thinges.
Proverbs 30:4 Who hath climed vp into heauen? Who hath come down from thence? Who hath holden the wynd fast in his hand? Who hath comprehended the waters in a garment? Who hath set al the endes of the worlde? What is his name, or his sonnes name? Canst thou tel?
Proverbs 30:5 All the wordes of God are pure & cleane, for he is a shyeld vnto al them, that put theyr trust in him.
Proverbs 30:6 Put thou nothing therfore vnto hys wordes, lest he reproue the, and thou be founde a lyar.
Proverbs 30:7 Two thynges I requyre of the, that thou wilt not denye me before I dye,
Proverbs 30:8 Remoue fro me vanite and lyes: geue me neither pouerte nor ryches, onely graunte me a necessary lyuyng.
Proverbs 30:9 Lest if I be to full, I denye the, & say: what felow is the Lord? And lest I beynge constrayned thorow pouerte, fall vnto stealyng, and forsweare the name of my God.
Proverbs 30:10 Accuse not a seruaunt vnto hys master, lest he speake euell of the also, and thou be hurt.
Proverbs 30:11 He that bringeth vp an euell reporte vpon the generacion of hys father and mother, is not worthy to be commended.
Proverbs 30:12 The generacion that thynke them selfes cleane, shall not be clensed from their filthynesse.
Proverbs 30:13 There are people that haue a proude loke, and cast vp their eye lyddes.
Proverbs 30:14 This peoples teth are swerdes, and with their chafte bones they consume and deuour the simple of the earth, and the poore from among men.
Proverbs 30:15 This generacion (whiche is lyke an horslech) hath two daughters: the one is called, fetch hither, and the other bring hyther.
Proverbs 30:16 There be thre thinges that are neuer satisfied, and the forth sayeth neuer hoo. The hell, a womans wombe, and the earthe hath neuer water ynough. As for fyre, it sayeth neuer, hoo.
Proverbs 30:17 Who so laugheth hys father to scorne, and setteth his mothers commaundement at naughte: the rauens pycke out hys eyes in the valley, and deuoured be he of the yonge Aegles.
Proverbs 30:18 There be thre thinges to hye for me, and as for the forth, it passeth my knowledge.
Proverbs 30:19 The way of an Aegle in the ayre, the way of a serpent ouer a stone, the waye of a shyp in the sea, and the waye of a man with a yonge woman.
Proverbs 30:20 Such is the way also of a wife that breaketh wedlocke, which wipeth her mouth like as when she hath eaten, & sayeth. As for me, I haue done no harme.
Proverbs 30:21 Thorow thre thinges the earth is disquieted, & the fourthe may it not beare:
Proverbs 30:22 Thorow a seruaunt that beareth rule, thorow a foole that hath greate ryches,
Proverbs 30:23 thorow an ydle houswyfe, & thorow an handmayden that is heyre to her mastres.
Proverbs 30:24 There be foure thinges in the earth, that which are very litle: but in wysedome they exceade the wyse.
Proverbs 30:25 The Emmettes are but a weake people, yet gather they their meate together in the haruest.
Proverbs 30:26 The Conyes are but a feble folke, yet make they their couches amonge the rockes.
Proverbs 30:27 The greshoppers haue not a gyde, yet go thei forth together by heapes.
Proverbs 30:28 The spyder laboureth with her handes, & that in the kynges palace.
Proverbs 30:29 There be thre thinges that go stifly, but the going of the fourth is the godlyest of all.
Proverbs 30:30 A Lyon, which is kinge of beastes, & geueth place to no man:
Proverbs 30:31 A cock ready to fight: A ramme and a kyng that goeth forth with his people.
Proverbs 30:32 If thou be so folish to magnifie thy selfe, or medlest with any such thing, then laye thine hande vpon thy mouth.
Proverbs 30:33 Who so cherneth mylke, maketh butter: he that rubbeth hys nose, maketh it blede: and he that causeth wrath, bringeth forth stryfe.

CHAPTER: 31

Proverbs 31:1 The wordes of kyng Lamuell, and the Prophecye that his mother taughte hym.
Proverbs 31:2 My sonne, thou sonne of my body: O my deare beloued sonne,
Proverbs 31:3 geue not ouer thy substaunce & mynde vnto women, whiche are the destruction euen of kinges.
Proverbs 31:4 O Lamuel, geue kynges no wyne, geue kynges & princes no strong drincke:
Proverbs 31:5 lest they beyng dronken forget the law, & regarde not the cause of the poore, and of al such as be in aduersite.
Proverbs 31:6 Geue strong drinke vnto suche as are condempned to death, & wyne vnto those that mourne:
Proverbs 31:7 that they may drinke it, & forget their misery and aduersitie.
Proverbs 31:8 Be thou an aduocate, and stande in iudgement thy selfe, to speake for all such as be domme & socourles.
Proverbs 31:9 With thy mouth defende the thyng that is lawful and right, and the cause of the poore and helpelesse.
Proverbs 31:10 Aleph. Who so fyndeth an honest faythfull woman, she is much more worth then pearles.
Proverbs 31:11 Beth. The hert of her husband may safely trust in her, so that he shal haue no nede of spoyles.
Proverbs 31:12 Gimel. She will do him good & not euell all the dayes of her lyfe.
Proverbs 31:13 Daleth. She occupyeth woll and flax, and laboureth gladly with her handes.
Proverbs 31:14 He. She is lyke a merchauntes shyppe, that bringeth her vitayles from a farre.
Proverbs 31:15 Vau. She is vp in the night season, to prouyde meate for her housholde, and foode for her maydens.
Proverbs 31:16 Zain. She considreth lande, & byeth it, & wyth the frute of her handes she planteth a vyneyarde.
Proverbs 31:17 Heth. She gyrdeth her loynes with strength, and courageth her armes.
Proverbs 31:18 Teth. And if she perceyue that her houswyfrye doth good, her candle goeth not out by night.
Proverbs 31:19 Iod. She layeth her fingers to the spyndle, & her hande taketh holde of the rocke.
Proverbs 31:20 Caph. She openeth her hande to the poore, yea, she stretched forthe her handes too suche as haue nede.
Proverbs 31:21 Lamed. She feareth not that the colde of wynter shall hurte her house, for all her housholde folkes are double clothed.
Proverbs 31:22 Mem. She maketh her selfe fayre ornamentes, her clothyng is whyte silke and purple.
Proverbs 31:23 Nun. Her husband is much set by in the gates, when he sitteth among the rulers of the lande.
Proverbs 31:24 Samech. She maketh cloth of silke & selleth it, and deliuereth a gyrdle vnto the marchaunt.
Proverbs 31:25 Ain. Strength and honour is her clothynge, & in the latter daye she shall reioyse.
Proverbs 31:26 Phe. She openeth her mouth with wysdome, and in her tonge is the lawe of grace.
Proverbs 31:27 Zade. She loketh well to the wayes of her housholde, & eateth not her bread with ydelnes.
Proverbs 31:28 Koph. Her chyldren arise, and call her blessed: & her husbande maketh much of her.
Proverbs 31:29 Res. Many daughters there be that gather riches together, but thou goest aboue them all.
Proverbs 31:30 Sin. As for fauour, it is disceatfull, & beuty is a vayne thing: but a woman that feareth the Lord, she is worthy to be praysed.
Proverbs 31:31 Thau. Geue her of the frute of her handes, & let her owne workes prayse her in the gates.

BOOK: Ecclesiastes

CHAPTER: 1

Ecclesiastes 1:1 These arethe wordes of the Preacher, the sonne of Dauid, king of Ierusalem
Ecclesiastes 1:2 All is but vanitie (sayeth the preacher) all is but playne vanite.
Ecclesiastes 1:3 For what els hath a man, of all the laboure that he taketh vnder the Sunne?
Ecclesiastes 1:4 One generacion passeth away, another commeth, but the earth abideth styll.
Ecclesiastes 1:5 The Sunne aryseth, the sunne goeth doune, and returneth to his place, that he may there ryse vp agayn.
Ecclesiastes 1:6 The wynde goeth towarde the South, & fetcheth hys compasse about vnto the North, & so turneth into him self agayn.
Ecclesiastes 1:7 All floudes runne into the sea, & yet the sea is not filled: for loke vnto what place the waters runne, thence they come agayn.
Ecclesiastes 1:8 All thinges are so harde, that no man can expresse them. The eye is not satisfied with sight, the eare is not filled with hearing.
Ecclesiastes 1:9 The thing that hath bene cometh to passe agayn: & the thing that hath bene done, is done agayn, there is no new thyng vnder the Sunne.
Ecclesiastes 1:10 Is there any thyng wherof it may be sayd: lo, this is new? For it was longe a goo in the tymes that haue bene before vs.
Ecclesiastes 1:11 The thing that is past, is out of remembraunce: Euen so the thynges that are for to come, shal no more be thought vpon among theim that come after.
Ecclesiastes 1:12 I myself the Preacher, beynge kynge of Israel & Hierusalem,
Ecclesiastes 1:13 applied my mynde to seke out & search for the knowlege of all thinges that are done vnder heauen. Such trauayle and labour hath God geuen vnto the chyldren of men, too exercyse them selfes therein.
Ecclesiastes 1:14 Thus I haue considred all the thynges that come to passe vnder the Sunne, & so, they are all but vanitie & vexacion of mynde.
Ecclesiastes 1:15 The croked can not be mayde strayght, & the fautes can not be numbred.
Ecclesiastes 1:16 I commoned wyth myne owne hert, saying: lo, I am come to a greate estate, & haue gotten more wisdome, then all they that haue bene before me in Ierusalem. Yea, my hert had great experience of wysedome & knowlege,
Ecclesiastes 1:17 for there vnto I applyed my mynde: that I might knowe what were wisdome & vnderstanding, what were errour & folishnes. And I perceyued that this also was but a vexacion of minde:
Ecclesiastes 1:18 for where much wysdome is, there is also great trauayle and disquietnes: and the more knowledge a man hath, the more is his care.

CHAPTER: 2

Ecclesiastes 2:1 Then sayde I thus in my herte: Now go to, I will take myne ease and haue good dayes. But lo, that was vanitie also:
Ecclesiastes 2:2 in so much that I sayd vnto laughter: thou art mad, and to myrthe: what doest thou?
Ecclesiastes 2:3 So I thought in my hert, to withdrawe my flesh from wyne, to apply my mynde vnto wysdome, & to comprehende folishnes vntill the time that (among all the thinges which are vnder the sunne) I might se what were best for men to do, so long as they lyue vnder heauen.
Ecclesiastes 2:4 I made Gorgious fayre workes. I buylded me houses, & planted vineyardes.
Ecclesiastes 2:5 I made me ortchardes & gardens of pleasure, & planted trees in them of al maner frutes.
Ecclesiastes 2:6 I made poles of water, to water the grene & frutefull trees withall.
Ecclesiastes 2:7 I bought seruauntes and maidens and had a greate housholde, As for catell and shepe, I had more substance of them then all they that were before me in Ierusalem,
Ecclesiastes 2:8 I gathered syluer and gold together, euen a treasure of kynges and landes. I prouyded me syngers and wemen which coulde playe of instrumentes, to make men myrth and pastime. I gat me drinckyng cuppes also and glasses.
Ecclesiastes 2:9 Shortly, I was greater and in more worshippe, then all my predecessours in Ierusalem. For wysdome remained with me
Ecclesiastes 2:10 and loke what soeuer myne eyes desyred, I let them haue it: and wherein soeuer my herte delited or had any pleasure, I wyth helde it not from it. Thus my herte reioysed in all that I dyd, and this I toke for the porcion of all my trauayle.
Ecclesiastes 2:11 But when I consydered all the workes that my handes had wrought, and all the laboures that I had taken therein, lo, all was but but vanytye and vexacion of mind, & nothyng of any value vnder the Sunne.
Ecclesiastes 2:12 Then turned I me to consyder wysdome, erroure and folyshnesse (for what is he amonge men, that myght be compared to me the kyng in suche workes?)
Ecclesiastes 2:13 and I saw that wysdome excelleth folishnesse, as farre as lyght doth darcknesse.
Ecclesiastes 2:14 For a wyse man beareth his eyes about in his head, but the foole goth in the darcknesse. I perceaued also that they both had one end.
Ecclesiastes 2:15 Then thought I in my mynde: If it happen vnto the foole as it doeth vnto me, what nedeth, me then to laboure anye more for wysdome? So I confessed wythin my herte, that thys also was but vanitye.
Ecclesiastes 2:16 For the wyse are euer as lytle in remembraunce as the folish, and al the daies for to come shalbe forgotten, yea the wyse man dyeth as well as the fole.
Ecclesiastes 2:17 Thus began I to be werye of my lyfe, in so muche that I coulde awaie wyth nothynge that is done vnder the Sunne, for all was but vanytye and vexacion of mynde:
Ecclesiastes 2:18 Yea I was weerye of al my laboure, which I had taken vnder the Sunne, because I shoulde be fayne to leaue them vnto another man, that commeth after me
Ecclesiastes 2:19 for who knoweth, whether he shalbe a wyse man or afole? And yet shall he be lorde of al my laboures, which I wyth suche wysdome haue taken vnder the Sunne. Is not this a vayne thynge.
Ecclesiastes 2:20 So I turned me to refraine my mynd from all such trauayle, as I toke vnder the Sunne
Ecclesiastes 2:21 for somuch as a man shuld weery hym selfe with wisdome, wt vnderstanding & oportunyte & yet be faine to leaue his laboures vnto another, that neuer swet. for them. This is also a vayne thinge and a greate miserie.
Ecclesiastes 2:22 For what getteth a man of all the laboure and trauaile of his mind, that he taketh vnder the Sunne,
Ecclesiastes 2:23 but heauinesse, sorow and disquietnes al the daeis of his life? In so much that his herte can not rest in the night. Is not this also a vaine thing?
Ecclesiastes 2:24 Is it not better then, for a man to eat & drinke, and his soule to be mery in his labour? Yea I sawe that thys also was a gyfte of God:
Ecclesiastes 2:25 For who may eat, drinke, or bring any thing to passe wythout hym? And why?
Ecclesiastes 2:26 he geueth vnto man, what it pleaseth him: whether it be wysdome, vnderstandyng, or gladnesse. But vnto the sinner he geueth werines and sorow that he may gather and heape togather the thing that afterward shalbe geuen vnto him whom it pleaseth God. This is now a vayne thynge yea a very disquietnes and vexacion of mind

CHAPTER: 3

Ecclesiastes 3:1 Every thynge hath a tyme, yea all that is vnder the heauen, hath his conuenient season.
Ecclesiastes 3:2 Their is a tyme to be borne, & a tyme to dye. Ther is tyme to plant, and a time to plucke vp the thing, that is planted.
Ecclesiastes 3:3 A tyme to slay, and a tyme to make whole. A time to breake down, & a time to bild vp.
Ecclesiastes 3:4 A time to wepe, and a time to laugh: A time to mourne, and a tyme to daunce:
Ecclesiastes 3:5 A time to cast away stones, and a tyme to gather stones together: A tyme to enbrace, and a tyme to refrayne from enbrasyng.
Ecclesiastes 3:6 A time to win, and a tyme to lose: A time to spare, and a tyme to spend:
Ecclesiastes 3:7 A time to cut in peces, and a time to sowe together: A time to kepe silence, and a time to speake:
Ecclesiastes 3:8 A tyme to loue, and a tyme to hate: A tyme of war, and time of peace:
Ecclesiastes 3:9 What hath a man els (that doth any thinge) but werines & labour?
Ecclesiastes 3:10 For as touchyng the trauayle and carefulnes which God hath geuen vnto men, I se that he hath geuen it them, to be exercised in it.
Ecclesiastes 3:11 Al this hath he ordeyned maruelous goodly: to euery thing his due tyme He hath planted ignorance also in the hertes of men, that thei shuld not find out the ground of his workes, whiche he doth from the beginning to the end.
Ecclesiastes 3:12 So I perceiued, that in these thinges their is nothinge better for a man, then to be mery and to do wel so long as he liueth.
Ecclesiastes 3:13 For al that a man eateth & drinketh, yea whatsoeuer a man enioyeth of al his labour, the same is a gyfte of God.
Ecclesiastes 3:14 I considered also that whatsoeuer God doth, it continueth for euer, & that no thing can be put vnto it nor taken from it: & that god doth it to the intent, that men shuld feare him.
Ecclesiastes 3:15 The thing that hath bene, is now: & that thing that is for to come, hath bene afore time, for God restoreth agayne the thynge that was paste.
Ecclesiastes 3:16 Moreouer, I saw vnder the sunne vngodlyenesse in the steade of iudgemente, and iniquitye in steade of ryghtuousnesse.
Ecclesiastes 3:17 Then thought I in my mind: God shal separat the rightuous from the vngodly, & then shalbe that time and iudgment of al councels and worckes.
Ecclesiastes 3:18 I comened with mine own hert also concerning the children of men how God hath chosen them & yet letteth them apeare: as though they were beastes:
Ecclesiastes 3:19 for it hapeneth vnto men as it doth vnto beastes, & as the one dieth, so dyeth the other: yea, thei haue both one maner of byrth so that (in this) a man hathe no preemynence aboue a beast, but al are subdued vnto vanitie.
Ecclesiastes 3:20 They go all vnto one place, for as they be all of dust, so shal they all turne vnto dust agayne.
Ecclesiastes 3:21 Who knoweth the sprete of man that goeth vpwarde, & the breath of the beast that goeth doune into the earth?
Ecclesiastes 3:22 Wherefore I perceyue, that there is nothing better for a man, then to be ioyfull in his labour, for that is hys porcion. But who will bring him to se the thing that shall come after hym?

CHAPTER: 4

Ecclesiastes 4:1 So I turned me, & considred al the violent wrong that is done vnder the sunne: & beholde, the teares of such as were oppressed, & there was no man to comforte them or that wolde deliuer & defende them from the violence of their oppressours.
Ecclesiastes 4:2 Wherfore I iudged those that are dead, to be more happy then such as be alyue:
Ecclesiastes 4:3 yea, hym that is yet vnborne to be better at ease then they both, because he seith not the miserable workes that are done vnder the sunne.
Ecclesiastes 4:4 Agayn, I sawe that all trauayle and diligence of labour was hated of euery man. This is also a vayn thinge, and a vexacion of mynde.
Ecclesiastes 4:5 The foole foldeth his handes together, and eateth vp hys owne flesh.
Ecclesiastes 4:6 One hand full (sayeth he) is better with rest, then bothe the handes full with labour and trauayle.
Ecclesiastes 4:7 Moreouer, I turned me, & beholde yet another vanitie vnder the Sunne.
Ecclesiastes 4:8 There is one man, no mo but him self alone, hauing neither childe nor brother: yet is there no ende of his carefull trauayle, hys eyes can not be satysfied with ryches, (yet doth he not remembre him selfe, & saye:) For whome do I take such trauayle? For whose pleasure do I thus consume away my lyfe? This is also a vayne & miserable thynge.
Ecclesiastes 4:9 Therfore two are better then one, for they may well enioy the profyt of their labour.
Ecclesiastes 4:10 If one of them fall, hys companion helpeth hym vp agayn: But wo is hym that is alone, for if he fall, he hathe not another to helpe hym vp.
Ecclesiastes 4:11 Agayn, when two slepe together, they are warme: but how can a body be warme alone?
Ecclesiastes 4:12 One maye be ouercome, but two may make resistaunce: A three folde cable is not lightly broken.
Ecclesiastes 4:13 A poore chylde beynge wyse, is better then an olde kynge, that doteth, & can not beware in tyme to come.
Ecclesiastes 4:14 Some one commeth out of pryson, & is made a kyng: and another which is born in the kyngdome, commeth vnto pouerte.
Ecclesiastes 4:15 And I perceyued, that al men lyuyng vnder the Sunne, go with the seconde chylde, that commeth vp in the steade of the other.
Ecclesiastes 4:16 As for the people that haue bene before hym, and that come after him, they are innumerable: yet is not their ioy the greater thorow hym. This is also a vayne thyng and a vexacion of mynde.

CHAPTER: 5

Ecclesiastes 5:1 When thou commest into the house of God, kepe thy fote & draw nye, that thou mayest heare: that is better then the offeringes of fooles, for they knowe not what euell they do.
Ecclesiastes 5:2 Be not hasty with thy mouth, & let not thyne herte speake any thyng rashly before God. For God is in heauen, & thou vpon earth, therfore let thy wordes be few.
Ecclesiastes 5:3 For where muche carefulnesse is, there are many dreames: and where many wordes are, there men may heare fooles.
Ecclesiastes 5:4 If thou make a vowe vnto God, be not slacke to perfourme it. As for folish vowes, he hath no pleasure in them.
Ecclesiastes 5:5 If thou promise any thynge, paye it: for better it is that thou make no vowe then that thou shouldest promyse, and not paye.
Ecclesiastes 5:6 Vse not thy mouth to cause thy flesh for to synne, that thou say not before the aungell: my foolishnesse is in the faute. For then God will be angry at thy voyce, & destroye all the workes of thyne handes.
Ecclesiastes 5:7 And why? where as are many dreames and many wordes, there are also diuerse vanities: but loke that thou feare God.
Ecclesiastes 5:8 If thou seyst the poore to be oppressed and wrongeously dealt withall, so that equite & the right of the law is wrasted in the lande: maruell not thou at such iudgement, for one great man kepeth touch with another, and the mightye helpe them selfes together.
Ecclesiastes 5:9 The whole lande also with the feldes and all that is therin, is in subiection & bondage vnto the kyng.
Ecclesiastes 5:10 He that loueth money, will neuer be satisfied wyth money: and who so deliteth in ryches, shall haue no profit therof. Is not this also a vayn thyng?
Ecclesiastes 5:11 Where as much ryches is, there are many also that spende them away. And what pleasure more hath he that possesseth them, sauyng that he may loke vpon them with hys eyes?
Ecclesiastes 5:12 A labouryng man slepeth swetely, whether it be litle or much that he eateth: but the aboundaunce of the ryche wil not suffre him to slepe.
Ecclesiastes 5:13 Yet is there a sore plague, whiche I haue sene vnder the sunne (namely) ryches kept to the hurt of him that hath them in possession.
Ecclesiastes 5:14 For oft tymes they perishe with his greate misery & trouble: and if he haue a chylde, it getteth nothynge.
Ecclesiastes 5:15 Lyke as he came naked out of his mothers wombe, so goeth he thyther agayn, and carieth nothing away with hym of all his labour.
Ecclesiastes 5:16 This is a miserable plage, that he shal go away euen as he came. What helpeth it hym then, that he hath labored in the wynde?
Ecclesiastes 5:17 All the dayes of his life also muste he eate in the darke, with greate carefulnesse, syckenesse and sorowe.
Ecclesiastes 5:18 Therefore me thincke it a better and a fayrer thinge a manne to eate and dryncke, and to be refreshied of all hys laboure, that he taketh vnder the Sunne all the dayes of hys lyfe which God geueth hym, for this is hys porcyon.
Ecclesiastes 5:19 For vnto whom soeuer God geueth ritches, goodes and power, he geueth it him to enioy it, to take it for hys porcyon, and to be refreshed of his laboure: thys is nowe the gyfte of God.
Ecclesiastes 5:20 For he thyncketh not muche how longe he shall lyue, for so much as God fylleth his herte with gladnesse.

CHAPTER: 6

Ecclesiastes 6:1 Hhere is yet a plage vnder the Sunne, and it is a general thing among men:
Ecclesiastes 6:2 when God geueth a man rytches, goodes and honoure, so that he wanteth nothynge of all that hys herte can desyre: and yet God geueth hym not leaue to enioye the same, but another man spendeth them. Thys is a vayne thynge and a myserable plage.
Ecclesiastes 6:3 If a man begette an hundred chyldren, and lyue manye yeares, so that his dayes are many in number, and yet cannot enioy his good neyther be buried: as for him I saye, that an vntymely byrth is better then he.
Ecclesiastes 6:4 For he commeth to naughte, and goeth hys waye into darckenes, and his name is forgotten.
Ecclesiastes 6:5 More ouer, he seith not the Sunne, and knoweth of no rest neyther here ner there:
Ecclesiastes 6:6 Yea thoughe he lyued two thousande yeares, yet hath he no good lyfe. Come not all to one place?
Ecclesiastes 6:7 All the laboure that a man taketh, is for him selfe, and yet hys desyre is neuer fylled after hys mynde.
Ecclesiastes 6:8 For what hath the wyse moore then the foole. What helpeth it the poore, that he knoweth to walcke before the lyuynge?
Ecclesiastes 6:9 The syght of the eyes is better, then that the soule shoulde so departe awaye. How be it thys is also a vayne thynge and a dysquyetnesse of mynde.
Ecclesiastes 6:10 What is more excellente then man? yet can he not in the lawe get the vyctorye of him that is myghtyer then he:
Ecclesiastes 6:11 A vaine thing is it to cast out many wordes, but what hath a man els?
Ecclesiastes 6:12 For who knowth what is good for man lyuynge, in the dayes of hys vayne life, whych is but a shadowe? Or, who wyll tell a man, what shall happen after him vnder the Sunne.

CHAPTER: 7

Ecclesiastes 7:1 A good name is more worth then a precious oyntemente, and the day of death is better then the daye of byrthe.
Ecclesiastes 7:2 It is better to go into an house of mourning, then into a bancketynge house. For there is the ende of all men, and he that is lyuyng, taketh it to hert.
Ecclesiastes 7:3 It is better to be sory then to laugh, for when the countenaunce is heauye, the herte is ioyfull.
Ecclesiastes 7:4 The herte of the wyse is in the mournyng house, but the hert of the folish is in the house of myrthe.
Ecclesiastes 7:5 It is better to geue eare to the chastenyng of a wyse man, then to heare the song of fooles.
Ecclesiastes 7:6 For the laughing of fooles is lyke the crackinge of thornes vnder a pot, And that is but a vayne thing.
Ecclesiastes 7:7 Who so doeth wronge, maketh a wyse man to goo out of hys wytte, and destroyeth agentle herte.
Ecclesiastes 7:8 The ende of a thyng is better then the begynnynge. The pacient of spirite is better then the hye mynded.
Ecclesiastes 7:9 Be not hastelye angrye in thy mynde, for wrath resteth in the bosome of a foole.
Ecclesiastes 7:10 Saye not thou: What is the cause that the dayes of the olde tyme were better, then they that be now? for that were no wyse question.
Ecclesiastes 7:11 Wysdome is better then ritches, yea much more worth then the eye syght.
Ecclesiastes 7:12 For wysdome defendeth as well as money, and the excellent knowledge and wysdome geueth life vnto him that hath it in possession.
Ecclesiastes 7:13 Consyder the worke of God, how that no man can make the thyng strayght whych he maketh croked.
Ecclesiastes 7:14 Vse well the tyme of prosperyty, and remembre the time of misfortune: for God maketh the one by the other. so that a man can fynd nothyng els.
Ecclesiastes 7:15 These .ij. things also haue I considered in the tyme of vanytye: that the iust man perisheth for hys ryghtuousnes sake, and the vngodly lyued in hys wickednesse.
Ecclesiastes 7:16 Therefore be thou nether to rightuous ner ouer wyse, that thou perysh not:
Ecclesiastes 7:17 be nether to vnrightuous also ner to folyshe, lest thou dye before thy tyme.
Ecclesiastes 7:18 It is good for the to take hold of thys, and not to let that go out of thy hand. For he that fereth God shal escape them al.
Ecclesiastes 7:19 Wisdom geueth more corage vnto the wise then ten myghty men of the cyty:
Ecclesiastes 7:20 for there is not one iuste vpon earth, that doth good, and synneth not.
Ecclesiastes 7:21 Take not hede vnto euery word that is spoken, leste thou heare thy seruaunt curse the:
Ecclesiastes 7:22 for thyne owne herte knoweth, that thou thy selfe also hast ofte tymes spoken euell by other men.
Ecclesiastes 7:23 All these thynges haue I proued because of wysdome: for I thought to be wise, but she went farther fro me
Ecclesiastes 7:24 then she was before, yea and so depe that I might not reach vnto her
Ecclesiastes 7:25 I aplied my minde also vnto knowledg, and to seke out science wysdome and vnderstandynge: to know the foolishnesse of the vngodly, and the erroure of dotynge fooles.
Ecclesiastes 7:26 And I founde, that a woman is bytterrer then death: for she is a very angle, her herte is a net, and her handes are cheynes. Who so pleaseth God shall escape from her, but the synner wil be taken wt her.
Ecclesiastes 7:27 Beholde (sayeth the preacher) this haue I dilygently searched oute and proued, that I myght come by knowledge: whych as yet I seke, and fynde it not.
Ecclesiastes 7:28 Amonge a thousande men I haue founde one, but not one woman amonge all.
Ecclesiastes 7:29 Lo thys onely haue I founde, that God made man iust and right, but they seke dyuerse soteltyes,

CHAPTER: 8

Ecclesiastes 8:1 wher as no man hath wysdome and vnderstandynge, to geue answere thereunto. Wysdome maketh a mans face to shyne, but malyce putteth it oute of fauoure.
Ecclesiastes 8:2 Kepe the kynges commaundemente (I warne the) and the othe that thou haste made vnto god.
Ecclesiastes 8:3 Be not hasty to go out of hys syght, and se thou contynue in no euell thynge: for whatsoeuer it pleaseth him, that doth he,
Ecclesiastes 8:4 Lyke as when a kynge geueth a charge, hys commaundemente is myghtye: Euen so who maye saye vnto hym what doest thou?
Ecclesiastes 8:5 Who so kepeth the commaundement, shal fele no harme: but a wise mans herte discerneth tyme and maner:
Ecclesiastes 8:6 For euerye thinge wil haue oportunite and iudgement, and thys is the thynge that maketh men ful of carefulnes and sorowe.
Ecclesiastes 8:7 And why a man knoweth not what is for to come, for who wyll tell him?
Ecclesiastes 8:8 Nether is there any man that hath power ouer the spirite, to kepe styll the spirite, ner to haue any power in the tyme of death: it is not he also that can make an ende of the battail, nether maye vngodlynes delyuer him that medleth with al.
Ecclesiastes 8:9 All these thynges haue I consydered, and applyed my mynde vnto euerye worcke that is vnder the Sonne: howe one man hath lordshyppe vpon another to hys owne harme.
Ecclesiastes 8:10 For I haue oft sene the vngodly broughte to their graues, and fallen downe from the hye & glorious place: in so muche that they were forgotten in the cytye, where they were had in so hye and greate reputacyon. This is also a vayne thynge.
Ecclesiastes 8:11 Because now that euell worckes are not hastely punyshed the herte of man geueth hym selfe ouer vnto wyckednesse.
Ecclesiastes 8:12 But thoughe an euell persone offende an hundred tymes, and haue a longe life: yet am I sure, that it shall go well wyth them that feare God, because they haue hym before their eyes.
Ecclesiastes 8:13 Againe, as for the vngodly, it shal not be well wyth hym, neyther shall he prolonge his dayes: but euen as a shaddowe, so shal he be that feareth not God.
Ecclesiastes 8:14 Yet is there a vanitye vpon earth: There be iust men, vnto whome it happeneth, as thoughte they had the workes of the vngodly: Agayne, there be vngodly, wyth whom it goeth as though they had the worckes of the ryghtuousnes, Thys me thynke also a vayne thyng.
Ecclesiastes 8:15 Therfore I commaunde gladnesse, because a man hath no better thynge vnder the Sonne, then to eate and dryncke, and to be mery: for that shal he haue of his laboure al the dayes of hys lyfe, whych God geueth hym vnder the Sonne.
Ecclesiastes 8:16 When I applied my mind to learne wysdome, and to knowe the trauail that is in the worlde (and that of such a fashion, that I suffred not myne eyes to slepe nether daye ner nyghte)
Ecclesiastes 8:17 I vnderstode of all the workes of god, that it is not impossyble for a man, to attaine vnto the workes that are done vnder the Sunne: and thoughe he bestowe his laboure to seke them oute, yet can he not reach vnto them: yea though a wise man would vndertake to knowe them, yet myght he not fynde them.

CHAPTER: 9

Ecclesiastes 9:1 For all these thynges purposed I in my mynd to seke out. The ryghtuous and wyse yea and their workes also are in the hande of God: and their is no man knoweth eyther the loue or hate of the thyng that he hath before him.
Ecclesiastes 9:2 It happeneth vnto one as vnto another: It goeth wt the ryghtuous as wt the vngodli wt the good & cleane as wt the vncleane: wt him that offereth as wt him that offereth not: lyke as it goeth wyth the vertuous, so goeth it also wyth the sinner: As it happeneth vnto the periured, so happeneth it also vnto him that is afraied to be forsworne.
Ecclesiastes 9:3 Amonge all thynges that come to passe vnder the Sunne, this is a mysery, that it happeneth vnto all alyke. This is the cause also that the hertes of men are ful of wyckednes, and mad folishnes is in their hertes as longe as they liue, vntyl they dye.
Ecclesiastes 9:4 And why? As longe as a man lyueth, he is careles: for a quicke dogg (saye they) is better then a dead lyon:
Ecclesiastes 9:5 for they that be lyuyng, knowe that they shall dye: but they that be dead, knowe nothinge, neyther deserne they any more. For their memoriall is forgotten,
Ecclesiastes 9:6 so that they be nether loued, hated ner enuied nether haue they animore parte in the world, in al that is done vnder the Sonne.
Ecclesiastes 9:7 Go thou thy waye then, eate thy bread wyth ioy, and dryncke thy wyne wyth gladnesse, for thy worckes please God.
Ecclesiastes 9:8 Let thy garments be alway white, and let thy head want none oyntment.
Ecclesiastes 9:9 Vse thy selfe to lyue ioyfully with thy wyfe whom thou leuest, all the dayes of thy life, which is but vaine, that God hath geuen the vnder the Sunne, all the dayes of thy vanite: for that is thy porcion in this lyfe, of all thy laboure and trauayle that thou takeste vnder the Sunne.
Ecclesiastes 9:10 Whatsoeuer thou takest in hande to do, that do wyth all thy power: for among the dead, wher as thou goest vnto, ther is nether worcke, councel, knowledge ner wysdome.
Ecclesiastes 9:11 So I turned me vnto other thynges vnder the Sonne, and I sawe, that in runnyng, it helpeth not to be swift: in battayll, it helpeth not to be stronge, to fedynge, it helpeth not to be wyse: to ryches, it helpeth not to be suttell: to be had in fauoure, it helpeth not to be cunnynge: but that all lyeth in tyme and fortune.
Ecclesiastes 9:12 For a man knoweth not his tyme, but like as the fishes are taken wyth the angle and as the byrdes are catched with the snare Euen so are men taken in the perilous time, when it commeth sodenly vpon them.
Ecclesiastes 9:13 This wysdome haue I sene also vnder the Sunne, and me thought it a great thynge.
Ecclesiastes 9:14 There was a litle citie, and a fewe men within it: so there came a great kyng and beseged it, and made great bulwarkes agaynste it
Ecclesiastes 9:15 And in the cytye there was founde a poore man (but he was wyse) which with hys wisdome deliuered the cytye: yet was there no body, that had any respect vnto such a symple man.
Ecclesiastes 9:16 Then sayde I: wysdome is better then strengthe. Neuertheles, a simple mans wysedome is despised, & his wordes are not herde.
Ecclesiastes 9:17 A wyse mans counsayl that is folowed in silence, is farre aboue the cryeng of a captayne among fooles.
Ecclesiastes 9:18 For wysdome is better then harnesse: but one vnthryft alone destroyeth much good.

CHAPTER: 10

Ecclesiastes 10:1 Dead flyes that corruppe swete oyntment and make it to stinke are somthyng more worth then the wysdome and honour of a foole.
Ecclesiastes 10:2 A wyse mans hert is vpon the right hande, but a fooles hert is vpon the left.
Ecclesiastes 10:3 A dotyng foole thynketh, that euery man doth as folishly as hym selfe.
Ecclesiastes 10:4 If a principall sprete be geuen the to beare rule, be not negligente then in thine office: for so shall great wickednesse be put doun, as it were wt a medecine.
Ecclesiastes 10:5 Another plage is there, which I haue sene vnder the sunne: namely, the ignoraunce that is commenly among princes:
Ecclesiastes 10:6 in that a foole sitteth in great dignitie, and the ryche are set doune beneth:
Ecclesiastes 10:7 I se seruauntes ryde vpon horses, & princes going vpon theyr fete as it were seruauntes.
Ecclesiastes 10:8 But he that dyggeth vp a pyt, shal fal therin hym self: & who so breaketh doune the hedge, a serpente shall byte hym.
Ecclesiastes 10:9 Who so remoueth stones, shall haue trauayl withal: & he that heweth wood shalbe hurt therwith.
Ecclesiastes 10:10 When an yron is blont, and the poynt not sharpened, it muste be whet agayn, and that with might: Euen so doth wysdome folowe diligence.
Ecclesiastes 10:11 A babler of his tonge is no better then a serpent that styngeth without hyssyng.
Ecclesiastes 10:12 The wordes of out a wyse mans mouth are gracious, but the lippes of a fole wil destroy hym self.
Ecclesiastes 10:13 The begynnyng of his talkynge is foolishnes, and the last worde of his mouth is great madnesse.
Ecclesiastes 10:14 A foole is so full of woordes, that a man can not tell what ende he will make: who will then warne hym to make a conclusion?
Ecclesiastes 10:15 The labour of the folish is greuous vnto them, whyle they know not how to go into the cytye.
Ecclesiastes 10:16 Wo be vnto the (O thou realme & lande) whose kyng is but a chylde, & whose princes are early at their bankettes.
Ecclesiastes 10:17 But well is the (O thou realme and lande) whose kynge is is come of nobles, and whose prynces eate in due seasou, for strength and not for luste.
Ecclesiastes 10:18 Thorow slothfulnesse the balkes fal doune, and thorowe ydle handes it raineth in at the house.
Ecclesiastes 10:19 Meate maketh men to laugh, and wine maketh them mery: but vnto money are all thynges obedyente.
Ecclesiastes 10:20 Wyshe the kynge no euell in thy thoughte, and speake no hurte of the ryche in thy preuy chambre: for a byrde of the ayre shall betraye thy voyce, and wyth her fethers shall she bewraye thy wordes.

CHAPTER: 11

Ecclesiastes 11:1 Sende thy vyttuayls ouer the waters, and so shalt thou finde them after many yeares.
Ecclesiastes 11:2 Geue it awaye amonge seuen or eyghte, for thou knoweste not what mysery shall come vpon earth.
Ecclesiastes 11:3 When the cloudes are full, they poure oute rayne vpon the earthe. And when the tree falleth (whether it be towarde the South or North) in what place soeuer it fall, there it lyeth.
Ecclesiastes 11:4 He that regardeth the wynde, shall not sowe: and he that hath respecte vnto the cloudes, shall not reape.
Ecclesiastes 11:5 Nowe lyke as thou knowest not the waye of the wynde, nor how the bones are fylled in a mothers wombe: Euen so thou knoweste not the worckes of God, whych is the worckemaster of all.
Ecclesiastes 11:6 Cease not thou therefore with thy handes to sowe thy sede, whether it be in the mornynge or in the euenynge: for thou knoweste not whether this or that shall prospere, and if they both take, it is the better.
Ecclesiastes 11:7 The lyghte is swete, and a pleasaunte thinge is it for the eyes to loke vpon the Sunne.
Ecclesiastes 11:8 If a man lyue manye yeares, and be gladde in them all, let hym remember the dayes of darckenesse, whiche shalbe many: and when thei come, al thynges shalbe but vanytye.
Ecclesiastes 11:9 Be glad then (O thou yong man) in thy youth, and let thine herte be mery in thy yonge daies: folowe the wayes of thine owne herte, and the luste of thyne eyes: but be thou sure, that God shall brynge the into iudgement for all these thinges.
Ecclesiastes 11:10 Pvt awaye displeasure oute of thine hert, & remoue euel from thy body: for childhode & youth is but vanitie.

CHAPTER: 12

Ecclesiastes 12:1 Remembre thy maker in thy youth, or euer the dayes of aduersitie come, and or the yeares drawe nye, when thou shalt saye: I haue no pleasure in them
Ecclesiastes 12:2 before the sunne, the lyght, the moone and starres be darkened, and or the cloudes turne agayn after the rayne:
Ecclesiastes 12:3 when the kepers of the house shall tremble, & when the strong men shall bowe them selfes: when the myllers stande styll, because they be so fewe, & when the sight of the wyndowes shal waxe dymme:
Ecclesiastes 12:4 when the dores in the stretes shalbe shut, & when the voyce of the myller shalbe layed doune: when men shall ryse vp at the voyce of the byrde, and when all the daughters of musicke shalbe brought lowe:
Ecclesiastes 12:5 when men shall feare in hye places, and be afrayed in the stretes: when the Almonde tree shalbe despised, the greshopper borne out, & when great pouerte shall breake in: when man goeth to his longe home, and the mourners go about the stretes.
Ecclesiastes 12:6 Or euer the siluer lace be taken awaye, and or the golden bande be broken: Or the pot be broken at the wel, and the whele vpon the cysterne:
Ecclesiastes 12:7 Or dust be turned agayn vnto earth from whence it came, and or the sprete returne vnto God, whyche gaue it.
Ecclesiastes 12:8 All is but vanitie (sayeth the Preacher) all is but playne vanite.
Ecclesiastes 12:9 The same Preacher was not wyse alone, but taught the people knowlege also: he gaue good hede, sought out the ground & set forth many parables.
Ecclesiastes 12:10 His diligence was to fynde out acceptable wordes, right scripture, and the wordes of trueth.
Ecclesiastes 12:11 For the wordes of the wise are like prickes and nayles that go thorow, wherewith men are kepte together: for they are geuen of one shepeherde onely.
Ecclesiastes 12:12 Therfore be ware (my sonne) that aboue these thou make the uot many and innumerable bokes, nor take diuerse doctrynes in hande, to weery thy body withall.
Ecclesiastes 12:13 Let vs heare the conclusion of all thinges Feare God, and kepe his commaundementes, For that toucheth al men:
Ecclesiastes 12:14 For God shal iudge all workes and secrete thynges, whether they be good or euell.

Book: Song of Songs
CHAPTER: 1

Song of Solomon 1:1 O that thy mouthe woulde geue me a kysse, for thy brestes are more pleasaunt then wyne,
Song of Solomon 1:2 & that because of the good & pleasaunt sauoure. Thy name is a swete smelling oyntment, therfore do the maydens laue the:
Song of Solomon 1:3 yea, that same moueth me also to runne after the. The King hath brought me into his preuy chambre. We wil be glad and reioyce in the, we thynke more of thy brestes then of wyne: well is them that loue the.
Song of Solomon 1:4 I am black (O ye daughters of Hierusalem) like as the tentes of the Cedarenes, and as the hanginges of Salomon:
Song of Solomon 1:5 but yet am I fayre & welfauoured withal. Maruell not at me that I am so blacke: & why? the sunne hath shyned vpon me. For when my mothers chyldren had euel will at me, they made me the keper of the vyneyarde. Thus was I fayne to kepe a vyneyarde, which was not myne owne.
Song of Solomon 1:6 Tell me (O thou whom my soule loueth) where thou fedest, where thou restest at the noone daye: lest I go wrong, and come vnto the flockes of thy companyons.
Song of Solomon 1:7 If thou knowe not thy selfe (O thou fayrest among women) then go thy waye forthe after the fotesteppes of the shepe, as though thou woldest fede thy goates beside the shepeherdes tentes.
Song of Solomon 1:8 There will I tary for the (my loue) with myne host and mith my charettes which shalbe no fewer then Pharaos.
Song of Solomon 1:9 Then shall thy chekes & thy neck be made fayre, & hanged with spanges & goodly iewels:
Song of Solomon 1:10 a neck bande of golde will we make the with siluer butons.
Song of Solomon 1:11 When the king sitteth at the table, he shal smell my Nardus:
Song of Solomon 1:12 for a bondel of Myrre (O my beloued) lyeth betwixte my breastes.
Song of Solomon 1:13 A cluster of grapes of Cypers, or of the vyneyardes of Engaddi art thou vnto me, O my beloued.
Song of Solomon 1:14 O how fayre art thou (my loue) how fayre art thou? thou hast doues eyes.
Song of Solomon 1:15 O how fayre art thou (my beloued) how wel fauored art thou? Our bed is decketh wt floures,
Song of Solomon 1:16 the sylinges of our house are of Cedre tree, and our balkes of Cypresse.

CHAPTER: 2

Song of Solomon 2:1 I am the floure of the felde, and Lylye of the valleys:
Song of Solomon 2:2 as the Rose amonge the thornes, so is my loue among the daughters.
Song of Solomon 2:3 Lyke as the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloued among the sones. My delyte is to sit vnder hys shadowe, for hys frute is swete vnto my throte.
Song of Solomon 2:4 He bringeth me into hys wyne seller, and loueth me specially well.
Song of Solomon 2:5 Refreshe me wyth grapes, comforte me with apples, for I am sycke of loue.
Song of Solomon 2:6 His left hand lyeth vnder my head, and hys right hande embraceth me.
Song of Solomon 2:7 I charge you (O ye daughters of Ierusalem) by the Roes & hyndes of the felde, that ye wake not vp my loue nor touche her, tyll she be content her selfe.
Song of Solomon 2:8 Me thynke I heare the voyce of my beloued: lo, there commeth he hoppyng vpon the mountaynes, & leapyng ouer the litle hylles.
Song of Solomon 2:9 My beloued is lyke a Roo or a yong hart. Beholde, he standeth behynde oure wall, he loketh in at the wyndow, and pepeth thorow the grate.
Song of Solomon 2:10 My beloued aunswered & sayde vnto me. O stande vp my loue, my doue, my beutifull, & come:
Song of Solomon 2:11 for lo, the wynter is now paste, & the rayne is away & gone.
Song of Solomon 2:12 The floures are come vp in the felde, the twystynge tyme is come, the voyce of the turtle doue is hearde in our lande.
Song of Solomon 2:13 The fygge tree bringeth forthe her figges, the vynes beare blossoms, & haue a good smell. O stande vp my loue, my beutifull, & come
Song of Solomon 2:14 (O my doue) oute of the caues of the rockes, out of the holes of the wal: O let me se thy countenaunce & heare thy voyce, for swete is thy voyce and fayre is thy face.
Song of Solomon 2:15 Get vs the foxes, yea, the litle foxes that hurt the vynes, for our vines beare blossoms.
Song of Solomon 2:16 My loue is myne, and I am hys, whych fedeth among the Lilies,
Song of Solomon 2:17 vntill the day breake, and till the shadowes be gone. Come agayn preuely (O my beloued) lyke as a Roo or a yong hart vnto the mountaynes.

CHAPTER: 3

Song of Solomon 3:1 By night in my bedde I soughte hym, whome my soule loueth: yea, diligently soughte I hym, but I founde him not.
Song of Solomon 3:2 I will get vp (thought I) & go aboute the citie, vpon the market & in all the stretes will I seke him whome my soule loueth: but when I sought hym, I founde him not.
Song of Solomon 3:3 The watchemen that go aboute the citie, founde me. Sawe ye not him whom my soule loueth?
Song of Solomon 3:4 So when I was a litle past them, I founde hym whom my soule loueth. I haue gotten holde vpon him, & will not let hym go, vntil I bryng hym into my mothers house, and into her chambre that bare me.
Song of Solomon 3:5 I charge you, O ye daughters of Ierusalem, by the Roes & Hyndes of the felde, that ye wake not vp my loue nor touche her, tyll she be content her selfe.
Song of Solomon 3:6 Who is thys that commeth out of the wildernesse lyke pylers of smoke as it were a smell of Myrre, franckencence and al maner spyces of the Apotecary?
Song of Solomon 3:7 Behold, aboute Salomons bedstede ther stande .lx. valeaunt men of the myghty in Israel.
Song of Solomon 3:8 Thei holde swerdes euery one & are experte in warre. Euery man hath his swerde vpon his thygh, because of feare in the nighte.
Song of Solomon 3:9 Kynge Salomon hath made him selfe a bedstead of the wood of Libanus,
Song of Solomon 3:10 the pilers are of syluer, the coueryng of golde, the seate of purple, the ground pleasauntly paued for the daughters of Ierusalem.
Song of Solomon 3:11 Go forth (O ye daughters of Sion) and beholde Kynge Salomon in the crowne wherwyth his mother crowned him in the day of his mariage, and in the daye of the gladnesse of hys herte.

CHAPTER: 4

Song of Solomon 4:1 O how fayre arte thou, my loue, how fayre art thou? thou haste doues eyes, beside that whych lyeth hyd wythin.
Song of Solomon 4:2 They hearye lockes are lyke a flocke of shepe that be clipped, which go first vp from the washing place: where euery one beareth two twynes, and not one vnfruteful among them.
Song of Solomon 4:3 Thy lyppes are lyke a rose coloured rybonde, thy wordes are louely: thy chekes are like a pece of a pomgranate, besides that whych lyeth hyd wythin.
Song of Solomon 4:4 Thy necke is lyke the tower of Dauyd buylded wyth bulworkes, where vpon there hange a thousaunde shyldes, yea all the weapens of the gyauntes.
Song of Solomon 4:5 Thy two brestes are lyke two twins of yong roes, which fede among the lilies.
Song of Solomon 4:6 O that I myght go to the mountayne of Myrre, and to the hyll of franckincense: tyll the day breake, and tyl the shadowes be past awaye.
Song of Solomon 4:7 Thou arte all fayre, O my loue, and no spot is therin the.
Song of Solomon 4:8 Come to me from Lybanus, O my house, come to me from Libanus come soone the next way from the top of Amana, from the top of Sanir and Hermon, from the lyons dennes & from the mountaynes of the leopardes.
Song of Solomon 4:9 Thou hast wounded my hert. O my syster, my spouse, thou hast wounded my hert, with one of thyne eyes, & wyth one cheyne of thy neck.
Song of Solomon 4:10 O howe fayre and louely are thy brestes, my syster, my spouse? Thy brestes are more pleasaunte then wyne, and the smell of thyne oyntmentes passeth al spices.
Song of Solomon 4:11 Thy lyps, O my spouse, drop as the hony combe, yea milcke and hony is vnder thy tonge, and the smel of thy garmentes is lyke the smell of frankyncense.
Song of Solomon 4:12 Thou arte a well kepte garden, O my syster, my spouse, thou art a well kepte waterspringe, a sealed well.
Song of Solomon 4:13 The frutes that sprute in the, are like a very Paradyse of pomegranates with swete frutes:
Song of Solomon 4:14 as Cypresse, Nardus, Saffron, Calmus, and all the trees of Libanus: Myrre, Aloes, and all the best spyces.
Song of Solomon 4:15 Thou art a well of gardens, a well of lyuyng waters, whyche reune doune from Libanus.
Song of Solomon 4:16 Vp thou Northwynde, come thou southwynde, & blowe vppon my garden, that the smell therof may be caryed on eueryside: yea that my beloued may come into my garden, and eate of the frutes and apples that grow therein.

CHAPTER: 5

Song of Solomon 5:1 Come into my garden O my sister, my spouse: I haue gathered my Myrre with my spyce. I wil eate my hony and my hony combe, I will drinke my wyne and my mylke. Eate, O ye frendes, drynke & be mery, O ye beloued.
Song of Solomon 5:2 As I was a slepe, & my hert wakynge, I hearde the voyce of my beloued, when he knocked. Open to me (sayde he) O my sister, my loue, my doue, my derlynge: for my heade is full of dewe, and the lockes of my heere are full of the night droppes.
Song of Solomon 5:3 I haue put of my cote, how can I do it on agayn? I haue washed my fete, how shall I fyle them agayn?
Song of Solomon 5:4 But when my loue put in his hand at the hole, my hert was moued toward hym:
Song of Solomon 5:5 so that I stode vp to open vnto my beloued. My handes dropped with Myrre, & the Myrre ranne doune my fingers vpon the locke.
Song of Solomon 5:6 Neuerthelesse when I had opened vnto my beloued, he was departed and gone his waye. Now lyke as afore tyme when he spake, my hert coude not longer refrayne: Euen so now I soughte hym, but I coulde not fynde hym: I cryed vpon him, neuerthelesse he gaue me no aunswere.
Song of Solomon 5:7 So the watchmen that wente aboute the cytye, founde me, smote me, & wounded me: Yea, they that kept the walles, toke awaye my garment fro me.
Song of Solomon 5:8 I charge you therfore, O ye daughters of Ierusalem, if ye fynde my beloued, that ye tell hym how that I am sycke for loue.
Song of Solomon 5:9 Who is thy loue aboue other louers, O thou fayrest among women? Or what can thy loue do, more then other louers, that thou chargest vs so straytely?
Song of Solomon 5:10 As for my loue, he is whyte and read coloured, a singular personne amonge mauy thousandes:
Song of Solomon 5:11 his head is the most fine golde, the lockes of hys heer are bushed, broune as the euenyng:
Song of Solomon 5:12 Hys eyes are as the eyes of doues by the water brokes, washen with mylke and remaynyng in a plenteous place:
Song of Solomon 5:13 Hys chekes are lyke a garden bed, where in the Apotecaries plante all maner of swete thinges: His lyppes droppe as the floures of the most principal Myrre,
Song of Solomon 5:14 hys handes are full of golde rynges & precious stones. His body is as the pure yuery, decte ouer with Saphires:
Song of Solomon 5:15 His legges are as the pylers of Marbel set vpon sokettes of golde: His face is as Libanus, and as the bewty of the Cedre trees:
Song of Solomon 5:16 Hys throte is swete, yea, he is altogether louely. Such one is my loue, O ye daughters of Ierusalem, such one is my loue.

CHAPTER: 6

Song of Solomon 6:1 Whither is thy loue gone then (O thou fayrest amonge women) whither is thy loue departed, that we may seke hym with the?
Song of Solomon 6:2 My loue is gone doune into hys garden, vnto the swete smelling beddes, that he maye refreshe him self in the garden, and gather floures.
Song of Solomon 6:3 My loue is myne and I am hys, which fedeth among the Lylyes.
Song of Solomon 6:4 Thou art pleasaunt (O my loue) euen as louelynesse it self, thou art fayre as Ierusalem, glorious as an army of men, with their banners.
Song of Solomon 6:5 (Turne awaye thyne eyes fro me, for thei make me to proude.) Thy heery lockes are lyke a flocke of goates vpon the mount of Galaad.
Song of Solomon 6:6 Thy teth are like a flocke of shepe that be clypped, which go out of the wasshyng place: where euery one beareth twoo twynes, and not one vnfruteful among them.
Song of Solomon 6:7 Thy chekes are lyke a pece of pomegranate besydes that which lyeth hyd within.
Song of Solomon 6:8 There are thre score Quenes, foure score concubines, & yong women without numbre.
Song of Solomon 6:9 But one is my doue, my derling. She is the onely beloued of her mother, and deare vnto her that bare her. When the daughters sawe her, they sayde, she was blessed: Yea the Quenes and concubynes praysed her.
Song of Solomon 6:10 What is she this, that pepeth out as the mornynge? fayre as the moone, excellent as the sunne, glorious as an army of men with their baners.
Song of Solomon 6:11 I went doune into the nutte garden, to se what grew by the brokes, to loke if the vineyarde florished, & if the pomegranates were shot forth.
Song of Solomon 6:12 Then the charettes of the prynce of my people made me sodenly afrayde.
Song of Solomon 6:13 Turne agayn, turne agayn, O thou Sulamite, turne agayne, turne agayne, that we may loke vpon the. What pleasure haue ye more in the Sulamite, than when she daunseth among the men of warre?

CHAPTER: 7

Song of Solomon 7:1 O how pleasaunt are thy treadinges with thy shoes, thou princes daughter? Thy thinges are like a fayre iewel, which is wrought by a connyng worke master:
Song of Solomon 7:2 Thy nauell is like a round goblet, which is neuer without drynke: Thy wombe is like an heap of wheat, set about with Lylies:
Song of Solomon 7:3 Thy two brestes are lyke two twynnes of yong roes:
Song of Solomon 7:4 Thy necke is as it were a tower of yuery: thyne eyes are lyke the water poles in Hesebon, beside the porte of Bathrabbim: thy nose is like the tower of Libanus, which loketh toward Damascus:
Song of Solomon 7:5 That head that standeth vpon the is lyke Carmel: the heare of thy head is like the kynges purple folden vp in plates.
Song of Solomon 7:6 O how fayre & louely art thou, my dearlyng, in pleasures?
Song of Solomon 7:7 Thy stature is like a date tree, and thy brestes like the grapes. I sayde:
Song of Solomon 7:8 I will clymme vp into the date tree, and take holde of hys braunches. Thy brestes also shalbe as the vyne grapes, the smell of thy nostrels lyke the smell of apples,
Song of Solomon 7:9 and thy throte like the beste wine. This shalbe pure and cleare for my loue, his lippes & teth shal haue their pleasure.
Song of Solomon 7:10 There wyll I turne me vnto my loue, and he shall turne hym vnto me.
Song of Solomon 7:11 O come on my loue, let vs go forth into the felde, and take oure lodgynge in the vyllages.
Song of Solomon 7:12 In the mornyng wyll we ryse by tymes, and go se the vyneyarde: if it be sprong forth, if the grapes be growne, & if the pomegranates be shut out. There wil I geue the my brestes:
Song of Solomon 7:13 there shall the Mandragoras geue their smell besyde oure dores: there, O my loue, haue I kepte vnto the all maner of frutes, both newe and olde.

CHAPTER: 8

Song of Solomon 8:1 O that I myght fynde the without, and kisse the, whom I loue as my brother whiche sucked my mothers brestes: and that thou woldest not be offended,
Song of Solomon 8:2 if I toke the, and broughte the into my mothers house: that thou mightest teache me, & that I might geue the drinke of spiced wyne and of the swete sappe of my pomgranates.
Song of Solomon 8:3 Hys left hand lyeth vnder my head and hys right hande embraceth me.
Song of Solomon 8:4 I charge you, O ye daughters of Ierusalem. that ye walke not vp my loue, nor touch her, tyll she be content her self.
Song of Solomon 8:5 What is she this, that commeth vp from the wyldernes, and leaneth vpon her loue? I am the same that waked the vp among the apple trees, where thy mother bare the, where thy mother brought the into the world.
Song of Solomon 8:6 O set me as a seale vpon thyne herte, and as a seale vpon thine arme: for loue is mightye as the death, and gelousy as the hell. Her cooles are of fyre, and a very flamme of the Lord:
Song of Solomon 8:7 so that many waters are not able too quenche loue, neither may the streames droun it. Yea, if a man wolde geue al the good of his house for loue, he should counte it nothinge.
Song of Solomon 8:8 When our loue is tolde our yong syster, whose brestes are not yet growen, what shal we do vnto her?
Song of Solomon 8:9 If she be a wall, we shall buylde a siluer bulwerke there vppon: if she be a tower, we shall fasten her with borders of Cedre tree.
Song of Solomon 8:10 If I be a wall, & my brestes like towres, then am I as one that hath founde fauoure in hys sight.
Song of Solomon 8:11 Salomon had a vyneyarde at Baal Hamon, thys vyneyarde delyuered he vnto the kepers: that euery one for the frute thereof should geue hym a thousand peces of siluer.
Song of Solomon 8:12 But my vyneyard, O Salomon, geueth the a thousand, and two hundreth to the kepers of the frute.
Song of Solomon 8:13 Thou that dwellest in the gardens, O let me heare thy voyce, that my companyons may herken to the same.
Song of Solomon 8:14 O get the awaye, my loue, as a roo or a yong hert vnto the swete smellynge mountaynes.

BOOK: Isaiah

CHAPTER: 1

Isaiah 1:1 The prophecye of Esai the sonne of Amos, whiche he shewed vpon Iuda & Ierusalem: In the tyme of Oziah, Ioatham, Ahaz, and Iehezekiah Kynges of Iuda.
Isaiah 1:2 Heare O heauen, herken O earth, for the Lord speaketh: I haue norysshed & brought vp chyldren, and they are fallen awaye from me.
Isaiah 1:3 An oxe knoweth hys Lorde, & an Asse his masters stall: but Israel knoweth nothynge, my people hath no vnderstanding.
Isaiah 1:4 Alas for thys synfull people, whiche are ouerladen with blasphemyes, a frowarde generacyon, wicked chyldren. They haue forsaken the Lorde, they haue prouoked the holy one of Israell vnto anger, and are gone backwarde.
Isaiah 1:5 Wherfore shulde ye be plaged any more? For ye are euer fallyng away. The whole head is sick, & the herte is very heauy.
Isaiah 1:6 From the sole of the fote vnto the head, there is no whol parte in all youre bodye: but all are woundes, botches, sores, and stripes, whiche can nether be helped, bound vp, molifyed, nor eased with any oyntment.
Isaiah 1:7 Youre lande lyeth waste, youre cyties are brent vp, youre enemyes deuoure your lande, and ye muste be fayne to stand, and loke vpon it: and it is desolate, as it were wyth enemyes in a battell.
Isaiah 1:8 Moreouer the doughter of Syon is lefte alone lyke a cotage in a vyneyard like a watche house in tyme of warre, lyke a beseged cytye.
Isaiah 1:9 And excepte the Lord of hostes had lefte vs a fewe alyue: we shulde haue ben as Sodoma, and lyke vnto Gomorra.
Isaiah 1:10 Heare the worde of the Lorde ye tyrauntes of Sodoma, and herken vnto the lawe of oure God, thou people of Gomorra.
Isaiah 1:11 Why offre ye so manye sacrifyces vnto me? I am discontent for the brentofferinges of wethers and with the fatnesse of fedbeastes. I haue no pleasure in the bloude of bullockes, lambes & gootes.
Isaiah 1:12 When ye appeare before me, who requyreth you to treade wythin my porches?
Isaiah 1:13 Offre me no mo oblacions, for it is but loste laboure. I abhorre youre incense. I maye not awaye with youre new moones, youre Sabbathes and solempne dayes. Youre fastinges are also in vayne.
Isaiah 1:14 I hate youre newe holye dayes and fastynges, euen from my very hert. They make me weerye, I can not abyde them.
Isaiah 1:15 Though ye holde oute your handes, yet turne I myne eyes from you. And though ye make manye prayers, yet heare I nothynge at all, for youre handes are full of bloude.
Isaiah 1:16 Washe you, make you cleane, put awaye youre euill thoughtes out of my sighte, cease from doynge of euyll and vyolence.
Isaiah 1:17 Lerne to do right, applye youre selues to equite, delyuer the oppressed, helpe the fatherlesse to hys ryght, let the wyddowes complaynte come before you.
Isaiah 1:18 Nowe go to (sayth the Lorde) we will talke together. Is it not so? Thoughe youre synnes be as reade as scarlet, shal they not be whyther then snowe? And though they were lyke purple, shall they not be lyke white wolle?
Isaiah 1:19 Is it not so? If ye be louynge and obedyent, ye shall enioye the best thynge that groweth in the lande.
Isaiah 1:20 But yf ye be obstynate and rebellyous, ye shalbe deuoured wt the swerde: for thus the Lorde hath promysed wyth hys owne mouthe.
Isaiah 1:21 Howe happeneth it then that the ryghtuous cytye (whiche was full of equyte) is be come vnfaythful as an whore? ryghteousnes dwelt in it, but now murthur.
Isaiah 1:22 Thy syluer is turned to drosse, and thy wyne mixte wyth water.
Isaiah 1:23 Thy prynces are traytours and companyons of theues. They loue gyftes altogether, & folowe rewardes. As for the fatherles, they helpe hym not to hys ryght, nether wyll they let the wydowes causes come before them.
Isaiah 1:24 Therfore speaketh the Lorde God of hostes the myghtye one of Israel: Ah I muste ease me of myne enemyes, and avenge me vpon them.
Isaiah 1:25 And therfore shall I laye my hande vpon the and burne oute thy drosse from the fyneste and pureste, and put oute all the leade,
Isaiah 1:26 and set thy iudges agayne as they were some tyme, and thy Senatours as they were from the begynninge. Then shalte thou be called the ryghtuous cytie, the faithful citye.
Isaiah 1:27 But Syon shalbe redemed with equite, and her captyuyte with ryghteousnesse.
Isaiah 1:28 For the transgressours and vngodlye, and suche as are become vnfaythfull vnto the Lorde, muste altogether be vtterlye destroyed.
Isaiah 1:29 And except ye be ashamed of the oke trees wherein ye haue so delyted, and of the gardens that ye haue chosen:
Isaiah 1:30 ye shalbe as an oke whose leaues are fallen awaye, and as a garden that hath no moystnesse.
Isaiah 1:31 And as for the glorye of these thynges, it shalbe turned to drye straw, and he that made them to a sparke. And they shall both burne together, so that no man shalbe able to quenche them.

CHAPTER: 2

Isaiah 2:1 Moreouer this is the word that was opened vnto Esay the sonne of Amoz, vpon Iuda & Ierusalem.
Isaiah 2:2 It will be also in processe of tyme: That the hyl where the house of the Lorde is buylded, shal be the chefe amonge hylles, and exalted aboue al lytle hylles. And all the Heathen shall preache vnto hym, & the multytude of people shall go vnto hym,
Isaiah 2:3 speakynge thus one to another: vp let vs go to the hyll of the Lorde, & to the house of the God of Iacob: that he maye shewe vs hys waye, and that we maye walcke in hys pathes. For the lawe shall come out of Syon and the worde of God from Ierusalem,
Isaiah 2:4 and shall geue sentence amonge the Heathen, and shall reforme the multytude of people. So that they shal breake theyr swerdes & speares to make sythes, sycles and sawes thereof. From that tyme forth shall not one people lyfte vp weapen agaynste another, neyther shall they learne to fight from thence forth.
Isaiah 2:5 It is to the that I crye (O house of Iacob) vp, let vs walck in the lyghte of the Lorde,
Isaiah 2:6 But thou art scatered abroade with thy people (O house of Iacob) for ye go farre beyonde youre fathers, whether it be in Sorcerers (whome ye haue as the Phylystynes had) or in calkers of mens byrthes, whereof ye haue to manye.
Isaiah 2:7 As soone as youre lande was full of syluer and golde, and no ende of youre treasure: so soone as youre lande was full of stronge horses and no ende of youre charettes:
Isaiah 2:8 Immediatlye was it full of Idols also, euen workes of youre owne handes, which ye youre selues haue fashyoned, & your syngers haue made.
Isaiah 2:9 There kneleth the man there falleth the man doune before them, so that thou canste not brynge hym a waye from thence.
Isaiah 2:10 And therfore get the soone into some rock, & hyde the in the grounde from the sighte of the fearful iudge, & from the glorye of his mageste:
Isaiah 2:11 Which casteth doune the hygh lokes of presumptuous personnes, & bryngeth lowe the pryde of man, & he only shall be exalted in the daye.
Isaiah 2:12 For the daye of the Lorde of Hostes shall go ouer all pryde & presumpcyon, vpon all them that exalte them selues, & shall brynge them all doune:
Isaiah 2:13 vpon all high & stoute Cedre trees of Lybanus, and vpon all the okes of Basan,
Isaiah 2:14 vpon all hygh hylles, and vpon al stoute mountaynes,
Isaiah 2:15 vpon all costlye towres, and vpon al strong walles,
Isaiah 2:16 vpon all shyppes of the sea, and vpon euerye thynge that is gloryous and pleasaunte to loke vpon.
Isaiah 2:17 And it shall bryng doune the pryde of man, & laye mans presumptuousnesse ful lowe, and the Lorde shall onelye haue the vyctorye in that daye.
Isaiah 2:18 But the ydoles shall vtterly be roted oute.
Isaiah 2:19 Men shall crepe into holes of stone, and into caues of the earthe, from the syghte of the fearfull iudge, and from the glorye of hys magesty: what tyme as he shall make hym vp to shake the earthe.
Isaiah 2:20 Then then, shall man caste awaye hys Goddes of syluer and golde (whiche he neuerthelesse had made to honoure them) vnto Moles and Backes:
Isaiah 2:21 that he maye the better crepe into the caues & rockes, and into the cliffes of harde stones, from the syghte of the fearfull iudge & from the glorye of hys Magestye.
Isaiah 2:22 Every man can eschue a persone moued in anger, for what doeth he wyselye?

CHAPTER: 3

Isaiah 3:1 Euen so shall the Lorde of Hostes take awaye from Ierusalem & Iuda, all possessyons and power, al meate and drincke,
Isaiah 3:2 the captayne & the soudyar, the iudge & the Prophete the wyse and the aged man,
Isaiah 3:3 the worshipful of fyftye yeare olde, and the honorable: the Senatours, and men of vnderstandyng: the maisters of craftes and oratours.
Isaiah 3:4 And I shal geue you chyldren to be youre prynces (sayeth the Lord) & babes shall haue the rule of you.
Isaiah 3:5 One shall euer be doynge vyolence & wronge to another. The boye shall presume agaynste the elder, and the vyle persone agaynst the honorable.
Isaiah 3:6 Ye one shal take a frend of his owne kynred by the bosome and saye: thou haste clothynge, thou shalt be oure heade, for thou mayest kepe vs from thys fall and parell.
Isaiah 3:7 Then shall he sweare and saye: I can not helpe you. Moreouer, there is neyther meate nor clothynge in my house, make me no ruler of the people.
Isaiah 3:8 For Ierusalem and Iuda muste decaye, because that bothe theyr wordes and councels are agaynste the Lorde, they prouoke the presence of his magesty vnto anger.
Isaiah 3:9 The chaungynge of their countenaunce bewrayeth them, yea they declare theyr owne synnes them selues, as the Sodomites, and hyde them not. Wo be vnto theyr soules, for they shalbe heuely rewarded.
Isaiah 3:10 Then shall they saye. O happye are the godly, for they maye enioye the frutes of theyr studyes.
Isaiah 3:11 But wo be to the vngodlye & vnryghtuous for they shall be rewarded after theyr worckes.
Isaiah 3:12 O my people rybaudes oppresse the, and wemen haue rule of the. O my people, thy leaders deceyue the, and treade oute the waye of thy fotesteppes.
Isaiah 3:13 The Lorde is her to comen of the matter, and standeth to geue iudgement wyth the people.
Isaiah 3:14 The Lorde shall come forth to reason wyth the Senatours and prynces of hys people, and shal saye thus vnto them: It is ye that haue burnt vp my vyneyarde, the robberye of the poore is in your house.
Isaiah 3:15 Wherfore do ye oppresse my people, and marre the faces of the innocentes? thus shall the God of Hostes reuyle them.
Isaiah 3:16 Moreouer thus sayth the Lorde: Seynge the doughters of Sion are become so proude, and come in with stretched oute neckes, and with vayne wanton eyes: seynge they come in tryppynge so nycely with their fete:
Isaiah 3:17 Therfore shall the Lorde shaue the heades of the doughters of Syon, and make theyr bewtye bare in that daye.
Isaiah 3:18 In that daye shall the Lord take awaye the gorgyousnes of theyr apparel & spanges, chaynes, parlaftes,
Isaiah 3:19 and colares, bracelettes & hooues,
Isaiah 3:20 the goodly floured wide & broderd rayment, brusshes & headebandes,
Isaiah 3:21 rynges and garlandes,
Isaiah 3:22 holye daye clothes & vales, kerchues & pynnes,
Isaiah 3:23 glasses & smockes, bonettes and taches.
Isaiah 3:24 And in steade of good smell there shalbe styncke amonge them. And for theyr gyrdles there shalbe louse bandes. And for well set hearre there shalbe baldnesse. In steade of a stomacker, a sackclothe, and for theyr bewtye wytherydnesse & sunneburninge.
Isaiah 3:25 Their housbandes and theyr myghtye men shall perysh with the swerde in batell.
Isaiah 3:26 At that time shal their gates mourne & complayne, and they shall sitte as desolate folck vpon the earth.

CHAPTER: 4

Isaiah 4:1 Then shall seuen wyues take holde of one man, and saye: we wil laye all oure meate and clothing together in comen, only that we may be called thy wyues, & that this shameful reprofe may be taken from vs.
Isaiah 4:2 After that tyme shall the braunche of the Lorde be bewtyfull & myghtye, & the frute of the earth shall be fayre & pleasaunte for those Israelites that shall bringe thereof.
Isaiah 4:3 Then shall the remnaunt in Syon and the remnaunte at Ierusalem be called holye: namelye all suche as are wrytten amonge the lyuynge at Ierusalem:
Isaiah 4:4 what time as the Lorde shall washe awaye the desolacion of the doughters of Syon, & pourge the bloude out from Ierusalem wt the wynde of his smoke & fyre.
Isaiah 4:5 Moreouer vpon al the dwellynges of the hyl of Syon, and vpon their whole congregacyon, shal the Lord prouyde a cloude & smoke by daye, and the shynynge of a flammynge fyre by nyght: for all their glorye shalbe preserued.
Isaiah 4:6 And Ierusalem shall be a tabernacle for a shadowe because of hete in the daye tyme, a place and refuge where a man may kepe him for wether and rayne.

CHAPTER: 5

Isaiah 5:1 Nowe wel then, I wyl syng my beloued frende a songe of hys vyneyarde. My beloued frende hath a vyneyard in a very frutefull plenteous grounde.
Isaiah 5:2 This he hedged, this he walled rounde about, & planted with goodly grapes. In the myddest of it buylded he a toure, & made a wyne presse therein. And afterwarde when he loked that it shulde bringe him grapes, it broughte forthe thornes.
Isaiah 5:3 I shewe you nowe my cause (O ye Cytesens of Ierusalem & whole Iuda:) Iudge I praye you betwixte me, & my vyneyarde.
Isaiah 5:4 What more coulde haue bene done for it, that I haue not done? Wherfore then hath it geuen thornes, where I loked to haue had grapes of it?
Isaiah 5:5 Well, I shall tell you how I wyl do with my vineyarde: I will take the hedge from it, that it maye perishe, & breake doune the wall, that it maye be troden vnder fote.
Isaiah 5:6 I wyl laye it waste, that it shall neyther be twisted nor cut, but beare thornes and breares. I wil also forbydde the cloudes, that they shall not raine vpon it.
Isaiah 5:7 As for the vyneyarde of the Lorde of Hostes it is the house of Israel, & whole Iuda hys fayre plantynge. Of these he loked for equyte, but se there is wronge: for rightuousnesse, lo, It is but miserye.
Isaiah 5:8 Wo be vnto you that ioyne one house to another, & bring one land so nyghe vnto another, tyll ye can get no more grounde. Wyll ye dwel vpon the earth alone?
Isaiah 5:9 The Lorde of Hostes roundeth me thus in myne eare: shall not many greater and more gorgyous houses be so waste, that no man shall dwell in them?
Isaiah 5:10 And ten akers of vynes shal geue but a Quarte, & .xxx. bushels of sede shall geue but thre.
Isaiah 5:11 Wo be vnto them that ryse vp earlye to vse them selues in dronkennes, & yet at nyght are more superfluous wyth wyne.
Isaiah 5:12 In those companies are harpes and lutes, tabrettes & pipes and wyne. But they regarde not the worck of the Lorde, and consydre not the operacyon of hys handes.
Isaiah 5:13 Therfore commeth my folcke also in captyuite, because they haue no vnderstandynge. Theyr glory shalbe mixte with hunger and theyr pryde shalbe marred for thyrste.
Isaiah 5:14 Therfore gapeth hell, and openeth her mouth maruelous wyde: that pryde, boastyng & wysdome, with suche as reioyse therein, may descende into it.
Isaiah 5:15 Thus shall man haue a fall, he shalbe brought lowe, & the hygh lokes of the proude layde doune.
Isaiah 5:16 But the Lorde of hostes, that holye God shalbe exalted and vntouched, when he shall declare hys equyte and ryghtuosnesse after thys maner:
Isaiah 5:17 Then shall the lambes eate theyr appoynted foder, & shall fede plenteouslye in the mountaynes.
Isaiah 5:18 Wo be vnto vayne persones, that drawe wyckednes vnto them, as it were with a coorde: & synne, as it were wt a carte rope.
Isaiah 5:19 Whiche vse to speake on thys maner: let hym make haste nowe, & go forthe with his worcke, that we maye se it. Let the councell of the holye one of Israel come, and draw nye, that we maye knowe it.
Isaiah 5:20 Wo be vnto them that cal euyll good, and good euyll: which make darckenesse lyghte, & lyghte darckenesse, that make sower swete and swete sower.
Isaiah 5:21 Wo be vnto them that are wyse in theyr owne syght, and thyncke them selues to haue vnderstandynge.
Isaiah 5:22 Wo be vnto them, that are connynge men to suppe oute wyne, and experte to set vp dronckennesse.
Isaiah 5:23 These geue sentence wyth the vngodlye for rewardes, but condempne the iust cause of the ryghtuous.
Isaiah 5:24 Therfore lyke as fyre lycketh vp the straw & as the flamme consumeth the stubble: Euen so (when theyr rote is full) theyr blossome shall vanyshe awaye lyke duste or smoke: for they despyse the lawe of the Lorde of Hostes, and blaspheme the worde of the holye maker of Israel.
Isaiah 5:25 Therfore is the wrath of the Lorde kyndeled also agaynst his people, and he shaketh hys hande at them: yea he shall smyte so, that the hylles shall tremble. And theyr karcases shall lye in the open stretes, lyke myre. After all thys, the wrathe of God shall not ceasse, but he shall stretche hys hande wyder.
Isaiah 5:26 And he shall geue a token vnto a straunge people and call vnto them in a farre countrey: and beholde, they shall come hastelye wyth spede.
Isaiah 5:27 There is not one faynte nor feble amonge them, no not a slogyshe nor sleperye personne. There shall not one of them put of the gyrdle from hys loynes, nor louse their lachet of his shue.
Isaiah 5:28 Theyr arowes are sharpe, and theyr bowes bent. Their horse hoofes are lyke flynt, & theyr cartwheles lyke a stormy wynde.
Isaiah 5:29 Theyr crye is as it were of a lyon, and the roarynge of them lyke lyons whelpes. They shal roare and hantch vp the praye, and no man shal recouer it, or get it from them.
Isaiah 5:30 In that day they shalbe so fearce vpon them, as the sea. And yf we loke vnto the lande, beholde, it shalbe all darckenesse and sorowe. If we loke to heauen: beholde, it shalbe darcke wyth careful desperacyon.

CHAPTER: 6

Isaiah 6:1 In the same yeare the kynge Oziah dyed, I sawe the Lorde sytting vpon an high & gloryous seate, and hys trayne fylled the palace.
Isaiah 6:2 From aboue flakred the Seraphins, whereof euery one had sixe wynges. With twayne eche couered his face, with twayne his fete, & with twayne dyd he flye.
Isaiah 6:3 They cryed also eche one to other on this maner: holy holy holy, is the Lord of hostes. The whole world is ful of his glory.
Isaiah 6:4 Yea the gestes and dorecheckes moued at their crieng, & the house was ful of smoke.
Isaiah 6:5 Then I sayde: O wo is me. For I was astonished: that I (which am a man of vncleane lippes and dwell amonge people that hath vncleane lyppes also) shulde se the kynge and the Lorde of hostes wyth myne eyes.
Isaiah 6:6 Then flue one of the Seraphins vnto me, hauynge a hote cole in hys hande, whiche he had taken from the aulter wyth the tounges,
Isaiah 6:7 and touched my mouthe, and sayde: lo, thys hath touched my mouth, and thyne vnryghtuousnes is taken awaye, and thy synne forgeuen.
Isaiah 6:8 After thys I heard the voyce of the Lord takyng aduysement on thys maner: Whome shall I sende, & who wylbe oure messenger? Then I sayde: here am I, sende me.
Isaiah 6:9 And so he sayde: go, and tell thys people: ye shall heare in dede, but ye shall not vnderstande, ye shall playnelye se, & not perceyue.
Isaiah 6:10 Harden the hart of thys people, stoppe theyr eares, and shutte theyr eyes, that they se not with theyr eyes, heare not wyth theyr eares, and vnderstande not wyth theyr hertes, and conuerte and be healed.
Isaiah 6:11 Then spake I: Lorde, howe longe? he aunswered: vntyll the cytyes be vtterlye without inhabytours, and the houses wythoute men, tyll the lande be also desolate, & lye vnbuylded.
Isaiah 6:12 For the Lorde shall take the men farre awaye, so that the lande shall lye waste.
Isaiah 6:13 Neuertheles, the tenthe part shall remayne there in, for it shall conuerte and be frutefull. And lykewyse as the Terebyntes and Oketrees brynge forthe theyr frutes, so shall the holye sede haue frute.

CHAPTER: 7

Isaiah 7:1 It happened in the time of Ahaz the sonne of Ioatham, whiche was the sonne of Oziah kyng of Iuda: that Razin the kyng of Syria, and Phakeh the sonne of Romeliah, kynge of Israel wente vp towarde Ierusalem to besege it, but wanne it not.
Isaiah 7:2 Nowe when the house of Dauid (that is Ahaz) hearde worde thereof, that Syria and Ephraim were confederate together: hys herte quaked (yea and the hertes also of hys people) lyke as a tree in the felde, that is moued wyth the wynde.
Isaiah 7:3 Then sayde God vnto Esay: go mete Ahaz (thou and thy sonne Sear Iasub) at the heade of the ouer pole, in the fote pathe by the fullers grounde,
Isaiah 7:4 and saye vnto hym: Take hede to thy selfe and be styll, but feare not, neyther be fayntharted, for these two tales: that is: for these two smokynge fyre brandes, the wrathe and furyousnes of Razin the Syryan and Romelyes sonne:
Isaiah 7:5 because that the kynge of Siria Ephraim & Romelyes sonne haue wickedlye conspyred agaynst the,
Isaiah 7:6 sayinge: We wyll go doune into Iuda, vexe them, and bryng them vnder vs, and set a kynge there, euen the sonne of Tabeel.
Isaiah 7:7 For thus sayth the Lorde GOD therto, It shall not so go forthe, nether come so to passe:
Isaiah 7:8 for the head cytye of the Syryans is Damascus, but the head of Damascus is Razin. And after fyue and threscore yeare, shall Ephraim be no more a people.
Isaiah 7:9 And the chefe cytye of Ephraim is Samaria, but the heade of Samaria is Romelies sonne. And yf ye beleue not, there shall no promyse be kepte wyth you.
Isaiah 7:10 Moreouer, God spake vnto Ahaz, saying:
Isaiah 7:11 requyre a token of the Lorde thy God, whether it be towarde the depthe benethe or towarde the heyght aboue.
Isaiah 7:12 Then sayde Ahaz: I wyll requyre none, neyther will I tempte the Lorde.
Isaiah 7:13 The Lord aunswered: Then heare to, ye of the house of Dauid: Is it not ynough for you, that ye be greuous vnto men, but ye muste greue my God also?
Isaiah 7:14 And therfore the Lorde shall geue you a token of hym selfe: Beholde, a vyrgyn shall conceyue and beare a sonne, and shall call hys name Emmanuel.
Isaiah 7:15 Butter and honye shall he eate, that he maye knowe the euyll, and chose the good.
Isaiah 7:16 But or euer the chylde come to knowledge, to eschue the euyll and chose the good: The lande (that thou arte so afrayde for) shalbe desolate of both her kynges.
Isaiah 7:17 The Lorde also shall sende a tyme vpon the, vpon thy people, and vpon thy fathers house (suche as neuer came sence the tyme that Ephraim departed from Iuda) thorowe the kynge of the Assyryans.
Isaiah 7:18 For at the same tyme shall the Lorde whistle for the flies that are aboute the water of Egypte, and for the bees in the Assyryans lande.
Isaiah 7:19 These shall come, and shall lyght all in the valeys, in the vawtes of stone, vpon all greue thynges, and in all corners.
Isaiah 7:20 At the same tyme shall the Lorde shaue the hearre of the heade and the fete and the beerd cleane of, with the rasoure that he shall paye them wyth all beyonde the water: namelye wyth the kynge of the Assyryans.
Isaiah 7:21 At the same tyme shall a man lyue wyth a cowe, and two shepe.
Isaiah 7:22 Then because of the aboundaunce of mylcke, he shall make butter and eate it. So that euerye one whiche remayneth in the lande, shall eate butter and honye.
Isaiah 7:23 At the same tyme all vyneyardes (thoughe there be a thousande vynes in one, and were solde for a thousande syluerlynges) shalbe turned to brears and thornes.
Isaiah 7:24 Lyke as they shall come into the lande wyth arowes and bowes, so shall al the land be come brears and thornes.
Isaiah 7:25 And as for all hylles that nowe are hewen doune, thou shalt not come vpon them, for feare of brears and thornes. But the catell shall be dryuen thyther, and the shepe shall fede there.

CHAPTER: 8

Isaiah 8:1 Moreouer the Lorde sayde vnto me: Take the a great leaf, and wryte in it, as men do wyth a penne, that he spede hym to robbe and haste him to spoyle.
Isaiah 8:2 And immediatly I called vnto me faythfull wytnesses, Vriah the priest, and Zachariah the sonne of Barachiah.
Isaiah 8:3 After that went I vnto the Prophetisse, that nowe had conceiued and borne a sonne. Then sayde the Lorde to me: geue him this name: Maherschalal haschbas (that is, a spedie robber: an hastie spoyler.)
Isaiah 8:4 For why, or euer the child shall haue knowledge to saye: Abi and Im (that is father, and mother): shall the ryches of Damascus, and the substaunce of Samaria be taken awaye, thorowe the kynge of the Assirians.
Isaiah 8:5 The Lorde spake also vnto me, sayinge:
Isaiah 8:6 for so muche as the people refuseth the styll runnynge water of Silo, and put their delyte in Razin and Romelies sonne:
Isaiah 8:7 Beholde, the Lorde shall brynge mightye and greate floudes of water vpon them: namely the kinge of the Assirians with all his power. Whyche shall poure oute his furiousnesse vpon euery man, and runne ouer all their banckes.
Isaiah 8:8 And shall breake in vpon Iuda, increasyng in power, tyll he get him by the throte. He shal fyl also the wydenesse of thy lande with hys broade wynges, O Emanuell.
Isaiah 8:9 Go together ye people, and gather you, herken to all ye of farre countreyes. Mustre you, & gather you: mustre you and gather you,
Isaiah 8:10 take your councel together, yet must youre councell come to nought: go in hand with all, yet shall it not prospere. Excepte Emanuel: (that is God) be with vs.
Isaiah 8:11 For the Lord chastised me, & toke me by the hande, and warned me, sayinge vnto me, that I shoulde not walcke in the waye of thys people. He sayde moreouer:
Isaiah 8:12 rounde with none of them, whosoeuer saye: younder people are bounde together. Neuertheles feare them not, neyther be afraide of them,
Isaiah 8:13 but sanctifye the Lorde of hostes, let him be youre feare and drede.
Isaiah 8:14 For he is the sanctifyeng, and stone to stomble at the rocke to fall vpon, a snare and net to both the houses, to Israell, and the inhabitours of Ierusalem.
Isaiah 8:15 And many shall stomble, fall, & be broken vpon him: yea they shalbe snared and taken.
Isaiah 8:16 Now laye the witnesses together (said the Lorde) and seale the lawe with my discyples.
Isaiah 8:17 Thus I wayte vpon the Lorde that hath turned his face from the house of Iacob, and I loke vnto him.
Isaiah 8:18 But lo, as for me, and the children whiche the Lorde hath geuen me: we are a token and a wondre in Israel, for the Lorde of hostes sake, whiche dwelleth vpon the hill of Syon.
Isaiah 8:19 And therfore yf they saye vnto you: aske councel at the sothesayers, wytches, charmers and coniurers, then make them thys answere: Is there a people any where, that asketh not councel at his God, whether it be concerning the deade, or the lyuynge?
Isaiah 8:20 Yf any man want lyght, let hym loke vpon the lawe and the testimony, whether they speake not after thys meaninge.
Isaiah 8:21 Yf he do not thys, he stombleth & suffereth hunger. And yf he suffre hunger, he is out of pacience, and blasphemeth hys kynge and his God. Then loketh he vpwarde, and dounewarde to the earthe,
Isaiah 8:22 and beholde, there is trouble & darcknesse, vexacyon is rounde aboute him, and the cloude of erroure. And oute of suche aduersitie, shall he not escape.

CHAPTER: 9

Isaiah 9:1 Even lyke as in time past it hath bene well sene, that the lande of Zabulon and the land of Nephtali (where thorow the sea way goeth ouer Iordane into the land of Galilee) was at the fyrst in lytle trouble, but afterwarde sore vexed.
Isaiah 9:2 Neuertheles the people that haue dwelt in darcknesse, shall se a greate lyght. As for them that dwell in the lande of the shadowe of death, vpon them shall the lyght shyne.
Isaiah 9:3 Shalt thou multyplye the people, and not increase the ioye also? They shall reioyse before the euen as men make mery in haruest and as men that haue gotten the vyctorye, when they deale the spoyle.
Isaiah 9:4 For thou shalte breake the yocke of the peoples burthen, the staffe of his shoulder, and the road of hys oppressoure, as in the daye of Madian.
Isaiah 9:5 Moreouer all temerariours and sedicious power (yea where there is but a cote fylled with bloude) shalbe burnt, and fede the fyre.
Isaiah 9:6 For vnto vs a chylde shalbe borne, and vnto vs a sonne shalbe geuen. Vpon his shoulder shall the kyngedome lye, and he shalbe called with hys owne name. The wonderous geuer of councel, the myghty God, the euerlastinge father, the prynce of peace,
Isaiah 9:7 he shall make no ende to encrease the kyngedome and peace, and shall sytte vpon the seate of Dauid, and in his kyngedome, to set vp the same, to stablyshe it wyth equyte and ryghteousnesse, from thence forth for euermore. This shall the gelousy of the Lorde of hostes brynge to paste.
Isaiah 9:8 The Lord sent a word into Iacob, the same is come into Israell.
Isaiah 9:9 And the people also of Ephraim, and they that dwell in Samaria, can saye wyth pryde and hye stomackes, on this maner:
Isaiah 9:10 The tyle worcke is fallen doune but we wyll buylde it wyth harder stones. The Molbery tymbre is broken, but we shal set it vp agayne with Cedre.
Isaiah 9:11 Neuertheles, the Lorde shall prepare Razin the enemy against them, and so ordre their aduersaryes,
Isaiah 9:12 that the Sirians shall laye holde vpon them before, & the Philistines behinde, and so deuoure Israell wyth open mouth. After all thys, the wrath of the Lord shall not ceasse, but yet his hande shall be stretched oute styll.
Isaiah 9:13 For the people turneth not vnto hym, that chastyseth them, nether do they seke the Lorde of Hostes.
Isaiah 9:14 Therfore the Lorde shal rote oute of Israel bothe head & tayle, braunch and twigge in one daye.
Isaiah 9:15 By the heade, is vnderstande the Senatoure and honorable man, and by the tayle, the Prophet that preacheth lyes.
Isaiah 9:16 For al they whiche enfourme the people that they be in a righte case, suche be disceyuers. Suche as men thyncke also to be perfecte amonge these, are but cast awaye.
Isaiah 9:17 Therfore shall the Lorde haue no pleasure in their yonge men, neyther fauoure their fatherlesse and wyddowes. For they are all together ypocrytes and wicked, and all their mouthes speake foly. After all this shall not the Lordes wrathe ceasse, but yet his hande shalbe stretched oute still.
Isaiah 9:18 For the vngodlye burne as a fyre in the bryers and thornes. And as it were oute of a fyre in a wood or a read bushe, so ascendeth the smoke of their pryde.
Isaiah 9:19 For this cause shall the wrath of the Lorde of Hostes fal vpon the lande, and the people shalbe consumed, as it were with fyre, no man shall spare his brother.
Isaiah 9:20 Yf a man do turne him to the ryght hande, he shall famishe, or to the lefte hande to eate, he shall not haue ynough. Euery man shall eate the fleshe of his owne arme.
Isaiah 9:21 Manasses shall eat Ephraim and Ephraim Manasses, and they both shall eate Iuda. After al this shall not the Lordes wrath cease, but yet shall his hande be stretched oute styll.

CHAPTER: 10

Isaiah 10:1 Wo be vnto you that make vnryghteous lawes, and deuyse thinges, whiche be to harde for to kepe:
Isaiah 10:2 where thorow the pore are oppressed on euery syde, & the innocentes of my people are therwyth robbed of iudgement: that wyddowes maye be youre praye, and that ye maye robbe the fatherlesse.
Isaiah 10:3 What wyll ye do in tyme of the visitacion and destruccyon, that shall come from farre? Tho whome wyll ye runne for helpe? or to whome will ye geue your honour that ye maye kepe it?
Isaiah 10:4 that ye come not among the presonners, or lye amonge the deade? After all this shall not the wrath of the Lord cease, but yet shall hys hande be stretched out styll.
Isaiah 10:5 Wo be also vnto Assur, whiche is a staffe of my wrathe, in whose hande is the roade of my punishement.
Isaiah 10:6 For I shall send him among those ypocrytish people, amonge the people that haue deserued my disfauour shall I send him: that he maye vtterly robbe them, spoyle them, and tread them doune lyke the myre in the strete.
Isaiah 10:7 How be it, his meaninge is not so, neither thincketh his hert of this fasshion. But he ymagineth only, how he may ouerthrowe and destroye muche people,
Isaiah 10:8 for he sayth: are not my princes al kinges?
Isaiah 10:9 Is not Calno as easye to winne, as Charchamis? Is it harder to conquere Antiochia then Arphad? Or is it lyghter to ouercome Damascus then Samaria?
Isaiah 10:10 As wo say: I were able to winne the kingedome of the Idolatres and their Goddes, but not Ierusalem and Samaria.
Isaiah 10:11 Shall I not do vnto Ierusalem and their ymages, as I dyd vnto Samaria and their ymages?
Isaiah 10:12 Wherfore the Lorde sayeth: As sone as I haue perfourmed my whole worcke vpon the hyll of Sion and Ierusalem, then wyll I also vpset the noble and stoute kynge of Assiria, wyth his wisedom and pryde.
Isaiah 10:13 For he standeth thus in hys owne conceyte. Thys do I thorow the power of myne owne hand, and thorowe my wysedome: For I am wyse I am he that remoue the landes of the people I robbe the princes, and (lyke one of the worthies) I dryue them from their hye seates.
Isaiah 10:14 My hande hathe founde out the hostes of the people, as it were arnest. And lyke as egges, that were layde here and there, are gathered togegether. So do I gather all countreyes. And there is no man, that darre be so bolde, as to touche a fether, that darre open his mouth, or ones whisper.
Isaiah 10:15 But doth the axe boost it selfe, agaynste hym, that he heweth therwyth, or doth the sawe make any krackynge, agaynst hym that ruleth it? That were euen lyke, as yf the roade dyd exalte it selfe, against him that beareth it: or as though the staffe shoulde magnyfye it selfe, as who saie: it were no wode.
Isaiah 10:16 Therfore shall the Lorde of Hostes sende him pouerte in his ryches, and burne vp hys power, as it were wyth a fyre.
Isaiah 10:17 But the lyght of Israell shalbe that fyre, and his Sanctuarye shalbe the flamme, and it shal kyndle, and burne vp his thornes and breers in one daye,
Isaiah 10:18 ye all the glory of his woodes and feldes shalbe consumed with body and soule. As for hym selfe, he shalbe as one chased away.
Isaiah 10:19 The trees also of his felde shalbe of suche a nombre, that a chylde may tell them.
Isaiah 10:20 After that daye shall the remnaunt of Israel, & suche as are escaped out of the house of Iacob, seke no more comfort at him that smote them, but shall comforte them selues wyth faythfulnesse and truthe in the Lorde, the holy one of Israell.
Isaiah 10:21 The remnaunt, yea and the posteryte of Iacob, shall conuerte vnto God the myghty one.
Isaiah 10:22 For thoughe thy people (O Israel) be as the sande of the sea, yet shall but the remnaunt of them onely conuerte vnto hym. Perfecte is the iudgement of hym that floweth in ryghteousnesse,
Isaiah 10:23 and therfore the Lorde of Hostes shall perfectlye fulfyll the thynge, that he had determyned in the myddest of the whole world.
Isaiah 10:24 Therfore thus sayth the Lorde God of Hostes: Thou my people thrt dwellest in Sion, be not afrayed for the king of the Assirians: He shall wagge his staffe at the, yea and beate the with the road, as the Egypcians did some tyme.
Isaiah 10:25 But soone after, shal my wrathe and mine indignacion be fulfilled agaynst their blasphemies.
Isaiah 10:26 Moreouer the Lorde of Hostes shall prepare a scourge for him, lyke as was the punyshement of Madian vpon the mount of Oreb. And he shall lyft vp his road ouer the sea, as he dyd somtyme ouer the Egipcians.
Isaiah 10:27 Then shall his burthen be taken from thy shoulders, and his yock from thy neck, yea the same yocke shall be corrupt for very fatnesse.
Isaiah 10:28 He shall come to Aiath, & go thorow towarde Migron. But at Machmas shall he muster his hoste,
Isaiah 10:29 and go ouer the foorde. Gabaah shalbe their restinge place, Rhamah shalbe afrayed, Gabaah Saul shall fle awaye.
Isaiah 10:30 The voyce of the noyse of thy horses (O doughter Gallim) shalbe hearde vnto Lais and to Anathoth, which also shalbe in trouble.
Isaiah 10:31 Madmena shall tremble for feare, but the cytesyns of Gabin are manlye,
Isaiah 10:32 yet shall he remayne at Nob that daye. After that, shall he lyft vp his hande agaynst the mount of Sion, and against the hyll of Ierusalem.
Isaiah 10:33 But se the lorde God of hostes shall take awaye the proude from thence with feare. He shall hew doune the proude, and fel the hye minded.
Isaiah 10:34 The thornes of the wood shalbe roted out with yron, and Libanus shall haue a myghtye fall.

CHAPTER: 11

Isaiah 11:1 After this there shall come a road forth of the kynrede of Iesse, & a blossome oute of his rote.
Isaiah 11:2 The spyryt of the Lorde shall lyghte vpon it, the spyryte of wisedome and vnderstandynge: the spirit of councell, & strength: the spirite of knowledge, and of the feare of God:
Isaiah 11:3 and shall make him feruent in the feare of God. For he shall not geue sentence, after the thinge that shall be brought before his eyes, neyther reproue a matter at the fyrst hearing
Isaiah 11:4 but wyth ryghteousnesse shall he iudge the poore, and with holynes shal he refourme the symple of the worlde. He shall smyte the worlde wyth the staffe of hys mouthe, & with the breathe of his mouth shall he slay the wicked.
Isaiah 11:5 Ryghteousnesse shalbe the gyrdle of his loynes, truthe & faythfulnesse, the gyrdynge vp of hys raynes.
Isaiah 11:6 Then shall the wolfe dwell wyth the lambe, and the leoparde shall lye doune by the gote. Bullockes, lions and catel shal kepe company together, so that a lytle childe shall dryue them forthe.
Isaiah 11:7 The cowe and the Beare shall fede together, & their younge ones shall lye together. The Lyon shall eate strawe like the oxe, or the cowe.
Isaiah 11:8 The chylde whyle he sucketh, shal haue a desyre to the serpentes nest, and when he is weaned, he shall put his hand into the Cochatryce denne.
Isaiah 11:9 No man shall do euyl to another, no man shall destroye another, in all the hyll of my Sanctuarye. For the earth shalbe full of the knowledge of the Lorde, euen as thoughe the water of the sea floweth ouer the earth.
Isaiah 11:10 Then shal the Gentyles enquere after the rote of Iesse (whiche shalbe set vp for a token vnto the Gentyles) for hys dwellinge shalbe glorious.
Isaiah 11:11 At the same tyme shal the Lord take in hande agayne, to conquere the remnaunt of hys people (whiche are left alyue.) From the Assirians, Egypcians, Arabians, Morians, Elamites, Ealdeyes, Antiochiaus, and Ilandes of the sea.
Isaiah 11:12 And he shal set vp a token amonge the Gentyles, and gather together the dispersed of Israel, yea and the out castes of Iuda from the foure corners of the world.
Isaiah 11:13 The hatred of Ephraim and the emnyte of Iuda shalbe cleane roted oute. Ephraim shall beare no euyll wyll to Iuda, and Iuda shall not hate Ephraim:
Isaiah 11:14 but they bothe together shall flee vpon the shoulders of the Philistines towarde the West, and spoyle them together that dwell towarde the Easte. The Idumytes and the Moabites shall let their handes, fal & the Ammonites shalbe obedient vnto them.
Isaiah 11:15 The Lorde also shall cleaue the tunges of the Egypcyans sea, and with a mighty wind shal he lift vp his hande ouer Nilus, & shall smyte hys seuen streames and make men go ouer drye shod.
Isaiah 11:16 And thus shall he make a waye for his people, that remayneth from the Assirians, lyke as it happened to the Israelytes, what tyme they departed oute of the lande of Egypt.

CHAPTER: 12

Isaiah 12:1 So that then thou shalt saye: O Lord I thanke the, for thou wast displeased at me, but thou haste refrained thy wrath, & hast mercy vpon me.
Isaiah 12:2 Beholde, God is my health, in whom I trust, & am not afraid. For the Lorde God is my strength and my praise, he also shalbe my refuge.
Isaiah 12:3 Therefore wt ioye shal ye drawe water out of the welles of the Sauioure,
Isaiah 12:4 & then shall ye saye: Let vs geue thankes vnto the Lorde, and call vpon his name, & declare his councels amonge the people, and kepe them in remembraunce for his name is excellente.
Isaiah 12:5 O synge prayses vnto the Lorde, for he doth great thinges, as it is knowne in al the worlde.
Isaiah 12:6 Crye oute, and be glad, thou that dwellest in Sion, for greate is thy prince, the holy one of Israell.

CHAPTER: 13

Isaiah 13:1 Thys is the heauy burthen of Babilon, whiche Esai the sonne of Amos dyd se.
Isaiah 13:2 Make some tokens to the hye hilles, call vnto them, hold vp youre hande, that the Princes maye go in at the dore.
Isaiah 13:3 For I will send for my debites & my gyauntes (sayth the Lorde) and in my wrath I wil call for suche, as triumphe in my glory.
Isaiah 13:4 With that, me thought I heard in the mountaynes a noyse, like as is hath bene of a great people: & a russhynge, as though the kyngedomes of al nacions had come together. (And the Lorde of Hostes was the captayne of the whole armye)
Isaiah 13:5 As they had not come only out of farre countreyes, but also from the endes of the heauens: Euen the Lorde him selfe with the ministres of his wrath, to destroye the whole lande.
Isaiah 13:6 Mourne therfore, for the daye of the Lorde is at hande, & commeth as a destroyer from the Almyghtye.
Isaiah 13:7 Then shall all handes be letten doune, and all mens hertes shall melt awaie,
Isaiah 13:8 they shall stande in feare, carefulnesse and sorowe shal come vpon them, and they shal haue payne, as a woman that trauaileth with childe. One shal euer be abasshed of another, and their faces shall burne lyke the flamme.
Isaiah 13:9 For lo, the daye of the Lorde shall come, terrible, full of indignacion and wrathe, to make the lande waste, and to rote oute the synne therof.
Isaiah 13:10 For the sterres and planetes of heauen shal not geue their lyght, the sunne shalbe quenched in the risinge, and the mone shall not shyne with his light.
Isaiah 13:11 And I will punysh the wickednesse of the worlde, and the synnes of the vngodly, sayeth the Lorde. The hye stomackes of the proude wyl I take awaye, and will laye doune the boastynge of tyrauntes.
Isaiah 13:12 I wyll make a man dearer then fyne goulde, and a man to be more worthe, then a goulden wedge of Ophir.
Isaiah 13:13 Moreouer, I wil so shake the heauen, that the earth shall remoue oute of her place. Thus shall it go with Babilon in the wrath of the Lorde of Hostes in the daye of his fearfull indignacyon.
Isaiah 13:14 And Babilon shalbe as an hunted or chased do, and as a flocke wythout a sheperde. Euery man shal turne to his own people, and flee eche one into his owne land.
Isaiah 13:15 Whoso is founde alone, shalbe shot thorow. And whoso gather together, shalbe destroied with the swerd.
Isaiah 13:16 Their chyldren shalbe slaine before their eyes, their houses spoyled, and their wyues rauyshed.
Isaiah 13:17 For lo, I shall brynge vp the Medes agaynst them, whiche shall not regarde siluer, nor be desyrous of gould.
Isaiah 13:18 Then shall young mens bowes be knapped a sunder. The Medes shall haue no pytye vpon wemen with chylde, and their faces shal not spare the chyldren.
Isaiah 13:19 And Babylon (that glory of kingedomes and bewtye of the Caldees honoure) shalbe destroied, euen as God destroyed Sodome and Gomorra.
Isaiah 13:20 It shall neuer be more inhabyted, neyther shal there be any more dwellynge there from generacion to generacyon. The Arabians shall make no more tentes there, neyther shall the shepardes make their foldes ther any more:
Isaiah 13:21 but wild beastes shal lye there, & the houses shalbe full of greate Oules. Estriches shall dwel there, and Apes shall daunse there:
Isaiah 13:22 the lytle Oules shal crye in the palaces, one after another, and Dragons shalbe in the plesaunt parlours. And as for Babilons tyme it is at hande, & her dayes maye not be longe absent.

CHAPTER: 14

Isaiah 14:1 Bvt the Lorde wylbe mercyfull vnto Iacob, and wil take vp Israel agayne, and set them in their owne lande. Straungers shall cleaue vnto them, and get them to the house of Iacob.
Isaiah 14:2 They shall take the people, and cary them home with them. And the house of Israell shall haue them in possession for seruauntes and maydens in the lande of the Lorde. They shall take those presonners, whose captyues they had bene afore, and rule those that had oppressed them.
Isaiah 14:3 When the lord now shall bringe the to rest, from the trauail, feare, and harde boundage that thou wast laden wyth all,
Isaiah 14:4 then shalte thou vse thys mockage vpon the Kynge of Babylon, and saye: Howe happeneth it, that the oppressoure leaueth of? Is the goulden trybute come to an ende?
Isaiah 14:5 Douteles the Lorde hathe broken the staffe of the vngodlye, and the scepter of the lordly.
Isaiah 14:6 Whyche when he is wrothe, smyteth the people with durable strokes, and in his wonders he persecuteth them, and tameth them continually.
Isaiah 14:7 And therfore the whole worlde is now at reste and quyetnesse, and men sing for ioye.
Isaiah 14:8 Yea, euen the Fyrre trees and Cedres of Libanus reioyse at thy fall, sayinge: Nowe that thou arte laide doune, there come no mo vp to destroye vs.
Isaiah 14:9 Hell also trembleth at thy commynge, all myghtye men, and Prynces of the earth, steppe forth before the. All Kynges of the earth stande vp from their seates,
Isaiah 14:10 that they may all (one after another) synge & speake vnto the. Art thou wounded also as we? art thou become lyke vnto vs?
Isaiah 14:11 Thy pompe and thy pryde is gone doune to hell. Mothes shalbe layde vnder the, and wormes shalbe thy coueringe.
Isaiah 14:12 How art thou fallen from heauen (O Lucifer) thou faire mornyng childe? hast thou gotten a fal euen to the ground, thou that (not withstanding) diddest subdue the people.
Isaiah 14:13 And yet thou thoughtest in thyne herte: I wyll climme vp into heauen, and make my seate aboue the starres of God, I wyl syt vpon the glorious mounte toward the North,
Isaiah 14:14 I wyll climme vp aboue the cloudes, and wylbe like the hyghest of all.
Isaiah 14:15 Yet darre I saye, that thou shalt be brought doune to the depe of hel.
Isaiah 14:16 They that se the, shal narowly loke vpon the, and thinke in them selues, sayenge: Is thys the man, that brought all landes in feare, and made the kyngedomes afrayde.
Isaiah 14:17 Is this he that made the worlde in a maner waste, and layde the cytyes to the grounde, whyche let not his prisoners go home?
Isaiah 14:18 How happeneth it, that the kynges of all people lye, euery one at home in his owne palace, with worshyppe,
Isaiah 14:19 and thou art cast oute of thy graue, like a wild braunch: like as dead mens raiment that are shot thorow wyth the swerde: as they that go doune to the stones of the depe, as a deade coarse that is troden vnder fete:
Isaiah 14:20 and art not buryed with them? Euen because that thou hast wasted thy lande, and destroyed thy people. For the generacion of the wycked shalbe wythoute honoure foreuer.
Isaiah 14:21 There shall a way be sought to destroye their chyldren, for their fathers wyckednes: they shall not come vp agayne to possesse the lande, and fyll the worlde ful of castels and townes.
Isaiah 14:22 I will stande vp against them (sayeth the Lorde of Hostes) and rote out the name & generacyon of Babylon (sayeth the Lorde)
Isaiah 14:23 and wyll geue it to the Oiters, and wyl make water podles of it. And I wyll swepe them oute with the besome of destruccyon, sayeth the Lorde of Hostes.
Isaiah 14:24 The Lorde of Hostes hathe sworne an othe, sayinge: It shal come to passe as I haue determyned: and shalbe fulfylled as I haue deuysed.
Isaiah 14:25 The Assyryans shalbe destroyed in my lande, and vpon my mountaynes wyll I treade them vnder fote. Where thorow hys yock shall come from you, & hys burthen shalbe taken from youre shoulders.
Isaiah 14:26 This deuyce hath God taken thorowe the whole worlde, and thus is hys hand stretched out ouer al people.
Isaiah 14:27 For yf the Lorde of Hostes determen a thynge, who wyl dysanulle it? And yf he stretch forth hys hande, who wil holde it in agayne?
Isaiah 14:28 The same yeare that kynge Ahaz dyed, God threatened by Esay on thys maner:
Isaiah 14:29 Reioyse not (thou whole Palestina) as thoughe the road of him that beateth the were broken: for out of the serpentes rote, there shall waxe a kockatrice, & the frute shalbe a fyrie worme.
Isaiah 14:30 But the poore shall fede of the best thynges, and the simple shal dwel in safety. Thy rotes wil I destroye with hunger, and it shall slay thy remnaunt.
Isaiah 14:31 Mourne ye portes, wepe ye cities, and feare thou (O whole Palestina) for there shall come from the North a smoke, whose power noman may abyde.
Isaiah 14:32 Who shall then maynteyne the messages of the Gentyles? But the Lorde stablisheth Sion, and the poore of my people shall put their truste in hym.

CHAPTER: 15

Isaiah 15:1 This is the heauy burthen vpon Moab: Ar of Moab was destroyed (as me thought) in the night season: the walles of Moab perished in the night, and vanished awaye.
Isaiah 15:2 They wente to Baith and Dibon in the hie places, for to wepe: Moab dyd mourne from Nebo to Medba. All their heades were colled, and all their beardes shauen.
Isaiah 15:3 In their stretes were they girded aboute with sacke clothe. In al the toppes of their houses and stretes was there nothinge but mourninge and wepinge.
Isaiah 15:4 Hesebon and Eleale cryed, that their voyce was hearde vnto Iahaz. The worthyes also of Moab bleared and cryed for very sorowe of their mindes.
Isaiah 15:5 Wo is my herte for Moabs sake. They fled vnto the cyty of Zoar, whiche is lyke a faire frutefull bullocke, they went vp to Luhith, weping. The waye toward Horonaim was ful of lamentacion for the hurte.
Isaiah 15:6 The waters of Nimrim were dried vp, the grasse was withred, the herbes destroied, and what necessary grene thing there was beside.
Isaiah 15:7 In lyke maner the thing that was left them of their substaunce, they caryed it by water to Arabye.
Isaiah 15:8 The crye wente ouer the whole lande of Moab: from Eglaim vnto Beer was there nothinge but mournyng.
Isaiah 15:9 The waters of Dimon were full of bloude, for the enemye hath sent thyther a bonde of men, which as a lyon laye awayte for the remnaunt of the lande, and for them that were escaped.

CHAPTER: 16

Isaiah 16:1 Then sent the Lordes of the lande a man of warre, from the rocke that lyeth toward the deserte vnto the hyl of the doughter Sion.
Isaiah 16:2 (For as for the doughters of Moab, they were as it had bene a trembling byrd, that is put oute of her nest, by the fery of Arnon) whiche messaunger sayde:
Isaiah 16:3 gather you councell, come together couer vs wyth your shadowe in the middaye, as the nyght doeth: hyd the chased, and be wray not them that are fled,
Isaiah 16:4 let the persecuted Moabites dwel among you, be you open refuge against the destroyer: for the aduersarye opppresseth vs, the robber vndoeth vs, & the tiraunt driueth vs oute of oure lande.
Isaiah 16:5 But the trone of youre Kyngedome is full of grace, therfore he that sitteth vpon it with faythfulnesse and trueth in the house of Dauid, knowe the thing, and do his diligence to helpe shortly, according to equite and ryghteousnes.
Isaiah 16:6 As for Moabs pride (shal they answere) it is well knowne. And all thoughe they be excellent, proude, arrogante and hye minded: yet is their strength nothing lyke.
Isaiah 16:7 And therfore Moab complayneth vnto Moab, where thorowe they come all to mourne: and now that they be smytten, they take their deuyce beneth by the bryckwall, & make theyr complaynte.
Isaiah 16:8 The suburbes also of Hesebon were made waste, & the Princes of the Gentyles hewed doune the vyneyardes of Sibma, whyche were planted with noble grapes, and spred vnto Iazer, and wente vnto the ende of the deserte, whose braunches stretched their selues forth beyonde the sea.
Isaiah 16:9 Therfore I mourned for Iazer, & for the vineyardes of Sibma with great sorowe. I poured my teares vpon Hesebon and Eleale, for al their songes were layde doune, in their haruest and gatherynge of their grapes.
Isaiah 16:10 Myrth and there was gone out of the felde and vyneyardes, in so muche that noman was glad nor songe. There went no treader into the wynepresse, their merye chere was layde doune.
Isaiah 16:11 Wherfore my belye rombled (as it had bene a lute) for Moabs sake and mine inward membres, for the brickwalles sake.
Isaiah 16:12 For it happened thus also: when Moab sawe that she was turned vpsyde doune: she went vpon on hye into her Sanctuarie, to make her prayer there, but she might not be helped.
Isaiah 16:13 This is the deuyce, whyche the Lorde toke in hande at that tyme agaynste Moab.
Isaiah 16:14 But now the Lorde sayeth thus: In the yeare shall the power of Moab wyth their pompe (whiche is greate) be minished, lyke as the burthen of an hyred seruaunt. And as for the remnaunt of them, they shalbe lesse then a fewe, and not rekened muche worth.

CHAPTER: 17

Isaiah 17:1 This is the heauy burthen vpon Damascus: Behold Damascus shalbe no more a citie, but an heape of broken stones.
Isaiah 17:2 The cyties of Aroer shalbe waste: the catell shal lye there, and no man shal fray them awaye.
Isaiah 17:3 Ephraim shal no more be strong, and Damascus shal no more be a kingedom. And as for the glory of the remnaunt of the Sirians it shalbe as the glory of the children of Israel sayeth the Lorde of Hostes.
Isaiah 17:4 At that tyme also shal the glory of Iacob be very poore, and his fatnes leane.
Isaiah 17:5 It shal happen to them, as when one sheareth in haruest, which cutteth his handfull with the sickle, and when one gathereth the sheaues together in the valley, of Raphaim
Isaiah 17:6 there remaineth yet some eares ouer: Or as when one shaketh an olyue tre, whiche fyndeth but two or thre olyue beries aboue in the toppe, & foure or fyue in the braunches. Thus the Lorde God of Israel hath spoken.
Isaiah 17:7 Then shall man conuerte agayne vnto his maker, and turne his eyes to the holy one of Israel.
Isaiah 17:8 And shall not turne to the aulters that are the worcke of his owne handes, neyther shal he loke vpon groues & ymages, which his fingers haue wrought.
Isaiah 17:9 At the same tyme shall their stronge cities be desolate, lyke as were ones the forsaken plowes & corne, which they forsoke, for feare of the children of Israel.
Isaiah 17:10 So shalt thou (O Damascus) be desolate because thou hast forgotten God thy Sauyoure, & hast not called to remembraunce the rocke of thy strength. Wherfore thou hast also set a fayr plat, & grafted a straung branch.
Isaiah 17:11 In the day when thou diddest plant it, it was greate, and gaue sone the frute of thy sede. But in the daye of haruest, thou shalt reape and heape of sorowes and myseries.
Isaiah 17:12 Wo be to the multitude of muche people, that rush in lyke the sea, and to the heape of folke, that runne ouer al lyke greate waters.
Isaiah 17:13 For thoughe so manye people increase as the flowynge waters, and though they be armed yet they fle farre of, and vanyshe awaye lyke the dust with the winde vpon an hill, and as the whirle winde thorow a storme.
Isaiah 17:14 Thoughe they be fearfull at night, yet in the morninge it is gone with them. This is their porcyon, that do vs harme, and heritage of them, that robbe vs.

CHAPTER: 18

Isaiah 18:1 Wo be to the land of flieng shippes, whyche is of thys side the floude of Ethiopia:
Isaiah 18:2 whych sendeth her message ouer the sea in shyppes of redes vpon the water: and sayeth: go sone & do youre message vnto a straunge and harde folke, to a fearful people, and to a people that is forther then this: to a desperate and pylled folke, whose lande is deuyded from vs with riuers of water.
Isaiah 18:3 Yea, al ye that syt in the compasse of the worlde, and dwell vpon the earthe, when the token shalbe geuen vpon the mountaynes, then loke vp: & when the horne bloweth, then herken to,
Isaiah 18:4 for thus hath the Lorde sayde vnto me. I layde me doune, and pondred the matter in my house, at the noone day when it was hote. And there fell a mistynge shower, lyke a dewe, as it happened in Haruest.
Isaiah 18:5 But the frutes were not yet type cut of, and the grapes were but younge and grene. Then one smote of the grapes wyth an hoke, yea he hewed doune also the bowes and the braunches and dyd cast them awaye.
Isaiah 18:6 And thus they were layde waste, for the foules of the mountaynes, and for the beastes of the earthe together. So that the foules sat there vpon, and the beastes of the earth wyntered there.
Isaiah 18:7 Then shall there be a present brought vnto the Lord of Hostes, euen that harde folke, that fearful folke, and that forther is then thys: that desperate and pylled folke (whose lande is deuided from vs with floudes of water) vnto the place of the name of the Lorde of Hostes: euen vnto the hyll of Syon.

CHAPTER: 19

Isaiah 19:1 This is the heauy burthen vpon Egipt: Beholde, the Lord wyll ryde vpon a swyft cloude, & come into Egipt. And the Goddes of Egypte shall tremble at hys comminge, and the herte of Egypt shal quake within her.
Isaiah 19:2 For thus sayeth the Lord: I wil stere vp the Egypcyans one agaynste another among them selues, so that one shalbe euer against his brother & neyghbour, yea one city against another, & one kingdome against another.
Isaiah 19:3 And Egypt shalbe choked in her selfe. When they aske councel at their goddes, at their prophetes, at their sothsayers & witches, then will I brynge their councell to naught.
Isaiah 19:4 I wil delyuer Egipt also into the handes of greuous rulers, and a cruel king shal haue the rule of them.
Isaiah 19:5 The water of the sea shalbe drawen out, Nilus shal sinck away, & be droncken vp.
Isaiah 19:6 The riuers also shalbe drawen out, the welles shal decreace and drye away. Rede & rush shal faile,
Isaiah 19:7 the grasse by the water syde or vpon the riuers banck, yea & whatsoeuer is sowen by the waters, shalbe withered, destroyed, & brought to naught.
Isaiah 19:8 The fishers shal mourne al suche as cast angles in the water, shal complayne, & they that sprede their nettes in the water, shalbe faynt harted.
Isaiah 19:9 Such as laboure vpon flax & sylck, shal come to pouerte, and they also that weeue fyne worckes.
Isaiah 19:10 All the poundes of Egypte, all the pollycye of their Moates and dyches shall come to naught.
Isaiah 19:11 Yea the vndiscrete Princes of Zoan, the councel of the wise Senatoures of Pharao, shall turne to folyshenesse. Those that darre boast & saye of Pharaos behalfe: I am come of wyse people,
Isaiah 19:12 I am come of the olde regall Progeny. But where are now thy wyse men? Let them tel the & shewe the, what the Lorde of hostes hath taken in hande agaynst Egipt.
Isaiah 19:13 Fooles are these Prynces of Zoan, & proude are the Princes of Noph: yea they disceyue Egypte with the nobilitye of their stock.
Isaiah 19:14 For the Lorde hath made Egypte droncken with the spirit of erroure, and they shal vse it in al matters, euen lyke as a droncken man goeth spewynge aboute.
Isaiah 19:15 For Egypte shall lacke good councell, so that they shall not knowe what to do, neyther beginning nor ende, neyther vpon the lande nor water.
Isaiah 19:16 Then shal the Egipcyans be lyke vnto wemen, afrayde & astonied, at the liftynge vp of the head, which the Lorde of Hostes shal lyft vp ouer them.
Isaiah 19:17 The land of Iuda also shall make the Egipcians afrayde, who so doeth but speake vpon it, shal put them in feare. And that because of the councel, whiche the Lorde of Hostes hath deuysed agaynst them.
Isaiah 19:18 Then shall the fyue cyties of Egypte speake wyth the Cananytes tonge, and swere by the Lorde of Hostes, & Heliopolis shalbe one of them.
Isaiah 19:19 At the same tyme shall the Lorde of Hostes haue an aulter in the middest of the lande of Egypt, with thys tytle therby: Vnto the Lord.
Isaiah 19:20 This shalbe a token or testimony vnto the Lorde of hostes in the lande of Egypt, when they shall crye vnto him, because of those that oppresse them, that he shal sende them a Captayne and a Sauioure to delyuer them.
Isaiah 19:21 Moreouer, Egypte shalbe boughte vnto the Lorde, and the Egipcians also shal know the Lorde at the same tyme: they shall do him reuerence with peaceofferinges, & with meatofferinges: they shal promyse him offeringes, yea and paye him also.
Isaiah 19:22 Thus the Lorde shall smyte Egipt, and heale it agayn: and so shal they turne to the Lorde, & he also shall haue mercy vpon them, and saue them.
Isaiah 19:23 Then shall there be a commen waye out of Egipt, into Assiria. The Assirians shal come into Egipt, and the Egipcians into Assiria. The Egipcians also and the Assirians shall bothe haue one Goddes seruyce.
Isaiah 19:24 Then shal Israel with honour be the thirde to Egipt and Assur,
Isaiah 19:25 and the Lorde of hostes shall blesse them, saying: Blessed is my people of the Egipcians, Assur is the worcke of my handes, but Israel is mine enheritaunce.

CHAPTER: 20

Isaiah 20:1 In the same yeare that Tharthan came to Asdod, where Sargon the kynge of the Assirians sent him, what tyme as he also beseged Asdod, and wanne it the same season.
Isaiah 20:2 Then spake the Lorde vnto Esai the sonne of Amos, sayinge: go and louse of that sacke clothe from thy loynes: and put of thy shoes from thy fete. And so he did, going naked and barefote.
Isaiah 20:3 Then sayde the Lorde: where as my seruaunt Esai goeth naked and barefote, it is a token and signifyenge of the thinge, that after thre yeare shall come vpon Egipt and Ethiopia.
Isaiah 20:4 For euen thus shall the kinge of the Assirians dryue bothe younge & olde, as presonners naked and barefote, oute of Egipte and Ethiopia. And shall discouer the shame of Egipt.
Isaiah 20:5 They shalbe also at their wittes ende, and ashamed one of another: the Egipcians of the Morians, and the Morians of the Egipcians, at the syght of their glorye.
Isaiah 20:6 Moreouer they that dwell in the Iles shall se euen the same daye: behold, this is our hope to whom we fled to seke helpe, that we might be delyuered from the kynge of the Assirians. How wil we escape?

CHAPTER: 21

Isaiah 21:1 Thys is the heauy burthen of the waste sea: A greuous vysion was shewed vnto me, lyke as when a storme of winde & rayn russheth in from the wildernesse that terrible land.
Isaiah 21:2 Who so may disceyue (said the voyce) let him disceyue. Who so may destroye, let him dystroye. Vp Elam, besege it O Madai, for I wyl styl al their groninges.
Isaiah 21:3 With this the raynes of my backe were full of payne: Panges came vpon me, as vpon a woman in her trauayle. When I hearde it, I was abasshed, and when I loked vp, I was afrayde.
Isaiah 21:4 Myne herte panted, I trembled for feare. The darcknesse made me fearfull in in my mynde.
Isaiah 21:5 Yea sone make ready the table (sayde this voyce) kepe the watch, eate & dryncke. Vp ye Captaynes, take you to youre shild,
Isaiah 21:6 for thus the Lorde hath charged me: go thy waye, and set a watche man, that he may tel what he seith.
Isaiah 21:7 And when he had wayted dylygentlye, he sawe two horsemen: the one rydynge vpon an Asse, the other vpon a Camel.
Isaiah 21:8 And the lyon cryed: Lorde, I haue stande waytynge all the whole daye, and haue kepte my watch all the night.
Isaiah 21:9 Wyth that came there one rydinge vpon a charet, whyche answered, and sayde: Babilon is fallen, she is turned vp syde doune and al the ymages of her Godes are smytten to the grounde.
Isaiah 21:10 This (O my felowe thresshers and fanners) haue I hearde of the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel, to shewe it vnto you.
Isaiah 21:11 The heauy burthen of Duma. One of Seir cryed vnto me: Watche man what hast thou espyed by nyght, whatcheman what hast thou espyed by nyght.
Isaiah 21:12 The watchman answered: The daye breaketh on, and the nyght is commyng: Yf youre request be earnest, then aske and come agayne.
Isaiah 21:13 The heauy burthen of Arabia. At euen ye shall abyde in the wood, in the way toward Dedanim.
Isaiah 21:14 Mete the thursty wt water (O ye cytesins of Hema) mete those wt bread that are fled.
Isaiah 21:15 For they shal runne away from the weapen, from the drawen swearde, from the bent bowe, and from the greate battel.
Isaiah 21:16 For thus hath the Lorde spoken vnto me: ouer a yeare shall all the power of Cedar be gone, lyke as when the offyce of an hyred seruaunt goeth oute.
Isaiah 21:17 And the remnaunte of the good Arthers of Cedar, shalbe very fewe: For the Lorde God of Israel hath spoken it.

CHAPTER: 22

Isaiah 22:1 The heauy burthen vpon the valley of vysyons. What haste thou there to do, that thou clymmest vp into the house toppe,
Isaiah 22:2 O thou cytye of miracles, sedycyous and wylfull seynge, thy slayne men are neyther kylled wyth swearde, nor deade in battell.
Isaiah 22:3 For all thy captaynes gat them to their horses from their ordinaunce, yea they are all together ridden awaye, & fled farre of.
Isaiah 22:4 When I perceyued that, I sayde: awaye from me, that I may wepe bitterly. Take no laboure for to comforte me, as thouchinge the destruccion of my people.
Isaiah 22:5 For this is the daye of the lord of hostes, wherin he will plage, treade doune, & wede out the valleye of visions, and breake doune the walles with suche a cracke, that it shal geue a sounde in the mountaynes.
Isaiah 22:6 I sawe the Elamites take the quyuers to carte and to horse, and that the walles were bare from harnesse.
Isaiah 22:7 Thy goodly valleys were ful of charettes, the horse men made them sone to besege the gates.
Isaiah 22:8 Then was the couerynge of Iuda put from thence, and then was sene the sege of the tymbre house.
Isaiah 22:9 There shall ye se the ryftes in the walles of the cyty of Dauid, whereof there shalbe many. Ye shall gather together the waters of the lower pole,
Isaiah 22:10 and tell the houses of Ierusalem, and breake of some of them to kepe the walles.
Isaiah 22:11 And ye shal make a pyt betwyxte the two walles of the water of the old pole, and nothing regard him, that toke it in hande, & made it.
Isaiah 22:12 And at the same tyme shall the Lorde of Hostes call men to wepinge, mourninge, to baldnesse & puttynge on of sacke clothe.
Isaiah 22:13 But they to fulfil their lust and wilfulnes, slaughter oxen: they kyll shepe, they eate costly meate, and drincke wyne, let vs eate and drincke, to morow we shall dye.
Isaiah 22:14 Neuerthelesse when the Lorde of Hostes hearde of it, he sayde: yea, yf this wyckednes of yours shalbe remytted, ye must dye for it. This hathe the Lorde of Hostes spoken.
Isaiah 22:15 Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Hostes: Go into the treasury vnto Sobna the gouernoure, & saye vnto him:
Isaiah 22:16 What hast thou here to do, & from whence comest thou? that thou hast made the a graue here? For he had caused a costly tombe of stone to be made for him selfe, & a place to lye into be hewen out of a rocke.
Isaiah 22:17 Beholde, the Lorde shal cast the out by violence, he wyl deck the of another fashyon, & put vpon the a straunge cloth.
Isaiah 22:18 He shall carye the into a farre countre, lyke a ball with hys handes. There shalt thou dye, there shal the pompe of thy charettes haue an ende: thou villeyne of the house of the Lorde:
Isaiah 22:19 I wyl shut the oute of thyne offyce, and put the from thine estate.
Isaiah 22:20 After this wil I cal my seruaunt Eliakim, the sonne of Helkiah,
Isaiah 22:21 & aray with him thy cote & gyrde him with the gyrdle, & I wil geue thy power into his hande. He shalbe a father of the cytesins of Ierusalem and of the kinred of Iuda:
Isaiah 22:22 I will also laye the keye of Dauids house vpon his shoulders, & yf he open, noman shall shut: and yf he do shut, noman shal open.
Isaiah 22:23 I wyl fasten him to a nayle in the place of the moost hye faithfulnesse, and he shalbe vpon the glorious trone of his fathers house.
Isaiah 22:24 They shall hange vpon him all the glorie of his fathers house, of the children and childers children, al apparel small and great, al instrumentes of measure & musike.
Isaiah 22:25 This shal come to passe (sayeth the Lorde of Hostes) when the nayle that is fastened to the place of the highest faythfulnesse, shalbe pluckt of. And when the weyght that hangeth vpon it, shall fal, be broken, and hewen in peces. For the Lorde hym selfe hath sayde it.

CHAPTER: 23

Isaiah 23:1 An heauy burthen vpon Tyrus. Mourne ye shippes of Tarsis, for she is throwen doune to the grounde, and conquered of them that are come from Cethim.
Isaiah 23:2 The in dwellers of the Ilandes, the marchauntes of Sidon, & they that occupied the sea (of whom thou wast full sometyme) are at a poynt.
Isaiah 23:3 For by sea were there frutes brought vnto the, & all maner of corne by water. Thou wast the romen market of all people.
Isaiah 23:4 Sidon is sorye for it, yea and all the power of the sea complaineth, and sayeth: O that I had neuer trauayled with child, that I had neuer borne any that I had neither norished boye, nor brought vp doughter.
Isaiah 23:5 As sone as Egipte perceyueth it, she wilbe as sory as Tirus it selfe.
Isaiah 23:6 Go ouer the sea, mourne ye that dwel in the Iles.
Isaiah 23:7 Is not that the glorious cytye, whiche hath bene of longe antiquitie? whose natiues dwelling farre of, commende her so greatly?
Isaiah 23:8 Who hath deuysed suche thinges vpon Tirus the croune of al cities, whose marchauntes and captaines were the highest & principal of the world?
Isaiah 23:9 Euen the Lord of Hostes hath deuysed it, that he may put doune al pompe, & minish al the glory of the worlde.
Isaiah 23:10 Go thorowe thy land (O thou doughter of the sea) as men go ouer the water, and there is not a gyrdle more.
Isaiah 23:11 Thus the Lord hath remoueth the kyngedomes, & hathe taken inhande agaynste that mighty Canaan to rote it out: hath stretched oute his hande ouer the sea,
Isaiah 23:12 and saide: From henceforth shalt thou make no more myrthe, O thou doughter of Sidon: for thou shalt be put doune of the Cethens. Stand vp therfore and go where the enemy will cary the, where thou shalt also haue no reste.
Isaiah 23:13 Beholde (for thine ensample) The Chaldees were suche a people, that no man was like them, Assur builded them: he set vp his castels and palaces, & broke them doune agayn.
Isaiah 23:14 And therfore mourne (ye shippes of the sea) for youre power shalbe throwne doune.
Isaiah 23:15 After that, shall the .lxx. yeares of Tyrus (euen as longe as their kinges lyfe was) be forgotten. And after .lxx. yeares, it shall happen to Tirus as with an harlot that playeth vpon a lute.
Isaiah 23:16 Take the lute (saye men to her) and go aboute the citie, thou art yet an vnknowne whence, make pastyme wyth dyuerse balettes, wherby thou mayest come into acquayntaunce.
Isaiah 23:17 Thus shall it happen after .lxx. yeares. The Lorde shall vyset the cytye of Tyrus, and it shall come agayne to her marchaundyse, and shal occupye with all the kingedomes that be in the worlde.
Isaiah 23:18 But al her occupyinge and winninge shalbe halowed vnto the Lorde. For then shal they laye vp nothinge behind them, nor vpon heapes: but the marchaundyse of Tyrus shall belong vnto the cytesins of the Lorde, to the feadynge and susteninge of the hungrye, and to the clothinge of the aged.

CHAPTER: 24

Isaiah 24:1 Beholde, the Lorde shal waste & plage the worlde, he shal make the face of the earthe desolate, & scatre abroade the inhabitoures therof.
Isaiah 24:2 Then shal the pryeste be as the people, the mayster as the seruaunt, the dame lyke the mayde, the seller lyke the byer he that lendeth vpon vsurye, lyke vnto him that boroweth vpon vsury, the creditoure, as the detter.
Isaiah 24:3 Yea miserably shall the worlde be wasted & clean destroied. For the Lorde hath so determed in him selfe.
Isaiah 24:4 The earth shalbe heauy & decay. The face of the earth shal perishe & fal awaye, the proude people of the worlde shal come to naught.
Isaiah 24:5 For the earth is corrupt of her indwellers. For why? they haue offended the law chaunged the ordynaunces, & made the euerlasting testament of none effecte.
Isaiah 24:6 And therfore shall the course deuoure the earth: for they that dwel theron haue sinned, wherfore they shal be brent also, and those that remaine shalbe very few.
Isaiah 24:7 The swete wyne shal mourne, the grapes shalbe weake, and al that haue bene mery in harte, shall sighe.
Isaiah 24:8 The myrth of tabrettes shalbe layde doune, the chere of the ioyfull shall cease & the pleasure of lutes shal haue an ende
Isaiah 24:9 there shal no more wyne be droncke wyth myrth, the beere shalbe bytter to them that dryncke it,
Isaiah 24:10 the wicked cytyes shalbe broken donne, al houses shalbe shut, that no man maye come in.
Isaiah 24:11 In the stretes shall there be lyft vp a crye because of wine, al mens chere shall vanyshe awaye & al ioye of the earth shal passe.
Isaiah 24:12 Desolacion shal remayne in the cytyes, and the gates shalbe smytten wyth wastnesse.
Isaiah 24:13 For it shall happen vnto al landes & to all people, lyke as when a man smyteth donne the olyues, that are left vpon the tree: or seketh after grapes, when the wyne gatherynge is oute.
Isaiah 24:14 And those same (that remayne) shall lyft vp their voyce, and be glad, & shal magnifye the glorye of the Lord, euen from the sea,
Isaiah 24:15 & praise the name of the Lorde God of Israel, in the valeys, and Ilandes.
Isaiah 24:16 We heare sunges sung to the prayse of the righteous, from al the endes of the worlde. Therefore I must speake: O myne vnfrutefulnesse, O my pouerte. Wo is me, all is full of synners, whiche offende of purpose and malice.
Isaiah 24:17 And therfore (O thou that dwellest vpon the earth) there is at hand for the, feare, pyt and snare.
Isaiah 24:18 Who so escapeth the terrible crye, shal fal into the pyt. And yf he come out of the pit, he shalbe taken with the snare. For the wyndowes aboue shalbe opened, and the foundacion of the earth shall moue.
Isaiah 24:19 The earthe shall geue a greate cracke, it shall haue a sore ruyne, & taken an horrible fall.
Isaiah 24:20 The earth shal stacker lyke a drocken man, & be taken awaye like a tente. Her mysdedes shal lie so heauy vpon her, that she must fal, and neuer ryse vp agayne.
Isaiah 24:21 At the same tyme shall the Lorde mustre together the hye hooste aboue, and the kynges of the worlde vpon the earth.
Isaiah 24:22 These shalbe coupled together as prysoners be, and shalbe shut in one ward and punished innumerable daies.
Isaiah 24:23 The Mone and the Sunne shalbe ashamed, when the Lorde of Bostes shall rule them at Ierusalem vpon the mount Sion, before and wyth his excellent councel.

CHAPTER: 25

Isaiah 25:1 O Lorde, thou arte my God, I wil praise the, & magnifie thy name. For thou bryngest maruelous thinges to passe, accordinge to thyne olde councels, truly & stedfastly.
Isaiah 25:2 Thou makest of townes, heapes of stone, and of head cities, broken walles: The palaces of the wicked destroyest thou out of the citie that they shal neuer be buylded again.
Isaiah 25:3 Therfore the very rude people must magnifie the, & the cities of the cruel Heathen muste feare the.
Isaiah 25:4 For thou art the poore mans helpe, a strength for the neadful in his necessyte. Thou art a defence against euyll wether, a shadow agaynst the hete. But vnto the presumptuous, thou art lyke a stronge whyrle wynde, that casteth doune
Isaiah 25:5 the boastynge of the vngodly: thou kepest men from heate, wt the shadow of the cloudes, thou cuttest of the braunches of tyrauntes.
Isaiah 25:6 Moreouer the Lorde of Hostes shall ones prepare a feaste, for all people vpon the hyll: A plenteous, costly, pleasaunt feaste, of fat & wel fede beastes, of swete & most pure thinges.
Isaiah 25:7 Vpon the hil shal he take away the side vale that hangeth before the face of al people and the couerynge wherwith al Gentiles are couered.
Isaiah 25:8 As for death, he shal vtterly consume it. The Lord God shall wype awaye teares from all faces, & take away the confusion of his people thorow the whole worlde. For the lord hym selfe hath sayde it.
Isaiah 25:9 At the same tyme shall it be sayde: lo, thys is oure God in whom we put oure trust, and he hath healed vs. This is the Lorde that we haue wayted for. Let vs reioyse and delyte in hys health.
Isaiah 25:10 For the hand of the Lorde ceaseth vpon thys hyll. But Moab shalbe thresshen doune vnder him, lyke sa the straw is troden vnder fete in a donge hill.
Isaiah 25:11 For he shal stretche out his handes vpon him, lyke as a swimmer doth to swimme. And with the power of his handes shal he rast doune his hye pompe.
Isaiah 25:12 As for his strong holdes and hye walles: he shal bowe them, that cast them doune, & fel them to the grounde into dust.

CHAPTER: 26

Isaiah 26:1 Then shal thys songe be sung in the lande of Iuda. We haue a stronge cyty, the walles and the ordynaunce shal kepe vs.
Isaiah 26:2 Open the gates, that the good people maye go in, whiche laboureth for the truthe.
Isaiah 26:3 And thou, whiche art the doar & hast the matter in hand, shalt prouyde for peace, euen the peace that men hope for in the.
Isaiah 26:4 Hope styl in the lord for in the Lorde God is euerlastyng strength.
Isaiah 26:5 For why, it is he, that bringeth low the hye mynded citesins, & casteth doune the proude cytyes. He casteth them to the grounde, yea euen into myre that they may be troden
Isaiah 26:6 vnder the fete of the symple, and wyth the steppes of the poore.
Isaiah 26:7 Thou (Lorde) consydrest the path of the ryghteous, whether it be ryghte, whether the waye of the ryghteous be ryght.
Isaiah 26:8 Therfore (Lorde) we haue a respecte vnto the waye of thy iudgementes, thy name & thy remembraunce reioyse thy soule.
Isaiah 26:9 My soule lusteth after the all the nyght longe, and my mynde hasteth frely to the. For as soone as thy iudgemente is knowne to the worlde, then the inhabytours of the earth learne rightuousnesse.
Isaiah 26:10 But the vngodly (though he haue receyued grace) yet lerneth he not ryghtuousnesse, but in the place where he is punished, he offendeth, & feareth not the glorye of the Lorde.
Isaiah 26:11 Lorde, they wyll not se thyne hye hande, but they shall se it, and be confounded: when thou shalte deuoure them with the wrathe of the people, & wyth the fyre of thyue enemyes.
Isaiah 26:12 But vnto vs, O Lorde, prouyde for peace: for thou worckest in vs all oure worckes.
Isaiah 26:13 O Lord oure God thoughe soith Lordes haue domynacyon vpon vs as knowe not the: yet graunt that we maye hope onelye in the, and kepe thy name in remembraunce.
Isaiah 26:14 The malycyous Tyrauntes when they dye, are nether in lyfe nor in the resurreccyon, for thou vysytest them and rootest them oute, and destroyest all the memory all of them.
Isaiah 26:15 Agayne, thou increaceste the people, O Lorde, thou increaceste the people, thou shalte be praysed and magnyfyed in all the endes of the worlde.
Isaiah 26:16 The people that seke vnto the in trouble, that same aduersite which they complayne of is vnto them a chastening before the.
Isaiah 26:17 Lyke as a wyfe wyth chylde (when her trauyle commeth vpon her) is ashamed, cryeth and suffreth the payne: Euen so are we O Lorde, in thy sight.
Isaiah 26:18 We are with chyld, we trauyle, & beare, & with the spryte we bring forth healthe, where thorowe the earth is vndestroyed, and the inhabytours of the worlde perysh not.
Isaiah 26:19 But as for thy dead men and oures, that be departed, they are in lyfe and resurreccion. They lye in the earthe, they wake, & haue ioy: for thy dewe is a dew of lyfe and light. But the place of the malycyous Tyrauntes is fallen awaye.
Isaiah 26:20 So go now my people into thy chambre, & shut the dore to the, and suffre now the twincklynge of an eye, tyll the wrathe be ouerpaste.
Isaiah 26:21 For beholde, the Lorde wyl go out of his habitacyon, and vpset the wyckednesse of them that dwell vpon earthe. He wyl dyscouer the bloud that she hath deuoured, she shal neuer hyde them, that she hath murthered.

CHAPTER: 27

Isaiah 27:1 Then the Lorde with his heauye, great, & longe swerd shall vyset Leuyathan that inuyncible serpent: euen Leuiathan that croked serpent & shall slaye the whalfysh in the sea.
Isaiah 27:2 At the same tyme shal men synge of the vyneyarde of Muscatel.
Isaiah 27:3 I the Lorde kepe it, and water in it due ceason. I watche daye and nyght, that no man breake into it. I beare no euil wil in my mynd.
Isaiah 27:4 Who wyll compell me, that I greatly forgettynge all faythfulnesse, shulde burne it vp at ones with thornes & bushes?
Isaiah 27:5 Or who wyll enforce me to kepe or make peace.
Isaiah 27:6 It wyll come to thys poynte, that Iacob shalbe roted agayne, & Israel shallbe grene, and beare floures, and they shall fyll the whole worlde with theyr frute.
Isaiah 27:7 Smyteth he not hys smyter, as euyl as he is smyten him selfe: Destroyeth he not the murtherers, as he is murthered?
Isaiah 27:8 Euery man recompenseth with the measure that he receyueth: He museth vpon hys sore wynde, as vpon the dayes of extreame heate.
Isaiah 27:9 And therfor shall the iniquite of Iacob be thus reconcyled. And so shall he take away all the frute of hys sinnes. As for aulter stones, he shall make them all as stones beaten to poulder: the groues & Idols shall not stande.
Isaiah 27:10 The stronge cytyes shalbe desolate, & the fayre cytyes shalbe lefte lyke a wyldernes. The cattell shall fede and lye there, & the shepe shall eate it vp.
Isaiah 27:11 Theyr haruest shalbe brente, theyr wyues which were theyr bewtye when they came forth: shalbe defyled. For it is a people wythout vnderstandynge, & therfore he that created them, shall not fauoure them, and he that made them shal not be mercyful to them.
Isaiah 27:12 In that time shal the Lorde shute from the swyfte water of Euphrates, vnto the ryuer of Egypte. And there shal the chyldren be chosen oute one by one.
Isaiah 27:13 Then shall the greate trompette be blowen, so that those whiche haue bene destroyed in the Assyryans lande, and those that be scatred abroad in Egypte: shall come and worshyppe the Lord at Ierusalem, vpon the holy mount.

CHAPTER: 28

Isaiah 28:1 Wo be to the croune of pryde, to the droncken Ephraemytes, & to the faydynge floure, to the glorye of hys pompe, that is vpon the toppe of the plenteous valleye: whiche men be ouerladen with wine.
Isaiah 28:2 Beholde, the strength and power of the Lord shall breake into the lande on euerye syde, like a tempest of hayle, that beareth doune strong holdes, and lyke an horryble, myghty & ouerflowynge water.
Isaiah 28:3 And the proude croune of the droncken Ephraemytes, shalbe troden vnder fote.
Isaiah 28:4 And as for the faydynge floure, the glory of hys pompe, whiche is vpon the toppe of the plenteous valleye: it shall happen vnto hym, as to an vntymelye frute before the harueste come. Which as soone as it is sene, is by and by deuoured, or euer it come well in a mans hande.
Isaiah 28:5 And then shall the Lorde of Hostes be a ioyfull croune, and a gloryous garlande vnto the remnaunt of hys people.
Isaiah 28:6 Vnto the lowly, he shalbe a sprete of iudgement, and vnto them that dryue away the enemyes from the gates he shalbe a spryte of strength.
Isaiah 28:7 But they go wronge by the reason of wyne, they fall and stacker because of stronge drincke. Yea euen the Priestes and Prophetes them selues go amysse, they are droncken with wyne, & weake brayned thorowe stronge drincke. They erre in seynge, and in iudgemente they fayle.
Isaiah 28:8 For all tables are so full of vomyte and fylthynes, that no place is cleane.
Isaiah 28:9 What is he amonge them, that can teache, instructe or enfourme the chyldren, whiche are wened from sucke or taken from the brestes: of anye other fashyon then:
Isaiah 28:10 Commaunde that maye be commaunded, byd that maye be bydden, forbidde that maye be forbidden, kepe backe that maye be kepte backe, here a lytle, there a lytle.
Isaiah 28:11 And therfore the Lorde also shall speake wyth lispynge lippes and with a straunge language vnto this people to whome he spake afore of thys maner.
Isaiah 28:12 This shall bringe reste, yf one refreshe the weerye, ye this shall bringe reste. But they had no will to heare.
Isaiah 28:13 And therfore the Lorde shall aunswere theyr stubbournes (Commaunde that maye be commaunded, byd that may be bidden, forbid that may be forbidden, kepe backe that maye be kept backe, here a lytle, there a lytle) That they maye go forth fall back warde, be brosed, snared and taken.
Isaiah 28:14 Wherfore heare the worde of the Lorde, ye mockers that rule the Lordes people, whiche is at Ierusalem.
Isaiah 28:15 For ye comforte youre selues thus: Tushe, death & we are at a poynte, and as for hell, we haue made a condicyon with it, that thoughe there breake out anye sore plage it shall not come vpon vs. For wyth disceyte wyll we escape, and with nymblenes wil we defende oure selues.
Isaiah 28:16 Therfore sayth the Lorde God: Beholde, I wyll laye a stone in Syon a great stone, a costly corner stone for a sure foundacyon: that who so putteth hys truste in hym, shall not be confounded.
Isaiah 28:17 Ryghtuousnes will I set vp agayne in the balaunce, and iudgement in the weyghtes. The tempeste of haile shall take awaye your refuge, that ye haue to disceyue wythall, & the ouerflowynge waters shall breake doune youre stronge holdes of dyssimulacion:
Isaiah 28:18 Thus the appoyntmente that ye haue made with deathe, shalbe done away and the condition that ye made with hell, shal not stande. When the great destruccyon goeth thorowe, it shal all to treade you. It shal take you quyte away before it.
Isaiah 28:19 For it shal go forth earlye in the mornynge, and contynue onelye that daye & that nighte. And the very feare only shall teache you, when ye heare it.
Isaiah 28:20 For the bedde shall be so narrowe that a man can not lye vpon it: And the coueryng to small, that a man maye not wynde hym selfe therein.
Isaiah 28:21 For the Lorde shall steppe forthe as he dyd vpon the mounte Perazim, and shall take on as he dyd vpon the dale of Gabaon: that he maye bryng forthe his deuyce his straunge deuyce: and fulfyll hys worcke, hys wonderful worcke.
Isaiah 28:22 And therfore make no mockes at it, that youre captiuite increase not: for I haue hearde the Lorde of Hostes saye, that there shall come a soden destruccyon & plage vpon the whole earthe.
Isaiah 28:23 Take hede, and heare my voyce, pondre and marcke my wordes well.
Isaiah 28:24 Goeth not the housbande man euer in due season earnestlye to hys lande: he moweth and ploweth hys grounde to sowe.
Isaiah 28:25 And when he hath made it playne, he soweth it wyth fetches or comyn. He soweth the wheate & Barlye in theyr place, Mylyum and Rye also in theyr place.
Isaiah 28:26 And that he maye do it ryght, hys God teacheth hym and sheweth hym.
Isaiah 28:27 For he treadeth not the fytches oute wyth a wayne, neyther bringeth he the carte here & there ouer the comyn, but he tresseth the fitches out with a flayle, and the comyn with a rod.
Isaiah 28:28 As for the wheate he gryndeth it to make breade thereof In as muche as he can not brynge it to passe with treadynge oute. For nether the brosyng that the carte wheles make, nor hys beastes can grynde it.
Isaiah 28:29 This and suche lyke thynges come of the Lorde of Hostes whiche is maruelous in councell, and greate in ryghtuousnesse.

CHAPTER: 29

Isaiah 29:1 Wo be vnto the O Ariel, thou citye that Dauid wanne. Take yet some years, & let some feastes yet passe ouer:
Isaiah 29:2 then shall Ariel be beseged, so that she shall be heuy and sorowfull, & shall be vnto me euen as a lyon.
Isaiah 29:3 For I will laye sege to the rounde aboute, & kepe the in with towers, and graue vp dykes against the.
Isaiah 29:4 And thou shalte be brought lowe, and speake oute of the earth and thy wordes shall go humbly oute of the grounde.
Isaiah 29:5 Thy voyce shall come oute of the earthe, lyke the voyce of a witch, and thy talkynge shall grone oute of the myre. For the multytude of thyne enemyes shalbe lyke mealduste. And the nombre of Tyrauntes shalbe as the duste that the wynde taketh awaye sodenlye.
Isaiah 29:6 Thou shalte be vysyted of the Lorde of hostes with thondre, earthequake, & wyth a greate crack, with the whyrle wynde, tempeste, & with the flamme of a consumynge fyre.
Isaiah 29:7 But nowe the multytude of all the people, that wente oute agaynste Ariel: the whole hoste, the stronge holdes and sege, is lyke a breame whiche appeareth in the nyghte.
Isaiah 29:8 It is lyke as when an hungrye man dreameth that he is eatynge, and when he awaketh, he hath nothynge: lyke as when a thyrstye man dreameth that he is drinckynge, and when he awaketh, he is faynte, and hys soule vnpacyent. So is the multitude of all people that mustre them selues agaynste the hyll of Syon.
Isaiah 29:9 But ye shalbe at youre wyttes ende, ye shall be abashed, ye shall stackre, and rele to & fro. Ye shalbe droncken, but not of wyne. Ye shall fall, but not thorowe dronckennes.
Isaiah 29:10 For the Lorde shall geue you an harde slepynge spryte, and holde doune youre eyes: namelye youre Prophetes and heades which shuld se, them shall he couer.
Isaiah 29:11 And all vysyons shalbe vnto you, as the wordes that stande in a sealed lettre, when one offereth it to a man that is learned, and sayeth: reade vs thys lettre. Then he aunswereth: I cannot read it, for it is shut.
Isaiah 29:12 But yf it be geuen to one that is not learned, or sayd vnto him: reade this lettre: Then saith he: I can not reade.
Isaiah 29:13 Therfor thus sayth the Lord: For so much as thys people draweth nye me with theyr mouthe, and prayseth me hyghlye wyth theyr lyppes (where as theyr herte neuerthelesse is farre from me, & the feare which they owe vnto me, that turne they to mens lawes and doctrynes)
Isaiah 29:14 therfore will I also shewe vnto thys people a maruelous, terryble, and great thing (Namelye thys:) I wyll destroye the wysdom of theyr wyse, & the vnderstandynge of theyr learned men shall peryshe.
Isaiah 29:15 Wo be vnto them that seke to depe, to hyde theyr ymagynacion before the Lorde, which reherse theyr councels in the darcknes, & saye: who seyth vs, or who knoweth vs?
Isaiah 29:16 Whiche ymagynacyon of yours is euen as when the potters clay taketh aduysemente, as thoughe the worcke myghte saye to the worckemaister: make me not, or as when an earthen vessell sayeth of the potter: he vnderstandeth not.
Isaiah 29:17 Se ye not that it is harde by, that Lybanus shalbe turned into Charmell, and that Charmell shalbe taken as a woode?
Isaiah 29:18 Then shall deaf men vnderstande the wordes of the boke, and the eyes of the blynd shall se wythoute anye cloude or darckenes.
Isaiah 29:19 The oppressed shall holde a merye feaste in the Lorde, and the poore people shall reioyse in the holye one of Israell.
Isaiah 29:20 Then shall the furyous people ceasse, and the mockers shalbe put awaye, and all they that do wronge shalbe plucked oute,
Isaiah 29:21 suche as laboure to drawe men vnto synne: & that dysceyue hym, whiche reproueth them in the gate, and such as turne good personnes to vanite.
Isaiah 29:22 And therfore the Lord (euen the defender of Abraham) sayeth thus vnto the house of Iacob: Now shall not Iacob be ashamed, nor hys face confounded,
Isaiah 29:23 when he seyth amonge hys children (whome my handes haue made) suche as halowe my name amonge them: that they maye sanctyfye the holye one of Iacob, and feare the God of Israell:
Isaiah 29:24 and that they which afore tyme were of an erroneous sprite haue nowe vnderstandynge, and that such as before coulde not speake, are nowe learned in my lawe.

CHAPTER: 30

Isaiah 30:1 Wo be to those shrynkynge children (sayeth the Lorde) whiche seke councell, but not at me: whiche take a webbe in hande but not after my wil: that they may heape one synne vpon another.
Isaiah 30:2 They go doune into Egypte (and aske me no councell) to seke helpe at the power of Pharao, and comforte in the shadowe of the Egypcians.
Isaiah 30:3 But Pharaos helpe shalbe youre confusyon, & the comfort in the Egypcyans shadowe shalbe your owne shame.
Isaiah 30:4 Youre rulers haue bene at Zoan, and youre messaungers came vnto Hanes.
Isaiah 30:5 But ye shall al be ashamed of the people that maye not helpe you, whiche shall not brynge you strength or comforte, but shame and confusyon.
Isaiah 30:6 Youre beastes haue borne burthens vpon theyr backes towarde the Southe, thorow the way that is full of parell and trouble, because of the lyon & lyones, of the Cockatryce & shutynge dragon. Yea the Mules bare youre substaunce, & the Camels brought your treasure vpon their croked backes, vnto a people that can not helpe you.
Isaiah 30:7 For the Egipcians helpe shalbe but vayne and lost. Therfore I tolde you also, that your pryde shulde haue an end.
Isaiah 30:8 Wherfore go hence, and wryte them thys in theyr tables, & note it in a boke: that it may remayne by theyr posteryte, & be styll kept.
Isaiah 30:9 For it is an obstynate people, vnfaythful children children that will not heare the lawe of the Lord.
Isaiah 30:10 They darre saye to the Prophetes: Intromytte youre selues with nothynge, and vnto the Sothsayers: tell vs of nothynge for to come, but speake frendlye wordes vnto vs, & preache vs false thinges.
Isaiah 30:11 Treade oute of the waye, go out of the path, turne the holye one of Israel from vs.
Isaiah 30:12 Therfore thus sayeth the holye one of Israel: In as muche as ye haue caste of youre bewtye, and comforted youre selues with power and nymblenesse, and put youre confidence therin:
Isaiah 30:13 therfore shal ye haue this myschefe agayne for youre destruccyon and fall, lyke as an hye wall, that falleth because of some ryft (or blast) whose breakynge cometh sodenly.
Isaiah 30:14 And youre destruccyon shalbe lyke as an earthen pot, whiche breaketh no man touching it, yea and breaketh so sore, that a man shall not fynde a sheuer of it to fetche fyre in, or to take water wyth all oute of the pyt.
Isaiah 30:15 For the Lorde God, euen the holy one of Israell hath promysed thus: Wyth styll syttynge and rest shall ye be healed, in quyetnesse & hope shall youre strength lye.
Isaiah 30:16 Notwithstandynge ye regarde it not, but ye wyll saye: No, for thus are we constrayned to fle vpon horses. And therfore shall ye fle, we muste ryde vpon swift beastes, and therfore youre persecutours shal yet be swyfter.
Isaiah 30:17 A thousand of you shall fle for one, or at the moste for fyue, whiche do but only geue you euyll wordes? vntyll ye be desolate, as a shyp mast vpon an hye mountayne, and as a beaken vpon on hyll.
Isaiah 30:18 Yet standeth the Lorde waytynge, that he maye haue mercye vpon you, and lyfteth hym selfe vp, that he maye receyue you to grace. For the Lorde God is ryghtuous. Happy are all they that wayte for him.
Isaiah 30:19 For thus (O thou people of Syon and ye citisens of Ierusalem) shall ye neuer be in heauynes, for doutlesse he wyll haue mercy vpon the. As sone as he heareth the voyce of thy crye, he wyl helpe the.
Isaiah 30:20 The Lorde geueth you the bread of aduersite, and the water of trouble. But thyne instructer flyeth not farre from the, yf thyne eyes loke vnto thyne instructer,
Isaiah 30:21 and thyne eares harken to his worde, that cryeth after the, and sayeth: thys is the waye, go thys, and turne neyther to the right hande nor to the lefte.
Isaiah 30:22 Moreouer yf ye destroye the syluer worckes of youre Idoles, and caste awaye the golden coppes that ye deckte them wythall (as fylthynes) & saye get you hence:
Isaiah 30:23 Then wyll he geue rayne to the sede that ye shall sowe in the earthe, and geue you bread of the encrease of the earthe, so that all shalbe plentuous and aboundaunt. Thy cattel also shall he fede in the brode medowes,
Isaiah 30:24 yea thyne oxen & Mules that tyll the grounde, shall eate good fodder, which is purged with the fanne.
Isaiah 30:25 Goodly ryuers shall flowe out of all hys mountaynes and hylles. In the daye of the greate slaughter when the towers shall fall,
Isaiah 30:26 the mone shall shyne as the sunne, and the sunne shyne shalbe seuen folde, and haue as much shyne, as in seuen dayes besyde. In that daye shall the Lorde bynde vp the brosed sores of hys people, and heale theyr woundes.
Isaiah 30:27 Beholde the glory of the Lord shal come from farre, hys face shal burne, that no man shalbe able to abyde it, hys lyppes shall wagge for verye indignacyon, and hys tonge shalbe as a consumynge fyre.
Isaiah 30:28 His breath like a vehement floude of water, whiche goeth vp to the throte. That he may take away the people, whiche haue turned them selues vnto vanite, and the brydle of erroure, that lyeth in other folkes chawes.
Isaiah 30:29 But ye shall synge, as the vse is in the night of the holy solempnyte. Ye shall reioyse from youre herte, as they that come with the pype, when they go vp to the mounte of the Lorde, vnto the rocke of Israel.
Isaiah 30:30 The Lorde also shall set vp the power of his voyce, and declare his terryble arme, wyth hys angry countenaunce yea and the flamme of the consumynge fyre, with earthquake, tempest of wynde, and haile stones.
Isaiah 30:31 Then shall the Assyryans feare also, because of the voyce of the Lorde, which shall smyte him with the rodde.
Isaiah 30:32 And the same rodde which the Lorde wil sende vpon hym, shall moue the whole foundacyon with trompet, with noyse of warre and battell to destroye.
Isaiah 30:33 For he hath prepared the fyre of payne from the begynnynge, yea euen for Kynges also. This hath he made depe & wyde, the noryshing thereof is fyre & woode innumerable, whiche the breathe of the Lorde kyndleth, as it were a matche of brymstone.

CHAPTER: 31

Isaiah 31:1 Wo be vnto them that go doune into Egypte for help, and trust in horses, & comforte themselues in charettes, because they be many, & in horse men because they be lusty & strong. But they regarde not the holy one of Israel, and they aske no question at the Lorde.
Isaiah 31:2 Where as he neuertheles plageth the wicked, and yet goeth not from hys word when he steppeth forthe, and taketh the victory agaynste the housholde of the frowarde, & agaynste the helpe of euyll doars.
Isaiah 31:3 Nowe the Egypcyans are men, and not God, and theyr horses fleshe and not sprete. And as soone as the Lorde stretched oute his hande, then shall the helper fall, and he that shuld haue ben helped, and shall all together be destroyed.
Isaiah 31:4 For thus hath the Lorde spoken vnto me: Lyke as the lyon or lyons whelpe roareth vpon the praye that he hath gotten, and is not afrayed, thoughe the multitude of shepardes crye oute vpon hym, nether abashed for all the heape of them: So shal the Lord of Hostes come doune from the mounte of Sion, and defend his hil.
Isaiah 31:5 Lyke as the brydes flotre about theyr nestes, so shall the Lord of Hostes, kepe, saue, defend & delyuer Ierusalem.
Isaiah 31:6 Therfore, O ye children of Israel, turne agayne, lyke as ye haue exceaded in youre goynge backe.
Isaiah 31:7 For in that daye euerye man shall caste oute hys Idols of syluer and gold, which ye haue made with your synfull handes.
Isaiah 31:8 Assur also shalbe slayne with the swerde, not with a mans swerde. A swerd shall deuoure hym, but not a mans swerde. And he shall fle from the slaughter, and hys seruauntes shalbe taken prysoners.
Isaiah 31:9 He shall go for feare to hys stronge holdes, and hys Prynces shal fle from hys badge. Thys hath the Lorde spoken, whose lyght burneth in Syon, and hys fyre in Ierusalem.

CHAPTER: 32

Isaiah 32:1 Beholde, the kynge shal gouerne after the rule of ryghtuousnes, & the princes shal rule according to the balaunce of equyte.
Isaiah 32:2 He shalbe vnto men as a defence for the wynde, & as a refuge for the tempeste, like as a riuer of water in a thurstye place, and the shadowe of a great rocke in a drye land.
Isaiah 32:3 The eyes of the seynge shall not be dymme, & the eares of them that heare, shall take dylygente hede.
Isaiah 32:4 The herte of the vnwyse, shall attayne to knowledge, & the vnparfyte tung shal speake playnely and distinctely.
Isaiah 32:5 Then shal the nygard be no more called gentle, nor the churle liberal.
Isaiah 32:6 But the churle wyll be churlyshly mynded, & his hert wil worcke euil & playe the Ipocrite, & ymagyn abhominacyons against God, to make the hungry leane, & to withhold drincke from the thurstie.
Isaiah 32:7 These are the perlous weapons of the couetous, these be hys shamefull councels: that he maye begyle the poore with disceatfull workes, yea euen there as he shuld geue sentence with the poore.
Isaiah 32:8 But the lyberall person ymagyneth honest thynges, and commeth vp with honestye.
Isaiah 32:9 Vp (ye ryche and ydell cytyes) harken vnto my voyce. Ye carelesse cytyes, marke my wordes.
Isaiah 32:10 After yeares & dayes shal ye be broughte in feare, O ye carelesse cytyes. For Harueste shalbe oute, and the grape gatherynge shall not come.
Isaiah 32:11 O ye ryche ydell cytyes ye that feare no parell, ye shalbe abashed and remoued, when ye se the barennesse, the nakednesse and preparynge to warre.
Isaiah 32:12 Ye shall knocke vpon youre brestes, because of the pleasaunte felde, and because of the frutefull vyneyarde.
Isaiah 32:13 My peoples felde shall brynge thornes & thystels for in euerye house is voluptuousnes, and in the cytyes, wylfulnes.
Isaiah 32:14 The palaces also shalbe broken, and the greatly occupied cities desolate. The towers and bulworkes shalbe become deunes for euermore, the pleasure of Mules shalbe turned to pasture for shepe:
Isaiah 32:15 vnto the tyme that the spryte be poured vpon vs from aboue. Then shall the wyldernesse be a fruteful felde and the plenteous felde shalbe rekened for a wodde.
Isaiah 32:16 Then shall equyte dwell in the deserte, and rightuousnesse in a fruteful land.
Isaiah 32:17 And the rewarde of ryghtuousnesse shalbe peace, and her frute reste and quyetnesse for euer.
Isaiah 32:18 And my people shall dwell in the ynnes of peace, in my tabernacle and pleasure where there is ynough in them all.
Isaiah 32:19 And when the hayle falleth, it shal fal in the wodde and in the cytie.
Isaiah 32:20 O how happy shall ye be, when ye shall safely sowe youre sede besyde all waters and dryue thyther the fete of youre oxen and asses.

CHAPTER: 33

Isaiah 33:1 Therfore wo be vnto the (O robber) shalte not thou be robbed also? and vnto the that layeste wayte, as who say: there shuld no waite be layde for the: Wo vnto the whiche doest hurte, euen so shalte thou be hurte also. And as thou layest wayte, so shall waite be layde for the also.
Isaiah 33:2 Lorde be mercyful vnto vs, we wayte for the. Thyne arme is at a poynte to vyset vs, but be thou oure health in the tyme of trouble
Isaiah 33:3 Graunt that the people maye fle at the anger of thy voyce, & that at thyne vpstandynge the Gentyles maye be scatred abroade,
Isaiah 33:4 and that theyr spoyle maye be gathered, as the gresshoppers are comonly gathered together into the pyt.
Isaiah 33:5 Stande vp Lorde, thou that dwellest on hye: Let Syon be fylled wyth equyte & rightuousnesse.
Isaiah 33:6 Let trueth and faythfulnesse be in her tyme: power, health, wisdome, knowledge and the feare of God are her treasure.
Isaiah 33:7 Beholde, theyr aungels crye wythout, the messaungers of peace wepe bytterly.
Isaiah 33:8 The stretes are waste, there walketh no man therein, the appoyntment is broken, the cyties are despysed, they are not regarded,
Isaiah 33:9 the desolate earthe is in heuynes. Lybanus taketh it but for a sporte, that it is hewen doune: Saron is lyke a wyldernes: Basan and Charmel are turned vpsyde doune.
Isaiah 33:10 And therfore sayeth the Lorde. I wyll vp, now wyll I get vp, nowe wil I aryse.
Isaiah 33:11 Ye shall conceyue stubble, & bear straw, & youre sprete shall be the fyre, that it maye consume you:
Isaiah 33:12 and the people shalbe burnt like lyme, and as thornes burne that are hewen of, and caste in the fyre.
Isaiah 33:13 Now herken to, ye that are farre of, howe I do with them, & consydre my glorye, ye that be at hande.
Isaiah 33:14 The synners at Syon are afrayd a sodane fearfulnesse is come vpon the ypocrytes. What is he among vs (saye they) that will dwell by that consumynge fyre whyche of vs maye abyde that euerlastinge heate?
Isaiah 33:15 He that ledeth a godly lyfe (saye I) and speaketh the trueth: He that abhorreth to do vyolence and dysceyte: he that kepeth his hande that he touche no rewarde: which stoppeth hys eares that he heare no councel agaynste the innocent: which holdeth doune hys eyes, that he se none euyll.
Isaiah 33:16 He it is, that shall dwell on hye whose sauegarde shalbe in the true rocke, to him shal be geuen the right true meate and drincke.
Isaiah 33:17 His eyes shall se the kynge in hys glory: and in the wyde worlde,
Isaiah 33:18 and hys herte shal delyte in the feare of God. What shall then become of the scrybe? of the Senatoure what of hym that teacheth chyldren?
Isaiah 33:19 There shalt thou not se a people of a straunge tounge to haue so diffused a language, that it may not be vnderstande: neyther so straunge a speache but it shall be perceyued.
Isaiah 33:20 There shal Sion be sene, the head cytye of oure solempne feastes. There shal thyne eyes se Ierusalem that gloryous habytacyon: the tabernacle that neuer shal remoue, whose nayles shall neuer be taken oute worlde wythout ende, whose coardes euerychone shall neuer corrupte:
Isaiah 33:21 for the gloryous Magestye of the Lorde shall there be present amonge vs. In that place, where fayre broade ryuers & streames are, shall neyther Galeyrowe, nor great shyppe tayle.
Isaiah 33:22 For the Lorde shalbe oure captayne, the Lorde shalbe oure lawe geuer. The Lorde shalbe oure kynge, and he hym selfe shalbe oure sauyoure.
Isaiah 33:23 There are the coardes so layde abroade, that they cannot be better: The maste set vp of suche a fashyon, that no banner nor sayle hangeth theron: but there is dealed great spoyle, ye lame men runne after the praye.
Isaiah 33:24 There lyeth no man that sayeth: I am syck, but all euyll is taken awaye from the people, that dwell there.

CHAPTER: 34

Isaiah 34:1 Come ye Heithen & heare, take hede ye people. Herken thou earth & all that is therin: thou rounde compasse & all that groweth there vpon
Isaiah 34:2 for the Lord is angrye with all people, & hys displeasure is kindled agaynst all the multytude of them, to curse them, & to sleye them.
Isaiah 34:3 So that their slayne shalbe cast out, and their bodyes styncke: that euen the verye hilles shalbe wet with the bloude of them.
Isaiah 34:4 All the starres of heauen shalbe consumed, & the heauen shall folde together lyke a roll, & all the starres therof shal fall, lyke as the leaues fall from the vynes & fygetrees.
Isaiah 34:5 For my swearde (saieth he) shalbe bathed in heauen, and shall immediatly come downe vpon Idumea, and vpon the people which I haue cursed for my vengeance.
Isaiah 34:6 And the Lordes swearde shalbe full of bloude, and be rustye wyth the fatnesse & bloude of lambes & gootes, wyth the fatnesse of the kydneys of wethers. For the Lorde shall kyl a greate offringe in Bosra, and in the lande of Idumea.
Isaiah 34:7 There shall the Vnycornes fall with the Bulles (that is with the gyauntes) and theyr lande shalbe washed wyth bloude, and their grounde corrupte wyth fatnesse.
Isaiah 34:8 Vnto the also (O Syon) shall come the daye of the vengeaunce of God, & the yeare when thyne owne iudgmentes shalbe recompensed.
Isaiah 34:9 Thy floudes shalbe turned to pytch, and thyne earthe to brymstone, and ther wyth shall the lande be kyndled,
Isaiah 34:10 so that it shall not be quenched daye ner nyght: But smoke euermore, and so forth to lye waste. And no man shall go thorowe thy lande for euer:
Isaiah 34:11 But Pellicanes, Storkes, great Dules, and Rauens shall haue it in possessyon, and dwell therin. For God shall sprede out the lyne of desolacyon vpon it, and weye it with the stones of emptynes.
Isaiah 34:12 When kinges are called vpon there shalbe none, and all prynces shalbe awaye.
Isaiah 34:13 Thornes shall growe in their palaces, nettels and thistles in theyr stronge holdes, that the dragons maye haue their pleasure therin, and that they maye be a courte for Estriches.
Isaiah 34:14 There shall straunge visures and monstruous beastes mete one another, and the wilde kepe companye together. There shall the lamya lye, and haue her lodginge.
Isaiah 34:15 There shall the hedghoge buylde, digge, be there at home, and brynge forth hys younge ones. There shall the kytes come together, ech one to his lyke.
Isaiah 34:16 Seke thorow the scrypture of the Lorde & rede it. There shall none of these thynges be left out, there shall not one (ner soche lyke) fayle. For what his mouth commaundeth, that same doth hys sprete gather together (or fulfylleth.)
Isaiah 34:17 Vpon whom soeuer the lot falleth, or to whom he dealeth it with the lyue: those shall possesse the enheritaunce from generacyon to generacyon, and dwell therin.

CHAPTER: 35

Isaiah 35:1 Bvt the deserte & wyldernes shall reioyse, the waste ground shalbe glad, and florysh as the lylly.
Isaiah 35:2 She shall floryshe pleasauntlye, & be ioyfull, & euer be geuyng of thanckes more and more. For the glory of Libanus, the bewty of Charmel and Saron shalbe geuen her. These shall knowe the honour of the Lorde, and the magestie of oure God.
Isaiah 35:3 And therfore strengthen the weake handes, and comforte the feble knees.
Isaiah 35:4 Saye vnto them that are of a fearfull herte: Be of good there, & feare not. Beholde youre God cometh, to take vengeaunce, and to rewarde, God commeth his owne selfe, & wyll delyuer you.
Isaiah 35:5 Then shall the eyes of the blynde be lyghtened, & the eares of the deafe opened.
Isaiah 35:6 Then shall the lame man leape as an herte, and the domme mans tunge shal geue thanckes. In the wyldernesse also there shall welles spryge, and floudes of water in the deserte.
Isaiah 35:7 The drye grounde shall turne to ryuers, and the thurstye to springes of water. Where as drrgons dwelt afore, there shall growe swete floures and grene russhes.
Isaiah 35:8 There shalbe fote pathes and comen stretes, this shalbe called the holy waye. No vncleane person shall go thorow it, for the Lorde hym selfe shall go with them that waye, and the ignoraunt shall not erre,
Isaiah 35:9 There shalbe no lyon, and no rauyshynge beast shall come therin, nor be there, but men shall go there fre and safe.
Isaiah 35:10 And the redemed of the Lorde shall conuerte, and come to Syon with thankesgeuynge. Euerlastinge ioye shall they haue, pleasure and gladnesse shall be amonge them. And as for all sorowe and heuynes, it shall vanysh awaye.

CHAPTER: 36

Isaiah 36:1 In .xiiij. yeare of Kyng Hezekiah, came Sennaherib kyng of the Assyrians downe, to laye sege vnto all the stronge cyties of Iuda.
Isaiah 36:2 And the Kynge of the Assyrians sent Rabsakeh from Lachis towarde Ierusalem, agaynst Kynge Hesekiah, wyth a greuous Hoste, which set hym by the condite of the ouerpole, in the waye that goeth thorowe the fullers lande.
Isaiah 36:3 And so there came forth vnto hym Eliakim Helkiahs sonne the Presydent, Sobna the Scribe, & Ioah Asaphs sonne the Secretary.
Isaiah 36:4 And Rabsakeh sayde vnto them: Tell Hezekiah, that the greate kyng of Assyria sayeth thus vnto hym: What presumpcton is this, that thou trustest vnto?
Isaiah 36:5 Thou thinckest (peraduenture) that thou hast councell and power ynough to mayntene this warre: or els wherto trustest thou, that thou castest thy selfe of frome?
Isaiah 36:6 lo, thou puttest thy truste in a broken staffe of rede (I meane Egypte) whyche he that leaneth vpon, it goeth in to hys hande & shutteth hym thorowe. Euen so is Pharao the Kyng of Egypt, vnto all them that trust in him.
Isaiah 36:7 But yf thou woldest saye to me: we trust in the Lorde oure God: A goodlye God in dede: whose Hye places and aulters Hezekiah toke downe, & commaunded Iuda & Ierusalem, to worshyppe onely before the aulter.
Isaiah 36:8 Abyde the, thou haste made a condycyon with my lorde the kyng of the Assyrians, that he shuld geue the two thousand horses: art thou able to set men ther vp?
Isaiah 36:9 Seyng now that thou canst not resiste the power of the smallest prynce, that my Lorde hath, how darrest thou truste in the charettes and horse men of Egipt:
Isaiah 36:10 Moreouer, thinckest thou that I am come downe hether, to destroye thys lande without the Lordes wil? The Lord sayde vnto me, go downe in to the lande, that thou mayest destroye it.
Isaiah 36:11 Then sayde Eliakim, Sobua & Ioah vnto Rabsakeh: Speake to vs thy seruauntes (we praye the) in the Sirians language, for we vnderstande it well: And speake not to vs in the Iewes tonge, leste the folcke heare, whych lyeth vpon the wall.
Isaiah 36:12 Then answered Rabsakeh: Thyncke ye, that the kynge sent me to speake this only vnto you? Hath he not sent me to them also, that lye vpon the wall? that they be not compelled to eate their owne donge, and drincke theyr owne stale wyth you?
Isaiah 36:13 And Rabsakeh stode styf, and cryed with a loude voyce in the Iewes tunge: and sayd: Now take hede, how the greate kynge of the Assirians geueth you warning.
Isaiah 36:14 Thus sayeth the kynge: Let not Hezekiah disceyue you, for he shal not be able to delyuer you.
Isaiah 36:15 Moreouer let not Hezekiah conforte you in the Lorde, when he sayeth: The Lorde without doute shall defende vs, and shall not geue ouer this citie into the handes of The kynge of the Assyrians, beleue hym not.
Isaiah 36:16 But thus sayth the king of Assyria: opteyne my fauoure, enclyne to me: so maye euery man enioye his vineyardes and fygetrees, and drincke the water of hys cisterne:
Isaiah 36:17 vnto the tyme that I come my selfe, and bringe you into a lande that is like youre owne: wher in is wheate and wyne, whyche is both sowen wyth sede, and planted wyth vyneyardes.
Isaiah 36:18 Let not Hezekiah dysceyue you, when he sayeth vnto you: the Lorde shall delyuer vs? Myght the Goddes of the Gentiles kepe euery mans lande, from the power of the Kinge of the Assyrians?
Isaiah 36:19 Where is the God of Hemath and Arphad? Where is the God of Sepharnaim? And who was able to defende Samaria out of my hande?
Isaiah 36:20 Or which of all the Goddes of the landes, hath delyuered their countre out of my power, so that the Lorde shuld delyuer Ierusalem fro my hande?
Isaiah 36:21 Vnto this Hezekiahs messaungers helde their tunges, & answered not one worde: for the Kyng had charged them, that they shulde geue hym none answere.
Isaiah 36:22 So came Eliakim Helkiahs sonne the President, Sobna the Scrybe, and Ioah Asaphs sonne the Secretarye vnto Hezekiah with rente clothes, and tolde him the wordes of Rabsakeh.

CHAPTER: 37

Isaiah 37:1 When Hezekiah hearde that, he rente his clothes, and put on a sack cloth, & went into the temple of the Lorde.
Isaiah 37:2 But he sent Eliakim the Presydent, Sobna the Scrybe, wyth the eldest preastes clothed in sacke, vnto the Prophet Esay the sonne of Amoz,
Isaiah 37:3 & they sayde vnto hym: Thus sayeth Hezekiah: This is the daye of trouble, of plage and of wrath: lyke as when a chylde cometh to the byrth, but the woman hath no power to brynge it forth.
Isaiah 37:4 The Lorde thy God (no doute) hath well consydered the wordes of Rabsakeh, whom hys lorde the Kynge of the Assyrians hath sent, to defye & blaspheme the lyuynge God: with soch wordes as the Lord thy God hath heard right well. And therfore lyfte vp thy prayer for the remnaunt, that yet are left.
Isaiah 37:5 So the seruauntes of Kyng Hezekiah came to Esay.
Isaiah 37:6 And Esay gaue them this answere. Saye thus vnto youre lorde: thus sayeth the Lord: Be not afrayed of the wordes that thou hast hearde, wherwith the Kyng of the Assyrians seruauntes haue blasphemed me.
Isaiah 37:7 Beholde, I wyll cause a wynde go ouer hym, as sone as he heareth it, he shall go agayne into hys countre, there wyll I destroye hym with the swerde.
Isaiah 37:8 Now when Rabsakeh returned, he founde the kynge of Assyria layenge sege the Lobnah, for he had vnderstande, that he was departed from Lachis.
Isaiah 37:9 For there came a rumoure, that Tharhakah kynge of Ethiopia was come forth to warre agaynst hym. And when the Kynge of Assyria hearde that, he sent other messaungers to Kynge Hezekiah with this commaundement:
Isaiah 37:10 Saye thus to Hezekiah Kyng of Iuda: Let not thy God disceyue the, in whom thou hopest, & sayeste: Ierusalem shall not be geuen in to the handes of the Kyng of Assyria.
Isaiah 37:11 For thou knowest well how the Kynges of Assyria haue handled all the landes that they haue subuerted, and hopest thou to escape?
Isaiah 37:12 Where the people of the Gentyles (whom my progenytours conquered) delyuered at any tyme thorow their goddes? As namely, Gozan, Haran, Rezeph, and the chyldren of Eden, which dwell at Thalassar.
Isaiah 37:13 Where is the Kynge of Hemah, & the Kynge of Arphad, & the Kyng of the cytye Sepharuaim, Ena and Aua?
Isaiah 37:14 Nowe when Hezekiah had receyued the lettre of the messaungers, and read it, he went vp into the house of the Lorde and opened the letter before the Lord.
Isaiah 37:15 And Hezekiah prayed before the Lorde on this maner:
Isaiah 37:16 O Lorde of Hostes, thou God of Israel, which dwellest vpon Cherubyn. Thou art the God, that only is God of all the Kyngdomes of the world, for thou only hast created heauen & earth.
Isaiah 37:17 Enclyne thyne eare Lord & consydre, open thyne eyes, O Lorde, & se, & pondre all the wordes of Sennaherib, whiche hath sent hys embage to blaspheme the lyuynge God.
Isaiah 37:18 It is true, O Lorde, that the Kynges of Assyria haue conquered all Kyngdomes and landes,
Isaiah 37:19 and cast their goddes in the fyre. Not wythstandynge those were no goddes but the worckes of mens handes, of wod or stone, therfore haue they destroyed them.
Isaiah 37:20 Delyuer vs then, O Lorde oure God, from the handes of Sennaherib, that all Kyngdomes of the earth maye knowe, that thou only art the Lorde.
Isaiah 37:21 Then Esay the sonne of Amoz sent vnto Hezekiah, sayinge: Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israel: Where as thou haste made thy prayer vnto me, as touchyng Sennaherib,
Isaiah 37:22 thys is the answere, that the Lorde hath geuen concernynge hym: Despised art thou, & mocked, O daughter of Syon, he hath shaken his head at the, O doughter of Ierusalem.
Isaiah 37:23 But thou Sennaherib, whom hast thou defyed & blasphemed? And agaynst whom hast thou lyfted vp thy voyce, & exalted thy proude lokes? euen agaynst the holy one of Israel.
Isaiah 37:24 Thou with thy seruauntes hast blasphemed the Lord, and thus holdest thou of thy selfe: I couer the hye mountaynes, and sydes of Libanus with my horsmen. And there wyll I cut downe the hye Cedre trees & the fayreste Fyrre trees. I will vp into the heyght of it, & into the chefest of his tymbre woddes.
Isaiah 37:25 If there be no water, I wyl graue & drynke. And as for waters of defence, I shall drye them vp wyth the fete of myne Hoste.
Isaiah 37:26 Yee (sayest thou) hast thou not hearde, what haue taken in hande, and brought to passe of olde tyme? That same wyll I do now also: waste, destroye, & bringe stronge cities vnto hearpes of stones.
Isaiah 37:27 For theyr inhabitours shal be lyke lame men, brought in feare and confounded. They shalbe lyke the grasse and grene herbes in the felde, lyke the haye vpon house toppes, that withereth a fore it be growne vp.
Isaiah 37:28 I knowe thy wayes, thy goinge forth and thy commyne home, yee & thy madnesse agaynst me.
Isaiah 37:29 Therfore thy furiousnesse agaynst me, & thy pryde is come before me. I will put a ringe in thy nose, and a bridle byt in the chawes of the, & turne the aboute, euen the same waye thou comest.
Isaiah 37:30 I will geue the also thys token (O Hezekiah) this yeare shalt thou eate that is kept in stoare, & the next yeare soch as groweth of him selfe, and in the thyrde yeare ye shall sowe & reape, yee ye shall plante vyneardes, and enioye the fruytes therof.
Isaiah 37:31 And soch of the house of Iuda as are escaped, shall come together, and the remnaunt shall take rote beneth, and bringe forth fruyte aboue.
Isaiah 37:32 For the escaped shall go out of Ierusalem, and the remaunte from the mount Syon. And this shall the gelousy of the Lorde of hostes bringe to passe.
Isaiah 37:33 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde, concernynge the kynge of the Assyrians: He shall not come in to the cytye, and shall shote no arowe in to it, there shall no shilde hurte it, nether shall they graue aboute it.
Isaiah 37:34 The same waye that he came, shall he retourne, & not come at thys cytie, sayeth the Lorde.
Isaiah 37:35 And I wyll kepe and saue the cytie (sayeth he) for myne owne, and for my seruaunte Dauyds sake.
Isaiah 37:36 Thus the angel went forth, and slewe of the Assyrians hoste, an .clxxxv. thousande. And when men arose, vp earlye (at Ierusalem:) Beholde, all laye full of deed bodyes.
Isaiah 37:37 So Sennaherib the kynge of the Assyrians brake vp, and dwelt at Niniue.
Isaiah 37:38 Afterwarde it chaunsed, as he prayed in the temple of Nesrah hys god, that Adramalech and Sarazer hys owne sonnes slewe hym with the sweard, and fled in to the lande of Ararat. And Asarhadon hys sonne reygned after hym.

CHAPTER: 38

Isaiah 38:1 Not longe afore thys, was Hezekiah sick vnto the deeth: and the Prophet Esay the sonne of Amoz came vnto hym, & sayde: Thus commaundeth the Lord: Set thine house in ordre: for thou must dye, and shalt not escape.
Isaiah 38:2 Then Hezekiah turned hys face towarde the wall, and prayed vnto the Lorde,
Isaiah 38:3 and sayde: Remembre (O Lorde) that I haue walcked before the in treuth and a stedfast herte, and haue done the thyng that is pleasaunt to the. And Hezekiah wepte sore.
Isaiah 38:4 Then sayde God vnto Esay:
Isaiah 38:5 Go and speake vnto Hezekiah: the Lorde God of Dauid thy father sendeth the thys worde: I haue herde thy prayer, and consydred thy teares: beholde I wyll put fyftene yeares mo vnto thy lyfe,
Isaiah 38:6 and delyuer the and the cytie also, from the hande of the kynge of Assiria, for I wyll defende the citie.
Isaiah 38:7 And take the this token of the Lord, that he wyll do it, as he hath spoken:
Isaiah 38:8 Beholde, I will returne the shadowe of Ahaz dial, that now is layed out wyth the Sunne & brynge it ten degrees backe warde. So the Sunne turned ten degree backward, the which he was descended a fore.
Isaiah 38:9 A thanckesgeuynge, whiche Hezekiah Kynge of Iuda wrote, when he had bene sycke, and was recouered.
Isaiah 38:10 I thought I shulde haue gone to the gates of hell in my best age, and haue wanted the resydue of my yeares.
Isaiah 38:11 I spake with in my selfe: I shall neuer viset the Lorde God in this lyfe: I shall neuer se man amonge the dwellers of the worlde.
Isaiah 38:12 Myne age is folden vp together, and taken awaye fro me, lyke a shepherdes cotage: my lyfe is hewen of, lyke as a weeuer cutteth of his webb. Whyle I was yet takynge my rest, he hewed me of, & made an ende of me in one day.
Isaiah 38:13 I thought I wolde haue lyued vnto the morow, but he brosed my bones lyke a lyon, and made an ende of me in one daye.
Isaiah 38:14 Then chatred I lyke a swalowe, and lyke a crane, and mourned as a doue. I lyfte vp myne eyes into the heyght: O Lorde (sayde I) vyolence is done vnto me, be thou suertye for me.
Isaiah 38:15 What shall I speake or saye, that he may this do? That I may lyue out all my yeares, yee in the bytternesse of my lyfe?
Isaiah 38:16 Verely (Lorde) men must lyue in bytternesse, & all my life muste I passe ouer therin: For thou raysest me vp, and wakest me. But lo, I wyllbe well content with this bytternes.
Isaiah 38:17 Neuertheles my conuersacyon hath so pleased the, that thou woldest not make an ende of my lyfe: so that thou hast cast all my synnes behynde thy back.
Isaiah 38:18 For hell prayseth not the, death doth not magnyfye the. They that go downe into the graue, prayse not thy trueth:
Isaiah 38:19 but the lyuyng, yee the liuinge acknowledge the, lyke as I do thys daye. The father telleth hys chyldren of thy faythfulnesse.
Isaiah 38:20 Delyuer vs (O Lorde) and we wyll singe prayses in thy house, all the dayes of oure life.
Isaiah 38:21 And Esay sayde: take a playster of fygges, and laye it vpon the sore, so shall it be whole.
Isaiah 38:22 Then sayd Hezekiah: O what a great thinge is this, that I shall go vp into the house of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 39

Isaiah 39:1 At the same tyme Merodach Baladam, Baladams sonne Kynge of Babylon, sent lettres and presentes to Hezekiah. For he vnderstode how that he had bene sick, and was recouered agayne.
Isaiah 39:2 And Hezekiah was glad therof, and shewed them the commodytyes of hys treasure, of syluer, of golde, of spyces and rootes, of precyous oyles, all that was in hys cubbordes & treasure houses. There was not one thing in Hezekiahs house, & so thorow out all hys kyngdome, but he let them se it.
Isaiah 39:3 Then came Esay the Prophete of Kynge Ezekiah, and sayde vnto hym. What haue the men sayde, & from whence came they vnto the? Hezekiah answered: they came out of a farre countre vnto me, out of Babylon.
Isaiah 39:4 Esay sayd: what haue they loked vpon in thyne house? Hezekiah answered: All that is in myne house haue they sene: and there is nothinge in my treasure, but I shewed it them.
Isaiah 39:5 Then sayde Esay vnto Hezekiah: Vnderstande the worde of the Lord of Hostes:
Isaiah 39:6 Beholde the tyme wyll come, that euery thynge which is in thyne house, and al that thy progenytoures haue layde vp in stoare vnto this daye, shalbe caried to Babylon, & nothinge left behynde. Thys sayeth the Lorde.
Isaiah 39:7 Yee & parte of thy sonnes, that shall come of the, & whom thou shalt get, shalbe caried hence, & become gelded chamberlaynes in the Kynge of Babylons courte:
Isaiah 39:8 Then sayde Hezekiah to Esay: Now God prosper hys owne councell, which thou hast told me. He sayde more ouer: So that there be peace and faythfulnesse in my tyme.

CHAPTER: 40

Isaiah 40:1 Be of good chere my people, be of good chere (sayeth youre God)
Isaiah 40:2 conforte Ierusalem, and tell her: that her trauayle is at an ende that her offence is pardoned, that she hath receyued of the Lordes hande sufficient correccyon for all her synnes.
Isaiah 40:3 A voyce cryeth: Prepare the waye for the Lorde in the wyldernesse, make streyght the path for oure God in the deserte.
Isaiah 40:4 Let all valleyes be exalted, & euery mountayne & hyll be leyed lowe. What so is croked, let it be made streyght, & lett the rough places be made playne feldes.
Isaiah 40:5 For the glory of the Lorde shall apeare, & all flesh shall se it, for why, the mouth of the Lorde hath spoken it.
Isaiah 40:6 The same voyce spake: Now crye. And I sayde: what shall I crye? Then spake yt: that all flesh is grasse, and that all the bewtye therof, is as the floure of the felde.
Isaiah 40:7 When the grasse is withered, the floure falleth awaye. Euen so is the people as grasse, when the breath of the Lorde bloweth vpon them.
Isaiah 40:8 Neuerthelesse whether the grasse wyther, or the floure fade awaye: Yet the worde of oure God endureth for euer. Moreouer the voyce cried thus:
Isaiah 40:9 Go vp vnto the hyll (O Sion) thou tha bryngest good tydynges, lyft vp thy voyce with power, O thou preacher Ierusalem. Lyft it vp without feare, & saye vnto the cities of Iuda: Beholde youre God,
Isaiah 40:10 beholde the Lorde, euen the Allmyghtie shall come with power, and beare rule with hys arme. Beholde, he bryngeth his treasure with hym, & hys worckes go before hym.
Isaiah 40:11 He shall fede his flock lyke an herdman. He shall gather the lambes together with his arme, and carie them in hys bosome, and shall kyndlye intreate those that beare yonge.
Isaiah 40:12 Who hath holden the waters in hys fyst? Who hath measured heauen with his spanne, and hath comprehended all the earth of the worlde in thre fyngers? Who hath weyed the mountaynes and hylles?
Isaiah 40:13 Who hath refourmed the mynde of the Lord? Or who is of hys councell to teach him?
Isaiah 40:14 At whom hath he asked councell, to make hym vnderstand, and to lerne hym the waye of iudgment: to teach him science: and to enstructe hym in the waye of vnderstandynge.
Isaiah 40:15 Beholde, all people are in comparyson of hym, as a droppe to a boket full, and are counted as the leste thinge that the balaunce weyeth. Beholde, the Iles are in comparyson of hym, as the shadowe of the sonne beame.
Isaiah 40:16 Libanus is not suffycyent to mynystre fyre for his offringe, and all the beastes therof are not ynough to one sacryfyce.
Isaiah 40:17 All people in comparyson of hym are rekened as nothing, yee vayne vanyte and emptynesse.
Isaiah 40:18 To whom then will ye liken God? or what simylitude wyll ye set vp vnto hym?
Isaiah 40:19 Shall the caruer make hym carued ymage? and shall the goldsmyth couer hym with golde, or cast hym in to a fourme of syluer plates?
Isaiah 40:20 Moreouer shall the ymage maker (that the poore man whyche is dysposed, maye haue some thynge to set vp also) seke out & chose a tree, that is not rotten, and came therout an ymage, that moueth not?
Isaiah 40:21 Knowe ye not this? Hearde ye neuer of it? Hath it not bene preached vnto you sence the begynnyng? Haue ye not bene enfourmed of this, sence the foundacyon of the earth was layde:
Isaiah 40:22 That he sytteth vpon the circle of the worlde, and that al the inhabytours of the worlde are in comparison of him, but as greshoppers: That he spredeth out the heauens as a coueryng, that he stretcheth them out, as a tent to dwell in:
Isaiah 40:23 That he bryngeth Prynces to nothyng, and the iudges of the earth to dust:
Isaiah 40:24 so that they be not planted nor sowen agayne, nether theyr stocke roted agayne in the earth? For as sone as he bloweth vpon them, they wither & fade awaye, lyke the strawe in a whyrle wynde.
Isaiah 40:25 To whom now will ye lyken me, & whom shall I be lyke, sayeth the holy one?
Isaiah 40:26 Lyft vp youre eyes on hye, and consydre. Who hath made those thynges, whyche come out by so greate heapes? And he can call them all by their names. For there is nothynge hyd vnto the greatnesse of his power, strength, and myght.
Isaiah 40:27 How maye then Iacob thyncke, or how maye Israel saye: My wayes are hyd from the Lorde, and my God knoweth not of my iudgementes.
Isaiah 40:28 Knowest thou not, or hast thou not hearde, that the euerlastynge God the Lorde whiche made all the corners of the earth, is nether weery nor faynt, & that his wysdome can not be comprehended,
Isaiah 40:29 but that he geueth strength vnto the weery, and power vnto the faynte?
Isaiah 40:30 Chyldren are weery and faynt, and the strongest men fall:
Isaiah 40:31 But vnto them that haue the Lorde before their eyes, shal strength be encreased, Aegles wynges shall growe vpon them: When they runne they shall not fal: and when they go, they shal not be weery.

CHAPTER: 41

Isaiah 41:1 Be styll (ye Ilandes) and herken vnto me. Be stronge ye people, Come hether, and shewe youre cause, we wyll go to the lawe together.
Isaiah 41:2 Who rayseth vp the iuste from the rysynge of the Sunne, and calleth him to go forth? Who casteth downe the people, and subdueth the kynges before him: that he maye thorowe them all to the grounde wyth hys swearde, and scatre them lyke stuble with hys bowe?
Isaiah 41:3 He foloweth vpon them, & goeth safely hym selfe, and cometh in no fote path with his fete.
Isaiah 41:4 Who hath made, created, and called the generacions from the begynnyng? Euen I the Lorde, whiche am the fyrst, and with the last.
Isaiah 41:5 Beholde ye Iles? that ye maye feare, and ye endes of the earth, that ye maye be abasshed, draw nye, and come hether.
Isaiah 41:6 Euery man hath exorted hys neyghboure, and brother, and bydden him be stronge.
Isaiah 41:7 The Smyth conforted the moulder, and the Ironsmyth the hammerman, sayenge: It shalbe good, that we fasten this cast worcke: and then they fastened it with nayles, that it shulde not be moued.
Isaiah 41:8 And thou Israell my seruaunte: Iacob my electe sede of Abraham my beloued,
Isaiah 41:9 whom I led from the endes of the earth by the hande: For I called the from farre, and sayde vnto the: Thou shalt be my seruaunt: I haue chosen the, and will not cast the awaye:
Isaiah 41:10 be not afrayd, for I will be with the. Loke not behynde the, for I will be thy God, to strength the, helpe the, and to kepe the with this right hand of myne.
Isaiah 41:11 Behold, all they that resyst the, shall come to confusyon and shame: & thine aduersaries shalbe destroyed and brought to naught.
Isaiah 41:12 So that who so seketh after them, shall not fynde them. Thy destroyers shall perysh and so shall they that vndertake to make batell agaynst the:
Isaiah 41:13 For I thy Lorde and God, will strengthen thy ryght hande. Euen I that saye vnto the: Feare not. I will helpe the.
Isaiah 41:14 Be not a frayde thou lytle worme Iacob, & thou despysed Israell for I will helpe the, sayeth the Lorde, and the holy one of Israel thyne auenger.
Isaiah 41:15 Beholde, I will make the a treadyng cart & a new flayle, that thou mayest thresshe and grynd the mountaynes, and brynge the hylles to poulder.
Isaiah 41:16 Thou shalt fanne them, & the wynde shall carye them awaye, and the whyrlwynde shall scater them. But thou shalt reioyse in the Lorde, and shalt delyte in praysinge the holy one of Israel.
Isaiah 41:17 When the thyrstye & poore seke water and fynde none, and when their tonge is drye of thyrst: I geue it them sayth the Lorde. I the God of Israel forsake them not.
Isaiah 41:18 I bringe forth floudes in the hylle, and welles in the playne feldes. I turne the wildernes to riuers, & the drye lande to condythes of water.
Isaiah 41:19 I plante in the waste grounde trees of Cedre, Boxe, Myrre & Olyues. And in the drye I set Fyre trees, Elmes, and Hawthornes together.
Isaiah 41:20 All thys do I, that they altogether may se & marcke, perceyue with their hertes & consydre, that the hande of the Lorde maketh these thinges, and that the holye one of Israel bringeth them to passe.
Isaiah 41:21 Stande at your cause (sayeth the Lorde) & brynge forth your stroungest grounde, counceleth the Kynge of Iacob.
Isaiah 41:22 Let the goddes come forth them selues, & shewe vs the thynges that are past, what they be: let them declare them vnto vs, that we maye take them to herte, and knowe them herafter.
Isaiah 41:23 Ether, let them shewe vs thynges for to come, and tell vs what shalbe done her after: so shal we knowe, that they be goddes. Shewe somthing, ether good or bad: so wyll we both knowledge the same, and tell it out.
Isaiah 41:24 Beholde, ye goddes are of naugth, & your makynge is of naught but abhomynacyon hath chosen you.
Isaiah 41:25 Neuertheles, I haue waked vp one from the North, and he shall come. And another from the East, which shall call vpon my name, & shall come to the Princes, as the Potter to his claye, and as the Potter treadeth downe the myre.
Isaiah 41:26 Who tolde that afore? So wyll we confesse and saye, that he is rightuous: But there is none that sheweth or declareth any thynge, there is none also that heareth youre wordes.
Isaiah 41:27 Beholde, I wyll fyrst graunte them of Sion and Ierusalem to be Euangelistes.
Isaiah 41:28 But when I consydre: there is not one amonge them that prophecyeth, nether (when I aske hym) that auswereth one worde.
Isaiah 41:29 Lo, wicked are they and vayne, with the thynges also that they take in hande: yee wynde are they, and emptynesse, with theyr ymages together.

CHAPTER: 42

Isaiah 42:1 Beholde now therfore, thys is my seruaunte whom I wyll kepe to my selfe: myne electe, In whom my soule shalbe pacified. I wyll geue hym my sprete, that he may shewe forth iudgement & equyte amonge the Gentyles.
Isaiah 42:2 He shall not be an outcryer, ner an hye mynded person. Hys voyce shall not be hearde in the stretes.
Isaiah 42:3 A brossed rede shall he not breake, and the smokyng flax shall he not quench, but faythfully and truly shall he geue iudgement.
Isaiah 42:4 He shall nether be ouersene ner hastye, that he maye restore ryghtuousnes vnto the earth: and the gentyles also shall kepe his lawes.
Isaiah 42:5 For thus sayeth God the Lord vnto hym (euen he that the made heauens, and spred them abrode & seth forth the earth with her increase, whych geueth breath vnto the people that is in it, & to them that dwell therin)
Isaiah 42:6 I the Lorde haue called the in rightuousnesse, & led the by the hande. Therfore wyll I also defende the, and geue the for a couenaunt of the people, and to be the lyght of the Gentyles.
Isaiah 42:7 That thou mayest open the eyes of the blynde, let out the prisoners, & them that syt in darknesse, out of the dongeon house.
Isaiah 42:8 I my selfe, whose name is the Lorde, whych geue my power to none other nether myne honoure to the Goddes:
Isaiah 42:9 shewe yow these newe tydynges, and tell you them or they come, for olde thynges also are come to passe.
Isaiah 42:10 Synge therfore vnto the Lorde, a newe songe of thanckes geuynge, blowe out hys prayse vnto the ende of the world. They that be vpon the sea, and all that is therin, prayse hym, the Iles and they that dwell in them.
Isaiah 42:11 Let the wyldernes with her cities lyft vp her voyce, the townes also that be in Cedar. Let them be glad that syt vpon rockes of stone, & let them crie downe from the hye mountaynes:
Isaiah 42:12 ascribinge almightynes vnto the Lorde, and magnifying hym amonge the Gentyles.
Isaiah 42:13 The Lord shal come forth as a gyaunte, and take a stomacke to hym lyke as a freshe man of warre. He shall roare and crye, and ouercome hys enemyes.
Isaiah 42:14 I haue longe holden my peace (sayeth the Lorde) shulde I therfore be styll, and kepe sylence for euer? I wyll crye lyke a trauelynge woman, and ones wyl I destroye, & deuoure.
Isaiah 42:15 I wyll make waste both mountayne & hyll, & drye vp euery grene thynge that groweth theron. I wyll drye vp the floudes of water, and drincke vp the ryuers.
Isaiah 42:16 I will brynge the blynde into a strete, that they knowe not: & lede them into a fote path, that they are ignoraunt in. I shall make darckenesse light before them, and the thinge that is croked to be streyght. These thinges wyll I do, & not forget them.
Isaiah 42:17 And therfore let them conuerte, and be ashamed earnestlye, that hope in Idoles, and saye to fashyoned ymages: ye are oure godes.
Isaiah 42:18 Heare, O ye deaf men, and sharpen youre sightes to se (O ye blynde.)
Isaiah 42:19 But who is blinder, then my seruaunt? Or so deaf, as my messaungers, whom I sent vnto them? For who is so blinde as my people, & they that haue the rule of them?
Isaiah 42:20 They are lyke, as yf thou vnderstodest moch, & keptest nothyng: or yf one herde well, but were not obedient.
Isaiah 42:21 The Lord be mercyfull vnto them for his rightuousnesse sake, that his worde myght be magnyfyed & praysed.
Isaiah 42:22 But it is a myscheuous and wycked people. Their younge men belonge all to the snare, & shalbe shut into preson houses. They shalbe caryed awaye captyue, and no man shall lowse them. They shalbe troden vnder fote, & no man shall laboure to bringe them agayne.
Isaiah 42:23 But who is he amonge you, that pondreth this in hys mynde, that consydreth it, & taketh it for a warnynge in tyme to come?
Isaiah 42:24 Who suffred Iacob to be trodden vnder fote, and Israel to be spoyled? Dyd not the Lorde? Now haue we synned agaynst hym, & haue had no delyte to walcke in his wayes nether bene obedyent vnto his lawe.
Isaiah 42:25 Therfore hath he poured vpon vs hys wrathfull dyspleasure, & stronge batell, whiche maketh vs haue to do on euery syde, yet wyll we not vnderstande: He burneth vs vp, yet syncketh it not in to oure hertes.

CHAPTER: 43

Isaiah 43:1 But now, the Lorde that made the O Iacob, & he that fashyoned the O Israel, sayeth thus: Feare not, for I wyll defende the. I haue called the by name thou art myne owne.
Isaiah 43:2 When thou wentest in the water, I was by the, that the stronge floudes shuld not pluck the awaye. When thou walkest in the fyre, it shall not burne the, and the flame shall not kindle vpon the.
Isaiah 43:3 For I am the Lorde thy God, the holy one of Israel, thy Sauyour. I gaue Egypte for thy delyueraunce, the Moryans, and the Sabees for the:
Isaiah 43:4 because thou wast deare in my sight, and because I set by the, and loued the. I pylled all men for the, & delyuered vp al people for thy sake,
Isaiah 43:5 that thou shuldest not feare, for I was wyth the. I wyll brynge thy sede from the East, and gather the together from the West.
Isaiah 43:6 I wyll saye to the North, let go. And to the South, kepe not backe: but bringe me my sonnes from farre, and my daughters from the endes of the worlde:
Isaiah 43:7 Namelye, all those that be called after my name: For them haue I created, fasshyoned, and made for myne honoure.
Isaiah 43:8 Brynge forth that people, whether they haue eyes or be blynde, deafe or haue eares.
Isaiah 43:9 All nacyons shall come in one, and be gathered in one people. But whiche amonge yonder goddes shall declare suche thynges, & tell vs what is to come? Let them bringe theyr wytnesses, so shall they be fre: for then men shall heare it, & saye, it is trueth.
Isaiah 43:10 But I bring you wytnesses (sayth the Lorde) euen those that are my seruauntes, whom I haue chosen: to the intent that ye myght be certyfyed and geue me faythfull credence: yee & to consydre, that I am he, before whom there was neuer any God, and that there shalbe none after me.
Isaiah 43:11 I am only the Lorde, and wythout me is there no Sauyour.
Isaiah 43:12 I geue warnynge, I make whole, I teach you that there shulde be no straunge God amonge you. And thys recorde must ye beare me your selues (sayth the Lorde) that I am God.
Isaiah 43:13 And euen he am I from the begynnynge, & there is none that can take any thynge out of my hande. And what I do, can no man chaunge.
Isaiah 43:14 Thus sayeth the Lorde the holy one of Israel youre redemer: For youre sake I wyll sende to Babylon, & brynge all the strongest of them from thence: Namely, the Chaldees that boost them of their shyppes:
Isaiah 43:15 Euen I the Lorde youre holy one whiche haue made Israel, and am youre Kynge.
Isaiah 43:16 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde, euen he that maketh a waye in the sea, and a footpath in the myghtye waters:
Isaiah 43:17 which bryngeth forth the charettes and horses, the hoste & the power, that they maye fall a slepe & neuer ryse, and be extincte, lyke as towe is quenched.
Isaiah 43:18 Ye remembre not thynges of olde, and regarde nothinge that is past
Isaiah 43:19 Therfore beholde, I shall make a new thynge, & shortly shall it appeare: ye shall well knowe it, I told it you afore, but I wil tel it you agayne. I wyll make stretes in the deserte, & ryuers of water in the wylderne
Isaiah 43:20 The wylde beastes shall worshyppe me: the dragon, and the Estryche. For I shall geue water in the wyldernesse, and streames in the deserte: that I may geue dryncke to my people, whom I chose.
Isaiah 43:21 This people haue I made for my self, & they shall shewe forth my prayse.
Isaiah 43:22 For thou (Iacob) woldest not call vpon me, but thou haddest an vnlust towarde me, O Israel.
Isaiah 43:23 Thou gauest me not thy younge beastes for burntoffrynges, nether dydest honoure me with thy sacryfices. Thou boughtest me no deare spice wyth thy money, nether pouredest the fatt of thy sacrifices vpon me. Howbeit I haue not bene chargeable vnto the in offringes, nether greuous in incense.
Isaiah 43:24 But thou hast laden me wyth thy synnes, and weeried me wyth thyne vngodlynes.
Isaiah 43:25 Where as I yet am euen he onlye, that for myne owne selfes sake do awaye thyne offences, & forget thy synnes: so that I wyll neuer thyncke vpon them.
Isaiah 43:26 Put me now in remembraunce (for we wyll reason together) & shew what thou hast for the, to make the quyte.
Isaiah 43:27 Thy fyrst father offended sore, & thy rulers haue synned agaynst me.
Isaiah 43:28 Therfore I ether suspended, or slue the chefest Prynces: I dyd curse Iacob, and gaue Israel into reprofe.

CHAPTER: 44

Isaiah 44:1 So heare now, O Iacob my seruaunt, and Israel whom I haue chosen.
Isaiah 44:2 For thus sayth the Lord that made the: fashyoned the, and helped the, euen from thy mothers wombe: Be not afrayed, O Iacob my seruaunt, thou rightuous, whom I haue chosen.
Isaiah 44:3 For I shall pouer water vpon the drye grounde and ryuers vpon the thurstye. I shall poure my sprete vpon thy sede, and myne encerase vpon thy stocke.
Isaiah 44:4 They shall growe together, lyke as the grasse, and as the Willies by the waters syde.
Isaiah 44:5 One wyll saye: I am the Lordes. Another will call vnder the name of Iacob. The thyrde shall descrybe wyth hys hande vnto the Lorde, and geue hym selfe vnder the name of Israel.
Isaiah 44:6 Moreouer, thus hath the Lorde spoken: euen the Kynge of Israel, and his auenger, the Lorde of Hostes: I am the fyrst & the last, and with out me is there no God.
Isaiah 44:7 For what is he, that euer was lyke me, which am from euerlastinge? Let hym shewe hys name, and do where thorow he may be likened vnto me. Let him tell you forth planely thinges, that are past & for to come:
Isaiah 44:8 yee and that without any feare or stoppe. For haue not I euer tolde you hytherto, and warned you? Ye can beare me recorde youre selues. Is there any God excepte me? or any maker, that I shuld not knowe hym.
Isaiah 44:9 Wherfore all caruers of Idoles are but vayne, & their labour lost. They must beare recorde them selues, that (seyng they came nether se ner vnderstande) they shalbe confounded.
Isaiah 44:10 Who shulde now make a God, or fashion an Idole, that is profytable for nothynge?
Isaiah 44:11 Beholde, all the felowshyppe of them must be brought to confusyon. Let all the worckmaisters of them come and stande together from amonge men: they must be abashed and confounded one with another.
Isaiah 44:12 The smith taketh yron, and tempereth it with hoate coales, and fashyoneth it with hammers, and maketh it with all the strength of his armes: yee sometyme he is faynt for very hunger, & so thurstye, that he hath no more power.
Isaiah 44:13 The carpenter, (or ymage caruer) taketh meat of the tymbre: & spredeth forth hys lyne: he maketh it with some coloure: he playneth it, he ruleth it, & squareth it, & maketh it after the ymage of a man, and accordynge to the bewtye of a man: that it maye stande in the temple.
Isaiah 44:14 Moreouer, he goeth oute to hewe downe Cedre trees: He bryngeth home Elmes and Okes, and other tymbre of the wod. Or els the Fyrre trees which he planted hym self, & soch as the rayne hath swelled,
Isaiah 44:15 whyche wod serueth for men to burne. Of this he taketh and warmeth him selfe with all: he maketh a fyre of it to bake bred. And afterwarde maketh a God there of, to honoure it: & an Idole to knele before it.
Isaiah 44:16 One pece he burneth in the fyre, with another he rosteth flesh, that he maye eate roste hys bely full: wyth the thyrde he warmeth hym self, & sayeth: Aha, I am well warmed, I haue bene at the fyre.
Isaiah 44:17 And of the resydue he maketh hym a God, and an Idole for hym selfe. He kneleth before it, he worshyppeth it, he prayeth vnto it, and sayeth: deliuer me, for thou art my God.
Isaiah 44:18 Yet men nether considre ner vnderstande, because their eyes are stopped, that they can not se: and their hertes, that they cannot perceyue.
Isaiah 44:19 They pondre not in their myndes, for they haue nether knowledge ner vnderstandyng, to thyncke thus: I haue brent one pece in the fyre: I haue baked bred with the coles there of, I haue rosted flesh with all, & eaten it: shall I now of the resydue make an abhomynacyon, & fall downe before a rotten pece of wodd?
Isaiah 44:20 The kepyng of dust, and folishnesse of herte hath turned them asyde: so that none of them can haue a fre conscience to thyncke maye not I erre?
Isaiah 44:21 Consydre this (O Iacob & Israel) for thou art my seruaunt. I haue made the, that thou mightest serue me. O Israel, forget me not.
Isaiah 44:22 As for thyne offences, I dryue them awaye lyke the cloudes, and thy synnes as the mist. Turne the agayne vnto me, and I wyl delyuer the.
Isaiah 44:23 Be glad ye heauens, whom the Lorde hath made, let al that is here beneth vpon the earth, be ioyfull. Reioyse ye mountaynes & woddes, with all the trees that are in you: for the Lord shall redeme Iacob, & shewe his glory vpon Israel.
Isaiah 44:24 For thus sayth the Lorde thy redemer euen he that fashioned the from thy mothers wombe: I am the Lorde, whiche do all thinges my selfe alone. I onlye haue spred oute the heauens and I only haue layde the foundacyon of the earth.
Isaiah 44:25 I destroye the tokens of witches, and make the Soth sayers go wronge. As for the wyse, I turne them backwarde, and make their connynge folyshnesse.
Isaiah 44:26 But I set vp the purpose of my seruauntes, and fulfill the councell of my messaungers. I saye to Ierusalem: turne agayne: And to the cyties of Iuda, be ye buylded agayne: and I repayre their decayed places.
Isaiah 44:27 I saye to the ground: be drie. And I drye vp thy water floudes.
Isaiah 44:28 I saye to Cyrus: thou art myne herd man: so that he shall fulfill all thinges after my will. I saye to Ierusalem: be thou buylded, & to the temple: be thou fast grounded.

CHAPTER: 45

Isaiah 45:1 Thus sayeth the Lorde vnto Cyrus his anoynted, whom he ledeth by the righthande: that the people maye fal downe before hym: I will lowse the gyrdle of kynges: that they shall open the gates before thy face, & not to shut their dores.
Isaiah 45:2 I wil go before the, & make the croked streyght I shall breake the brasen dores, & burst the yron barres.
Isaiah 45:3 I shall geue the the hyd treasure & the thinge which is secretly kepte: that thou maiest knowe that I the God of Israel haue called the by thy name:
Isaiah 45:4 & that for Iacob my seruauntes sake and for Israel my chosen. For I called the by thy name, & ordened the or euer thou knewest me:
Isaiah 45:5 Euen I the Lorde, before whom there is none other: for without me, tere is no God. I haue prepared the or euer thou knewest me
Isaiah 45:6 that it myght be knowne from the rysyng of the sunne to the goynge downe of the same, that all is nothing without me. For I am the Lord, & there is els none.
Isaiah 45:7 It is I that created the lyght and darcknes, I make peace & trouble yee euen I the Lorde do all these thinges.
Isaiah 45:8 The heauens aboue shall droppe downe, & the cloudes shall rayne ryghtuousnes. The earth shall open it self, & brynge forth health, & therby shall ryghtuousnes florishe. Euen I the Lorde shall brynge it to passe.
Isaiah 45:9 Wo be vnto hym that chydeth wyth hys maker, the potsherde with the potter: Sayeth the claye to the potter: What makest thou? or thy worcke serueth for nothynge?
Isaiah 45:10 Wo be vnto hym, that sayeth to his father: Why begettest thou? And to hys mother: why bearest thou?
Isaiah 45:11 Thus sayeth the Lorde, euen the holy one & maker of Israel: Aske me of thynges for to come, concernynge my sonnes: and put me in remembraunce, as touchyng the worckes of my handes:
Isaiah 45:12 I haue made the earth, & created man vpon it. Wyth myne handes haue I spred forth heauen, and geuen a commaundment for all the Host therof.
Isaiah 45:13 I shall wake hym vp with ryghtuousnesse, & ordre all hys wayes. He shall buylde my cytye, and lett out my prisoners: and that nether for gyft nor rewardes, sayeth the Lorde of Hostes.
Isaiah 45:14 The Lorde hath sayde moreouer: The occupiers of Egypte, the marchauntes of the Morians and Sabees, shall come vnto the with trybute, they shalbe thyne, they shall folowe the, & go with cheynes vpon their fete. They shall fall downe before the, and make supplicacyon vnto the. For God (without whom there is none other God) shall be with the.
Isaiah 45:15 O how profunde art thou O God, thou God & Sauioure of Israel?
Isaiah 45:16 Confounded be ye, and put to dishonour: go hence together with shame, all ye that be worckmaysters of erroure: (that is worshippers of Idols)
Isaiah 45:17 But Israell shalbe saued in the Lorde, which is the euerlastinge saluacion: They shall not come to shame ner confusyon, worlde without ende.
Isaiah 45:18 For thus sayeth the Lorde: euen he that created heauen, the God that made the earth, that fashioned it, & sett it forth: I haue not made it for naught, but I made it to be enhabited Euen I the Lorde, wythout whom there is none other.
Isaiah 45:19 I haue not spoken secretely, nether in darcke places of the earth. It is not for naught, that I sayde vnto the sede of Iacob: seke me. I am the Lord, which when I speake, declareth the thing that is ryghtuous & true.
Isaiah 45:20 Let them be gathered and come together, lett them drawe nye hyther, that are escaped of the people: Haue they eny vnderstandynge, that set vp the stockes of their Idols, & praie vnto a God, that cannot helpe them?
Isaiah 45:21 Lett men drawe nye, let them come hyther, & aske councell one at another, and shewe forth: What is he, that tolde this before? or who spake of it, euer sence the begynnynge? Haue not I the Lorde done it: wythout whom there is none other God? the true God and Sauioure, and there is els none but I?
Isaiah 45:22 And therfore turne you vnto me (all ye endes of the earth) so shall ye be saued, for I am God, and there is els none.
Isaiah 45:23 I sweare by my selfe, out of my mouth commeth the worde of ryghtuousnesse, and that maye no man turne: but all knees shall bowe vnto me, and all tunges shall sweare by me,
Isaiah 45:24 sayinge: Verelye in the Lorde is my ryghtuousnes and strength. To hym shall men come: but all they that thyncke scorne of hym, shalbe confounded.
Isaiah 45:25 And the whole sede of Israel shalbe iustyfyed, and praysed in the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 46

Isaiah 46:1 Neuertheles Bell shall fall, and Nabo shalbe broken: whose ymages are a burthen for the beastes and cattell, to ouerlade them, and to make them weery.
Isaiah 46:2 They shall syncke downe, and fall together: for they maye not ease them of their burthen, therfore muste they go in to captyuyte.
Isaiah 46:3 Herken vnto me, O house of Iacob, & all ye that remayne yet of the housholde of Israel: whom I haue borne from youre mothers wombe, & brought you vp from your birth, tyll ye weere growen:
Isaiah 46:4 I whych shall beare you vnto youre laste age: I haue made you, I wyll also noryshe you, beare you and saue you.
Isaiah 46:5 Whom wyll ye make me lyke, in fashion or ymage, that I maye be lyke him?
Isaiah 46:6 Ye fooles (no doute) wyll take out syluer & golde oute of youre purses, and weye it, and hyre a gold smith to make a God of it, that men maye knele downe & worshippe it.
Isaiah 46:7 Yet muste he be taken on mens shoulders & borne, & set in hys place that he maye stande and not moue. Alas that men shulde crye vnto hym, which geueth no answere: and delyuereth not the man that calleth vpon hym, from hys trouble.
Isaiah 46:8 Consydre this well, & be ashamed Go in to youre owne selues (O ye runnagates.)
Isaiah 46:9 Remembre the thynges which are past, sence the begynnyng of the worlde: that I am God, & that there is els no God, yee & that there is nothynge lyke vnto me.
Isaiah 46:10 In the beginning of a thynge, I shewe the ende therof: & I tell before, thynges that are not yet come to passe. With one worde is my deuyce accomplyshed, & fulfylleth all my pleasure.
Isaiah 46:11 I call a byrde out of the East, & all that I take in hande, out of farre countrees, as soone as I commaunde, I brynge it hether: as soone as I thyncke to deuyse a thynge, I do it.
Isaiah 46:12 Heare me, O ye that are of an hye stomack, but farre from ryghtuousnesse.
Isaiah 46:13 I shall brynge forth my ryghtuousnesse. It is not farre, and my health shall not traye longe awaye. I wyll laye health in Sion, and geue Israel my glorye.

CHAPTER: 47

Isaiah 47:1 Bvt as for the (O daughter thou virgin Babylon) Thou shalt syt in the dust thou shalt sit vpon the grounde, & not in a trone (O thou mayden of Chaldea.) Thou shalt no more be called tender and pleasaunt.
Isaiah 47:2 Thou shalt bringe forth the querne and grind meele, put downe thy stomacher make bare thy knees & shalt wade thorow the water ryuers.
Isaiah 47:3 Thy shame shalbe discouered, & thy preuyties shalbe sene. For I wyll auenge me of the, and no man shall lett me:
Isaiah 47:4 sayeth oure redemer, which is called the Lorde of Hostes the holy one of Israel.
Isaiah 47:5 Syt styll, holde thy tunge, & get the in to some darcke corner, O daughter Chaldea, for thou shalt nomore be called lady of kyngdomes.
Isaiah 47:6 I was so wroth with my people, that I punished myne enheritaunce, & gaue them into thy power. Neuertheles, thou shewedeste them no mercy, but euen the very aged men of them, didest thou oppresse ryght sore wyth thy yock,
Isaiah 47:7 & thou thoughtest thus. I shalbe lady for euer. And desyde all that, thou hast not regarded these thinges, nether cast, what shuld come after.
Isaiah 47:8 Heare now therfore, thou wylful, that syttest so carelesse, & speakest thus in thine herte: I am alone, & without me is there none I shall neuer be wydowe, ner desolate agayne.
Isaiah 47:9 And yet both these thinges shall come to the vpon one daye in the twyncklyng of an eye: Namely wyddowhead, & desolacyon. They shall mightely fall vpon the, for the multitude of thy witches, & for the greate heape of thy coniurers.
Isaiah 47:10 For thou hast comforted thy selfe in thy dysceitfulnes, and hast sayde: No man seyth me. Thyne owne wysdome & connyng hath disceueyd the. In that thou hast sayde: I am alone, and without me there is none.
Isaiah 47:11 Therfore shall trouble come vpon the, & thou shalt not knowe, from whence it shall aryse. Myschefe shal fall vpon the, which thou shalt not be able to put of. A sodane myserye shall come vpon the, or euer thou be a warre.
Isaiah 47:12 Now go to thy coniurers, and to the multitude of thy witches (whom thou haste bene acquainted withall from thy youthe) yf they maye helpe the, or strengthen the.
Isaiah 47:13 Thou haste hytherto had manye councels of them, so let the heauengasers & the beholders of starres come on now and delyuer the: yea & let them shewe, when these new thynges shal come vpon the.
Isaiah 47:14 Beholde, they shalbe lyke strawe, whiche yf it be kindled with fyre, no man may rydde it for the vehemence of the flame: And yet it geueth no synners to warme a man by, nor cleare fyre to sit by.
Isaiah 47:15 Euen so shall they be vnto the whome thou haste vsed and occupied from thy youthe. Euery one shall shewe the hys erroneous waye, yet shall none of them defende the.

CHAPTER: 48

Isaiah 48:1 Heare this, O thou house of Iacob: ye that are called by the name of Israel, and are come oute of one stocke with Iuda, whiche sweare by the name of the Lorde, & beare wytnesse by the God of Israell (but not with trueth & righte)
Isaiah 48:2 whiche are called fre men of the holye citie, as they that loke for comforte in the God of Israel, whose name is the Lorde of hostes.
Isaiah 48:3 The thinges that I shewed you euer sence the begynnynge: Haue I not broughte them to passe, immedyatly as they came out of my mouthe, & declared them? And they are come.
Isaiah 48:4 Howebeit I knewe that thou arte obstynate, & that thy neck hath an yron veyne, & that thy browe is of brasse.
Isaiah 48:5 Neuertheles I haue euer sence the beginning shewed the of thinges for to come, and declared them vnto the, or euer they came to passe: that thou shouldest not saye: myne Idoll hathe done it, my carued or caste ymage hath shewed it.
Isaiah 48:6 Heare and consyder all these thynges whether it was ye that prophecyed them: But as for me, I tolde the before at the beginning, new and secrete thinges that thou knewest not of.
Isaiah 48:7 And some done nowe not of olde tyme, whereof thou neuer heardest, before they were brought to passe, that thou canst not saye: I knewe of them.
Isaiah 48:8 Moreouer there be some whereof thou haste neyther hearde nor knowne, neyther haue they ben opened vnto thyne eares afore tyme. For I knew that thou woldest maliciously offende, therfor haue I called the a transgressoure, euen from thy mothers wombe.
Isaiah 48:9 Neuertheles for my names sake, I haue withdrawen my wrath, and for myne honours sake I haue ouersene the, so that I haue not roted the oute.
Isaiah 48:10 Beholde I haue pourged the, & not for moneye. I haue chosen the in the fyre of pouerte,
Isaiah 48:11 And that onely for myne owne sake, for I geue myne honoure to none other, that thou shuldest not despyse me.
Isaiah 48:12 Herken vnto me O Iacob, and Israel whom I haue called I am euen he that is, I am the fyrst & the last.
Isaiah 48:13 My hande is the foundacyon of the earthe, & my ryghte hande spanneth ouer the heauens. As sone as I called them they were there.
Isaiah 48:14 Gather you al together, and herken: Whiche of yonder goddes hath declared this, that the Lorde wyll do by the kyng of Babylon (whom he loueth & fauoureth) & by the Caldees hys arme?
Isaiah 48:15 I my self alone haue tolde you this before. Yea I shall call him and brynge him forth & geue him a prosperous iourneye.
Isaiah 48:16 Come nye and heare this, haue I spoken anye thynge darcklye sence the begynnynge? when a thing begynneth, I am there. Wherfore the Lorde God with his spryte hathe sent me,
Isaiah 48:17 And thus sayeth the Lord God thyne auenger, the holye one of Israell: I am the Lorde thy God, whiche teache the profitable thynges, & leade the the waye, that thou shuldest go.
Isaiah 48:18 Yf thou wilt now regarde my commaundement, thy welthynes shalbe as the water streame, and thy ryghteousnes as the waues flowynge in the sea.
Isaiah 48:19 Thy sede shalbe lyke as the sande in the sea, and the frute of thy body, lyke the grauel stones therof. Thy name shal not be roted oute, nor destroyed before me.
Isaiah 48:20 Ye shall go awaye from Babylon, and escape the Calders with a merye voyce. This shalbe spoken of, declared abroad, and go forth vnto the ende of the worlde, so that it shalbe sayde: The Lorde hathe defended hys seruaunte Iacob,
Isaiah 48:21 that they suffred no thurste, when they trauayled in the wyldernesse. He claue the rockes a sonder, and the water gusshed out.
Isaiah 48:22 As for the vngodlye, they haue no peace, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 49

Isaiah 49:1 Ye Iles, herken vnto me, & take hede ye people from farre. The Lorde hath called me from my byrth, and made mencion of my name from my mothers womb:
Isaiah 49:2 he hath made my mouth like a sharp swerd vnder the shadowe of hys hande hath he defended me, & hyd me in hys quyuer, as a good arowe,
Isaiah 49:3 and sayde vnto me: Thou arte my seruaunt Israel, I wylbe honoured in the.
Isaiah 49:4 Then aunswered I: I shall lese my laboure, I shall spende my strength in vayne. Neuertheles, I wyll commytte my cause and my worcke vnto the Lorde my God.
Isaiah 49:5 And now sayth the Lord euen he that fashioned me from my mothers wombe to be his seruaunte, that I may bring Iacob agayne vnto him: howbe it, Israel wil not be gathered vnto hym agayne. In whose syght I am greate; whiche also is my Lorde my God and my strength.
Isaiah 49:6 Let it be but a smal thynge, that thou arte my seruaunte, to set vp the kynredes of Iacob, & to restore the destruccyon of Israel: yf I make the not also the light of the Gentiles. that thou mayest be my helthe vnto the ende of the worlde.
Isaiah 49:7 Moreouer thus sayth the Lorde the auenger and holye one of Israel, because of the abhorrynge and despysynge amonge the Gentyles, concernynge the seruaunte of all them that beare rule: Kynges and prynces shall se, and aryse and worshyppe, because of the Lord that he is faythfull: and because of the holye one of Israell, which hath chosen the.
Isaiah 49:8 And thus sayth the Lorde: In the tyme apointed wyll I be present with the. And in the houre of healthe wyll I helpe the, and delyuer the. I wyll make the a pledge for the people, so that thou shalte helpe vp the earthe agayne, and chalenge agayne the scatred herytages:
Isaiah 49:9 That thou mayest saye to the presonners: go forth, & to them that are in darknesse: come into the lyght, that they may fede in the hye wayes, and get theyr lyuynge in all places.
Isaiah 49:10 There shall neyther hunger nor thurste, heate nor sunne hurte them. For he that fauoureth them, shall leade them, and geue them drincke of the sprynge welles.
Isaiah 49:11 I wyll make wayes vpon all my mountaynes, & my fote pathes shalbe exalted.
Isaiah 49:12 And beholde, they shall come from farre: lo, some from the north and weste, some from the south.
Isaiah 49:13 Reioyse ye heauens, and synge prayses thou earthe: Talke of ioye ye hylles, for God wyll comforte hys people, and haue mercye vpon hys, that be in trouble.
Isaiah 49:14 Then shal Syon saye: God hath forsaken me, and the Lorde hath forgotten me.
Isaiah 49:15 Doth a wyfe forget the chylde of her wombe, & the sonne whom she hath borne? And though she do forget, yet wyll not I forget the.
Isaiah 49:16 Beholde, I haue written the vp vpon my handes, thy walles are euer in my syght.
Isaiah 49:17 They that haue broken the doune, shall make haste to build the vp agayne: and they that made the waste, shall dwell in the.
Isaiah 49:18 Lyft vp thyne eyes, & loke aboute the: all these shall gather them together, and come to the. As truly as I lyue (saith the Lorde) thou shalte put them all vpon the, as an apparell, and gyrde them to the, as a bryde doth her Iewels.
Isaiah 49:19 As for thy lande that lyeth desolate, wasted & destroyed: it shalbe to narowe for them, that shall dwell in it. And they that wolde deuoure the, shalbe farre awaye.
Isaiah 49:20 Then the childe whom the baren shal bringe forth vnto the, shall saye in thyne eare: thys place is to narowe, syt nye together, that I maye haue roume.
Isaiah 49:21 Then shalt thou thincke by thy self: Who hath begotten me these: seing I am baren & alone, a captyue & an oute cast? And who hath noryshed them vp for me? I am desolate and alone, but from whence come these?
Isaiah 49:22 And therfore thus sayth the Lorde God. Beholde, I wyll stretch out myne hand to the Gentyles, and set vp my token to the people, They shal bryng the thy sonnes in theyr lappes, and carye thy doughters vnto the vpon theyr shoulders.
Isaiah 49:23 For kynges shalbe thy noursynge fathers, and Quenes shalbe thy noursynge mothers. They shall fall before the wt theyr faces flat vpon the earth, and lycke vp the duste of thy fete: that thou mayest knowe, how that I am the Lord. And wo so putteth his trust in me, shal not be confounded.
Isaiah 49:24 Who spoyleth the gyaunte of hys praye? or who taketh the presoner from the mightye?
Isaiah 49:25 And therefore thus sayeth the Lorde: The prysoners shalbe taken from the gyaunte, & the spoyle delyuered from the vyoleute: for I wil maintayne thy cause agaynste thyne aduersaryes, and saue thy sonnes.
Isaiah 49:26 And wyl fede thyne enemyes with their owne fleshe, and make them dryncke of theyr owne bloude, as of swete wyne. And all fleshe shall knowe (O Iacob) that I am the Lorde thy Sauyoure & stronge auenger.

CHAPTER: 50

Isaiah 50:1 Thus sayeth the Lorde: Where is the byll of your mothers deuorcement, that I sente vnto her or who is the vsurer, to whome I solde you? Beholde, for youre owne offences are ye solde: & because of youre transgression, is youre mother forsaken.
Isaiah 50:2 For why wolde no man receyue me, when I came and when I called, no man gaue me aunswere. Was my hande clene smyten of, that it might not helpe? or had I not power to delyuer? lo, at a worde I drincke vp the sea, and of water floudes I make drye lande: so that for want of water, the fysh corruppe and dye of thurst.
Isaiah 50:3 As for heauen, I clothe it wyth darcknesse, & put a sack vpon it.
Isaiah 50:4 The Lorde God hath geuen me a wel learned tunge, so that I can comforte them whiche are troubled, yea & that in due ceason. He waked myne eare vp by tymes in the mornynge (as the scolemasters do) that I myght herken.
Isaiah 50:5 The Lord God hath opened myne eare, therfore can I not saye naye, nor withdrawe my selfe,
Isaiah 50:6 but I offre my backe vnto the smyters, & my chekes to the uyppers. I turne not my face from shame & spyttynge,
Isaiah 50:7 for the Lorde God helpeth me, therfore shall I not be confounded. I haue hardened my face like a flynt stone, for I am sure, that I shall not come to confusyon.
Isaiah 50:8 Myne aduocate speaketh for me, who wyl then go with me to law? Let vs stand one agaynste another: yf there be any that wyll reason with me, let him come here forth to me.
Isaiah 50:9 Beholde the Lord God standeth by me, what is he that can condempne me? lo, they shalbe all lyke as an olde clothe, whiche the mothes shall eate vp.
Isaiah 50:10 Therfore who so feareth the Lorde among you let hym heare the voyce of hys seruaunt, Who so walketh in darcknesse, and no lyghte shyneth vpon hym, let hym hope in the Lord, and holde hym by his God.
Isaiah 50:11 But take hede ye haue all kyndled a fyre, and gyrded youre selues with the flamme: Ye walcke in the glysteryng of youre owne fyre, and in the flamme that ye haue kyndled. This cometh vnto you from my hande, namely that ye shall slepe in sorowe.

CHAPTER: 51

Isaiah 51:1 Herken vnto me, ye that hold of ryghtuousnes, ye that seke the Lord. Take hede vnto the stone whereout ye are hewen, and to the graue whereoute ye are digged.
Isaiah 51:2 Consydre Abraham youre father, & Sara that bare you: how that I called him alone prospered hym well, & encreased him:
Isaiah 51:3 how the Lorde comforted Syon, and repayred all her decaye: makynge her deserte as a Paradyse, & her wyldernesse as the garden of the Lorde. Myrth and ioye was there, thanckesgeuynge and the voyce of prayse.
Isaiah 51:4 Haue respecte vnto me then, O my people, and laye thyne eare to me: for a lawe and an ordynaunce shall go forth from me, to lyghten the Gentyles.
Isaiah 51:5 It is harde by, that my health & my ryghteousnesse shall go forthe, and the people shalbe ordered wyth myne arme. The Ilandes (that is the Gentyles) shall hope in me, & put theyr truste in myne arme.
Isaiah 51:6 Lyfte vp youre eyes towarde heauen, & loke vpon the earthe beneth. For the heauens shall vanyshe awaye lyke smoke, & the earthe shall teare lyke a clothe, & they that dwell therein, shall peryshe in lyke maner. But my healthe endureth for euer, & my ryghtuousnes shall not cease.
Isaiah 51:7 Therfore herken vnto me, ye that haue pleasure in rightuousnes, thou people that bearest my lawe in thyne herte. Feare not the curse of men, be not afrayde of theyr blasphemies & reuylynges:
Isaiah 51:8 for wormes and mothes shal eate them vp lyke cloth and wol. But my ryghtuousnesse shall endure for euer, & my sauinge health from generacion to generacyon,
Isaiah 51:9 Wake vp, wake vp, and be strong: O thou arme of the Lorde: wake vp, lyke as in tymes paste, euer and sence the worlde beganne.
Isaiah 51:10 Arte not thou he, that haste wounded that proude lucyfer, & hewen the dragon in peces? Arte not thou euen he, whiche haste dryed vp the depe of the sea, whiche haste made playne the sea grounde, that the delyuered myght go thorow?
Isaiah 51:11 That the redemed of the Lord, which turned agayne, myghte come wyth ioye vnto Syon, there to endure for euer? That myrthe and gladnesse might be with them, that sorow & wo myght fle from them?
Isaiah 51:12 Yea I, I am euen he, that in all thynges geueth you consolacion. What arte thou then, that fearest a mortal man, the chylde of man, whiche goeth awaye as doeth the floure?
Isaiah 51:13 And forgettest the Lord that made the, that spred oute the heauens, & layde the foundacyon of the earthe. But thou arte euer afrayde for the syght of thyne oppressour whiche is ready to do harme: Where is the wrath of the oppressoure?
Isaiah 51:14 It commeth on fast it maketh haste to apeare: It shall not perysh, that it shulde not be able to destroye, neyther shall it fayle for faute of noryshyng.
Isaiah 51:15 I am the Lorde thy God, that make the sea to be styl, & to rage: whose name is the Lorde of Hostes.
Isaiah 51:16 I shall put my worde also in thy mouth, & defende the with the turninge of my hande: that thou mayest plante the heauens, and laye the foundacyns of the earth, and saye vnto Sion: thou arte my people.
Isaiah 51:17 Awake, awake, and stande vp, O Ierusalem, thou that from the hande of the Lorde, hast droncken oute the cuppe of hys wrath, thou that hast supped of, and sucked oute the slombrynge cuppe to the bottome.
Isaiah 51:18 For amonge all the sonnes whome thou haste begotten, there is not one that maye holde the vp: and not one to leade the by the hande, of al the sonnes that thou hast noryshed.
Isaiah 51:19 Both these thynges are happened vnto the, but who is sorye for it: Yea, destruccyon, wastynge, hunger, & swerde: but who hath conforted the?
Isaiah 51:20 Thy sonnes lye comfortles at the heade of euery strete lyke a taken venyson, and are full of the terryble wrath of the Lorde, & punyshmente of thy God.
Isaiah 51:21 And therfore thou myserable & droncken (howbe it not with wyne) Heare this:
Isaiah 51:22 Thus sayth thy Lorde, thy Lorde & God, the defender of his people: Beholde, I wyll take the slombrynge cuppe oute of thy hande, euen the cuppe with the dregges of my wrathe: that from hence forthe thou shalt neuer drincke it more,
Isaiah 51:23 & wyll put it in theyr hande that trouble the: whiche haue spoken to thy soule: stoupe doune, that we maye go ouer the: make thy body eauen with the grounde, and as the strete to go vpon.

CHAPTER: 52

Isaiah 52:1 Vp Syon vp, take thy strengthe vnto the: put on thyne honeste rayment O Ierusalem, thou citie of the holye one. For from thys tyme forthe, there shall no vncyrcumcysed nor vncleane person come in the.
Isaiah 52:2 Shake the from the dust, aryse and stand vp, O Ierusalem. Plucke oute thy necke from the bonde. O thou captyue doughter Syon.
Isaiah 52:3 For thus sayth the Lord: ye are solde for naughte, therfor shal ye be redemed also without anye moneye.
Isaiah 52:4 For thus hath the Lorde sayde: My people wente doune afore tyme into Egypte, there to be straungers. Afterwarde dyd the kynge of the Assyryans oppresse them, for naughte.
Isaiah 52:5 And nowe what profyt is it to me (sayeth the Lorde) that my people is frely caryed awaye, & brought into heuynes by theyr rulers, and my name euer styll blasphemed? saith the Lorde.
Isaiah 52:6 But that my people maye knowe my name, I my selfe will speache in that daye. Beholde, here am I.
Isaiah 52:7 O howe bewtyfull are the fete of the Embassytoure, that bryngeth the message from the mountaine, and proclameth peace, that bringeth the good tydynges, and preacheth health, and sayeth vnto Syon. Thy God is the kynge.
Isaiah 52:8 Thy watchemen shall lyft vp theyr voyce with loude voyce shall they preache of him: for they shall se him presente, when the Lorde shall come agayne to Syon.
Isaiah 52:9 Be glad, O thou desolate Ierusalem, and reioyce together, for the Lorde wyll comforte hys people, he wyll delyuer Ierusalem.
Isaiah 52:10 The Lorde wyl make bare hys holye arme, and shewe it forthe in the sight of al the Gentyls, & all the endes of the earthe shall se the sauing healthe of oure God.
Isaiah 52:11 Awaye, awaye, get you oute from thence, and touche no vnclean thing. Go oute from amonge suche. And be cleane, ye that beare the vessell of the Lorde.
Isaiah 52:12 But ye shall not go oute with sedicion, nor make hast as they that fle awaye: for the Lord shall go before you, and the God of Israel shal kepe the watche.
Isaiah 52:13 Beholde, my seruaunt shall deale wysely, therfore shall he be magnyfyed, exalted and greatly honoured.
Isaiah 52:14 Lyke as the multitude shal wondre vpon hym, because his face shalbe so deformed & not as a mans face, & hys bewtye lyke no man:
Isaiah 52:15 Euen so shall the multitude of the Gentyles loke vnto hym, & the kinges shall shut theyr mouthes before hym. For they that haue not bene tolde of hym, shall se hym, and they that hearde nothynge of hym, shall beholde hym.

CHAPTER: 53

Isaiah 53:1 Bvt who geueth credence vnto oure preachynge? Or to whome is the arme of the Lorde knowne?
Isaiah 53:2 He shall growe before the Lorde lyke as a braunche, and as a rote in a drye grounde, he shall haue neither bewtye nor fauoure. When we loke vpon him there shalbe no fayrenesse: we shall haue no lust vnto him
Isaiah 53:3 He shalbe the most simple, and despysed of all, which yet hath good experience of sorowes & infyrmyties. We shall reken him so symple and so vyle, that we shall hyde our faces from hym.
Isaiah 53:4 Howbeit (of a trueth) he only taketh awaye oure infyrmyte, and beareth our payne: Yet we shal iudge him, as though he were plaged & caste doune of God:
Isaiah 53:5 where as he (notwithstanding) shal be wounded for oure offences, & smytten for oure wickednes. For the payne of oure punyshmente shalbe sayde vpon hym, and with hys strypes shall we be healed.
Isaiah 53:6 As for vs, we go all astraye (lyke shepe) euery one turneth hys owne waye. But thorow hym, the Lorde pardoneth all oure synnes.
Isaiah 53:7 He shall be payned & troubled, and shal not open his mouth. He shalbe led as a shepe to be slayne, yet shall he be as styll as a lambe before the shearer, and not open hys mouthe.
Isaiah 53:8 He shall be had awaye, hys cause not hearde, & wythout any iudgement: Whose generacion yet no man maye nombre, when he shalbe cut of from the grounde of the lyuyng: Which punishment shall go vpon him, for the transgression of my people.
Isaiah 53:9 His graue shalbe geuen hym with the condempned, & hys crucyfyenge with the theues. Where as he dyd neuer vyolente nor vuryght, neyther had there bene any disceytfulnesse in hys month.
Isaiah 53:10 Yet hath it pleased the Lorde to smyte him with infirmite, that when he had made hys soule an offerynge for synne, he myght se longe lasting sede. And this deuyce of the Lord shall prospere in hys hande.
Isaiah 53:11 Wyth trauayle and laboure of hys soule, shall he obtayne great ryches. My ryghtuous seruaunte shall wyth hys wysdome iustifye & delyuer the multitude, for he shal beare away theyr synnes,
Isaiah 53:12 Therfore wyll I geue him the multytude for hys parte, and he shall deuyde the stronge spoyle because he shall geue ouer hys soule to death, & shalbe rekened amonge the transgressours, which neuertheles shall take away the sinnes of the multytude, and make intercessyon for the mysdoers.

CHAPTER: 54

Isaiah 54:1 Therfore be glad nowe, thou baren that bearest not. Reioyce, singe, and be mery, thou that arte not with chyld. For the desolate hath mo children, then the maried wife sayeth the Lorde.
Isaiah 54:2 Make thy tente wyder, and sprede out the hanginges of thyne habytacion: spare not, laye forth thy coardes, and make faste thy stakes,
Isaiah 54:3 for thou shalt breake oute on the ryght syde and on the left, & thy sede shall haue the Gentyles in possessyon, & dwell in the desolate cities.
Isaiah 54:4 Feare not, for thou shalte not be confounded: Be not ashamed, for thou shalt not come to confusyon. Yea thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remembre the dyshonoure of thy wedowheade.
Isaiah 54:5 For he that made the, shalbe thy Lorde & husband (whose name is the Lorde of hostes) & thyne auenger shalbe euen the holy one of Israel, the Lorde of the whole worlde.
Isaiah 54:6 For the Lord shal call the, beynge as a desolate sorowful woman and as a younge wyfe that hath broken her wedlocke: sayeth thy God.
Isaiah 54:7 A lytle whyle haue I forsaken the, but with greate mercyfulnes shall I take the vp vnto me.
Isaiah 54:8 When I was angry, I hyde my face from the for a lytle season, but thorowe euerlasting goodnes shall I pardon the, sayeth the Lorde thyne auenger.
Isaiah 54:9 And this must be vnto me as the water of Noe: for as lyke I haue sworne that I wyll not brynge the water of Noe any more vpon the worlde: so haue I sworne that I wil neuer be angrye with the, nor reproue the:
Isaiah 54:10 The mountaynes shal remoue and the hylles shal fal doune: but my louing kindnesse shall not moue, & the bonde of my peace shal not fal doune from the, saith the lord thy mercifull louer.
Isaiah 54:11 Beholde thou pore, vexed and despysed: I will make thy walles of precious stones, & thy foundacyon of Saphires,
Isaiah 54:12 thy wyndowes of Christal, thy gates of fyne cleare stone, and thy borders of pleasaunt stones.
Isaiah 54:13 Thy children shall all be taught of god & I wyll geue them plenteousnes of peace.
Isaiah 54:14 In rightuousnes shalt thou be grounded, and be farre from oppressyon: for the whiche thou nedeste not be afrayed, nether for hynderaunce for it shall not come nye the.
Isaiah 54:15 Beholde, the aleaunt that was farre from the, shal dwel with the: & he that was sometyme a straunger vnto the. shalbe ioyned with the:
Isaiah 54:16 Beholde, I make the smyth that bloweth the coales in the fyre, & he maketh a weapen after hys handy worck. I make also the waster to destroye:
Isaiah 54:17 but al the weapens that are made agaynste the, shal not prospere. And as for all tunges, that shall resiste the in iudgement, thou shalte ouercome them, and condempne them. This is the herytage of the Lordes seruauntes, and the ryghtuousnes that they shal haue of me, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 55

Isaiah 55:1 Come to the waters all ye, that be thurstye, & ye that haue no money. Come, bye, that ye maye haue to eate. Come bye wine & mylcke, without any money or money worth.
Isaiah 55:2 Wherfore do ye laye oute youre moneye, for the thing that fedeth not, and spende youre laboure aboute the thynge that satisfyed you not. But herken rather vnto me, & ye shall eate of the beste, & youre soule shall haue her pleasure in plentuousnes.
Isaiah 55:3 Encline youre eares, & come vnto me, take hede, & your soule shall lyue. For I wyll make an euerlastynge couenaunt wyth you, euen the sure mercyes of Dauid.
Isaiah 55:4 Beholde, I shall geue him for a wytnesse amonge the folke, for a Prynce and Captaine vnto the people.
Isaiah 55:5 Lo, thou shalte call an vnknowne people: & a people that had no knowledge of the, shall runne vnto the: because of the Lorde thy God, the holye one of Israell, which glorifieth the.
Isaiah 55:6 Seke the Lorde, whyle he maye be founde, & call vpon hym whyle he is nye.
Isaiah 55:7 Let the vngodly man forsake his wayes & the vnrighteous his ymaginacions, & turne agayne vnto the Lorde: so shall he be mercyfull vnto him: & to oure God, for he is redy to forgeue.
Isaiah 55:8 For thus saith the Lorde: my thoughtes are not youre thoughtes, & youre wayes are not my wayes,
Isaiah 55:9 but as farre as the heauens are hyer then the earth, so farre do my wayes exceade yours, and my thoughtes yours.
Isaiah 55:10 And lyke as the rayne & snowe commeth doune from heauen, & returneth not thyther agayne, but watereth the earthe, maketh it frutefull and grene, that it maye geue corne and breade vnto the sower:
Isaiah 55:11 So the worde also that commeth oute of my mouthe shall not turne agayne voyde vnto me, but shall accomplysh my wil & prospere in the thinge, whereto I sende it.
Isaiah 55:12 And so shall ye go forth with ioye, & be led with peace. The mountaynes & hilles shal sing with you for ioye, and all the trees of the feld shall clappe theyr handes.
Isaiah 55:13 For thornes, there shall growe. Fyrre trees, & the Myrre tre in the steade of breres. And thys shall be done to the prayse of the Lorde, and for an euerlasting token, that shall not be taken awaye.

CHAPTER: 56

Isaiah 56:1 Thus sayth the Lord Kepe equite, and do ryght, for my sauing health shal come shortly, & my righteousnes shalbe opened.
Isaiah 56:2 Blessed is the man that doth this & the mans chylde which kepeth the same. He that taketh hede, that he vnhalow not the Sabboth (that is) he that kepeth him self that he do no euyll.
Isaiah 56:3 Then shall not the straunger, which cleaueth to the Lorde, saye: Alas the Lorde hath shut me cleane oute from his people. Nether shall the gelded man say: lo, I am a drye tre.
Isaiah 56:4 For thus sayth the Lorde, fyrste vnto the gelded that kepeth my Sabboth: Namelye: that holdeth greately of the thynge that pleaseth me, and kepeth my couenaunte:
Isaiah 56:5 Vnto them wyll I geue in my housholde and within my walles, a better herytage and name then yf they had bene called sonnes and doughters I wyll geue them an euerlastynge name, that shall not peryshe.
Isaiah 56:6 Agayne, he sayeth vnto the straungers that are dysposed to stycke to the Lorde, to serue hym, and to loue hys name: That they shalbe no bonde men. And all they whiche kepe them selues, that they vnhalowe not the Sabboth, namely that they fulfil my couenaunt.
Isaiah 56:7 Then wyll I brynge to my holye mountayne, and make them ioyfull in my house of prayer. Their burnt offeringes & sacryfyces shalbe accepted vpon mine aulter, for my house shalbe an house of prayer for all people.
Isaiah 56:8 Thus sayeth the Lorde God whiche gathered together the scatred of Israel: I wil bring yet another congregacion to him.
Isaiah 56:9 Al the beastes of the felde, and al the beastes of the wood shal come to deuoure hym.
Isaiah 56:10 For hys watch men are al blind, they haue altogether no vnderstandyng, they are al domme dogges, not beyng able to barcke, they are slepery: slogish are they, & lye snortynge:
Isaiah 56:11 they are shamelesse dogges, that be neuer satisfyed. The sheperdes also in lyke maner haue no vnderstanding but euery man turneth his owne way, euery one after his owne couetousnes with all hys power.
Isaiah 56:12 Come (saye they) I wil fetche wyne, so shall we fyll oure selues, that we maye be droncken. And to morowe, lyke as to daye, yea and much more.

CHAPTER: 57

Isaiah 57:1 Bvt in the meane season the righteous perysheth, and no man regardeth it in his herte. Good godly people are taken awaye, and noman consydreth it. Namely: that the righteous is conuayed awaye thorowe the wicked,
Isaiah 57:2 that he him selfe myght be in reste, lye quietly vpon his bed, & lyue after his owne pleasure.
Isaiah 57:3 Come hyther therfore ye charmers children, ye sonnes of the aduoutrer & the whore:
Isaiah 57:4 Wherin take ye your pleasure? Vpon whom gape ye with your mouth and bleare out your tonge? Are ye not children of aduoutry, and a sede of dissimulacion?
Isaiah 57:5 Ye take youre pleasure vnder the okes, and vnder all grene trees, the childe beyng slayne in the valleys, and dennes of stone.
Isaiah 57:6 Thy part shalbe with the stony rockes by the ryuer. Yea euen these shalbe thy part. For there thou hast poured meat and drinckeofferinges vnto them. Shoulde I ouerse that?
Isaiah 57:7 Thou hast made thy bed vpon hye mountaynes, thou wentest vp thither, and there hast thou slayne sacryfyces.
Isaiah 57:8 Behinde the dores and postes, hast thou set vp thy remembraunce. When thou haddest discouered thy selfe to another then me, when thou wentest doune & made thy bed wyder (that is) when thou diddest carue the certayne of yonder Idols, & louedest their couches, where thou sawest them.
Isaiah 57:9 Thou wentest streyght to kinges with oyle & diuerse oyntmentes (that is) thou hast sente thy messaungers farre of, and yet arte thou fallen into the pyt therby.
Isaiah 57:10 Thou hast had trouble for the multitude of thine owne waies, yet saydest thou neuer: I will leaue of. Thou thynkest to haue lyfe (or health) of thy selfe, & therfore thou beleuest not that thou art syck.
Isaiah 57:11 For when wilt thou be abashed or fear seinge: thou hast broken thy promise, and remembrest not me, neyther hast me in thyne herte? Thinkest thou, that I also will holde my peace (as a fore tyme) that thou fearest me not?
Isaiah 57:12 Yea verely I wil declare thy goodnes and thy workes, but they shal not profyt that
Isaiah 57:13 when thou criest, let thy chosen heape deliuer the. But the winde shall take them al away, & cary them into the ayre. Neuertheles, they that put there trust in me, shal inheret the lande, and haue my holy hill in possession.
Isaiah 57:14 And therfore thus he sayeth: Make ready, make ready, & clense the strete, take vp what ye can oute of the waye that ledeth to my people.
Isaiah 57:15 For thus sayeth the hye and excellent, euen he that dwelleth in euerlastingnesse, whose name is the holy one. I dwell hye aboue & in the sanctuary, and with him also, that is of a contrite & humble spirite: that I maye heale a troubled mind, & a contrite hert.
Isaiah 57:16 For I chide not euer, & am not wroth without ende. But the blastinge goeth from me, though I make the breath.
Isaiah 57:17 I am wroth with him for his couetousnes and lust, I smyte him, I hyd me, and am angry, when he turneth him selfe, & foloweth the by the waye of his owne herte.
Isaiah 57:18 But yf I may se his right way againe, I make hym whole, I lede him and restore him vnto them, whome he maketh ioyfull, and that were sorye for him.
Isaiah 57:19 I make the frutes of thankesgeuynge. I geue peace vnto them that are farre of, and to them that are nye. saye I the Lord, that make hym whole.
Isaiah 57:20 But the wycked are lyke the raryng sea, that can not reste, whose water fometh with the myre and grauel.
Isaiah 57:21 Euen so the wycked haue no peace, saieth my God.

CHAPTER: 58

Isaiah 58:1 And therfore crye now, as loude as thou canst. Leaue not of, lyft vp thy voyce like a trompet, and shewe my people their offences, and the house of Iacob their synnes.
Isaiah 58:2 For they seke me daylye and wyll knowe my waies, euen as it were a people that did right & had not forsaken the statutes of their God. They argue with me concerninge right iudgement, and wil pleate at the lawe with their God.
Isaiah 58:3 Wherfore fast we (saye they) and thou seist it not? we put oure lyues to straytnesse, & thou regardest it not?
Isaiah 58:4 Beholde, when ye fast, your lust remayneth still: for ye do no lesse vyolence to youre detters: lo, ye falle to stryfe and debate, and to smite hym wyth youre fyst that speaketh vnto you. Ye fast not (as som tyme) that your voyce might be hearde aboue.
Isaiah 58:5 Thyncke ye this fast pleaseth me, that a man shoulde chasten him self for a daye, and to writhe his head aboute lyke an hoke in an hearry cloth, and to lye vpon the earth? Shoulde that be called fasting, or a daye that pleaseth the Lord.
Isaiah 58:6 But this fastyng pleaseth not me, til the tyme be thou louse him out of bondage, that is in thy daunger: that thou breake the ooth of wicked barginnes, that thou let the oppressed go fre and take from them all maner of burthens.
Isaiah 58:7 It pleaseth not me, tyll thou deale thy breade to the hungry, and brynge the poore fatherlesse home into thy house, when thou seyste the naked that thou couer him, and hyde not thy face from thyne owne fleshe.
Isaiah 58:8 Then shall thy lighte breake forthe as the morninge, and thy healthe floryshe ryghte shortlie: thy righteousnesse shall go before the, and the glorye of the Lorde shall embrace the.
Isaiah 58:9 Then yf thou callest, the Lorde shall answere the: yf thou cryest, he shall saye: here I am. Yea, yf thou layest awaie thy burthens, and holdest thy fingers, and ceasest from blasphemous talkinge,
Isaiah 58:10 yf thou hast compassyon vpon the hongrye, and refresshest the troubled soule: Then shall thy light sprynge oute in the darcknesse, and thy darckenesse shalbe as the noone day.
Isaiah 58:11 The Lord shal euer be thy gyde, and satisfye the desire of thyne herte, and fyl thy bones with marye. Thou shalt be like a freshwatred garden, and lyke the founteyne of water, that neuer leaueth running.
Isaiah 58:12 Then the places that haue euer bene waste, shalbe buylded of the: there shalt thou lay a foundacion for many kinredes: thou shalt be called the maker vp of hedges, and the buylder againe of the waye of the Sabboth.
Isaiah 58:13 Yea yf thou turne thy fete from the Sabboth, so that thou do not the thynge whyche pleaseth thy selfe in my holy daye: then shalte thou be called vnto the pleasaunt, holy, & gloryous Sabboth of the Lorde, where thou shalt be in honoure: so that thou do not after thyne owne ymaginacion, neyther seke thine owne wyll, nor speake thyne owne wordes.
Isaiah 58:14 Then shalt thou haue thy pleasure in the lord whyche shal carye the hye aboue the earthe, & fede the wt the heretage of Iacob thy father for the lordes owne mouthe hath so promised.

CHAPTER: 59

Isaiah 59:1 Beholde, the Lordes hand is not so shortened, that it can not helpe, neyther is his care so stopped, that it maye not heare.
Isaiah 59:2 But youre misdedes haue separated you from youre God, and youre synnes hyde his face from you, that he heareth you not.
Isaiah 59:3 For your handes are defiled with bloud and youre fyngers with vnryghteousnesse. Youre lippes speake lesinges, and your tong setteth oute wickednes.
Isaiah 59:4 Noman regardeth righteousnes, and noman iudged truely. Euery man hopeth in vayne thinges, and ymagyneth disceyte, conceyueth werynesse, and bringeth forth euyl.
Isaiah 59:5 They brede cockatrice egges, and weue the spyders webbe Who so eateth of their egges, dyeth. But yf one treade vpon them, there commeth vp a serpent.
Isaiah 59:6 Their webbe maketh no clothe and they maye not couer them with their laboures. Their dedes are the dedes of wickednes, and the worck of robbery is in their handes:
Isaiah 59:7 Their fete runne to euyll, & they make haste to shed innocent bloude. Their councels are wycked councel, harme and destruccion are in their wayes.
Isaiah 59:8 But the way of peace they know not. In their goinge is no equite, their wayes are so crocked, that whosoeuer goeth therin, knoweth nothinge of peace.
Isaiah 59:9 And this is the cause that equyte is so far from vs, and that ryghteousnes commeth not nye vs. We loke for light, lo, it is darcknesse: for the morninge shine, se we walke in the darcke.
Isaiah 59:10 We grope like the blinde vpon the wal, we grope euen as one that hath none eyes. We stomble at the none daye, as thoughe it were toward night, in the fallynge places, lyke men that are halfe deade.
Isaiah 59:11 We roare all lyke Beeres, and mourne still like doues. We loke for equyte, but there is none: for health, but it is farre from vs.
Isaiah 59:12 For oure offences are many before the, and oure sinnes testifie against vs. Yea we must confesse that we offende, and knowledge that we do amysse:
Isaiah 59:13 Namely transgresse and dissemble agaynst the Lorde, and fall awaye from oure God: vsinge presumptuous and trayterous ymaginacions, and castynge false matters in oure hertes.
Isaiah 59:14 And therfore is equyte gone a syde, & ryghteousnes standeth farre of: truthe is fallen doune in the strete, and the thinge that is playne and open, maye not be shewed.
Isaiah 59:15 Yea, the truth is layde in preson, and he that refraineth him selfe from euyl, must be spoyled. When the Lorde sawe this, it dyspleased him sore, that there was no where any equite.
Isaiah 59:16 He sawe also, that there was noman, whiche had pitie thereof, or was greued at it. And he helde him by hys owne power, and cleued to his owne ryghteousnes.
Isaiah 59:17 He put ryghteousnes vpon him for a brest plate, and set the helmet of health vpon his heade. He put on wrath steade of clothinge, and toke gelousye aboute hym for a cloke
Isaiah 59:18 (lyke as when a man goeth forth wrothfully to recompence his enemies, and to be auenged of his aduersaryes.) Namely that he might recompence and rewarde the Ilandes,
Isaiah 59:19 where thorowe the name of the Lorde might be feared, from the rysynge of the Sunne: and his magesty, vnto the goinge doune of the same. For he shall come as a vyolente waterstreame, whyche the winde of the Lorde hath moued.
Isaiah 59:20 But vnto Sion there shall come a redemer, and vnto them is Iacob that turne from wyckednesse, sayeth the Lorde.
Isaiah 59:21 I wyll make this couenaunt with them (sayeth the Lorde): My spirite that is come vpon the, and the wordes whyche I haue put in thy mouthe, shall neuer go out of thy mouthe, nor oute of the mouth of thy childers chyldren, from this tyme forth for euermore.

CHAPTER: 60

Isaiah 60:1 And therfore get the vp by tymes, for thy lyght cometh, and the glory of the Lorde shall ryse vp vpon the.
Isaiah 60:2 For lo, whyle the darcknesse and cloude couered the earth and the people, the Lorde shal shew the lyght, and hys glorye shalbe sene in the.
Isaiah 60:3 The Gentyles shal come to thy light, & kynges to the brightnes that springeth forth vpon the.
Isaiah 60:4 Lyft vp thyne eyes, & loke round aboute the: All these gather them selues, and come to the. Sonnes shal come vnto the from farre, and doughters shal gather them selues to the on euery syde.
Isaiah 60:5 When thou seyst this, thou shalt maruel exceadingly, and thine hert shal be opened: when the power of the sea shalbe conuerted vnto the (that is) when the strength of the Gentiles shall come vnto the.
Isaiah 60:6 The multitude of Camels shall couer the, the dromedaries of Madian and Epha. Al they of Saba shal come, bringinge golde and incense, and shewinge the prayse of the Lorde.
Isaiah 60:7 All the catel of Cedar shalbe gathered vnto the, the rammes of Nabaioth shall serue the, to be offred vpon myne aulter, whiche I haue chosen, and in the house of my glory, whiche I haue garnyshed.
Isaiah 60:8 But what are these that fle here like the cloudes, and as the doues flyenge to their wyndowes?
Isaiah 60:9 The Iles also shall gather them vnto me, and specially the shippes of the sea: that they maye bringe the sonnes from farre, and their syluer and their goulde with them, vnto the name of the Lorde thy God, vnto the holye one of Israel, that hath glorifyed the.
Isaiah 60:10 Straungers shall buylde vp thy walles, and their kinges shall do thy seruice. For when I am angrie, I smyte the: & when it pleaseth me, I pardon the.
Isaiah 60:11 The gates shall stande open still both daye and night, and neuer be shut: that the hoste of the Gentiles may come, and that their kinges may be brought vnto the.
Isaiah 60:12 For euery poeple & kingedom that serueth not the, shal perysh, and be destroyed with the swerd.
Isaiah 60:13 The glorye of Libanus shall come vnto the. The Fyrre trees, Boxes and Cedres together, to garnish the place of my Sanctuarye, for I will glorifie the place of my fete.
Isaiah 60:14 Moreouer those shall come knelinge vnto the, that haue vexed the: and al they that despised the, shal fall doune at thy fote. Thou shalt be called the citie of the Lorde, the holye Sion of Israel.
Isaiah 60:15 Because thou hast bene forsaken and hated, so that noman went thorowe the: I wyl make the glorious for euer and euer, and ioyfull thorowe oute all posterities.
Isaiah 60:16 Thou shalt sucke the mylcke of the Gentiles, and kinges brestes shal fede the. And thou shalt knowe that I the Lorde am thy Sauyoure and defender, the mightie one of Iacob.
Isaiah 60:17 For brasse, will I geue the golde, and for yron siluer: for wood brasse, & for stones yron. I will make peace thy ruler, and ryghteousnes thyne officer.
Isaiah 60:18 Violence and robbery shall neuer be heard of in thy land, neither harme and destruccyon within thy borders. The walles shalbe calleth healthe, and thy gate the prayse of God.
Isaiah 60:19 The Sunne shall neuer be thy day lyght, and the light of the Mone shal neuer shyne vnto the, but the Lorde hym selfe shalbe thyne euerlasting lyght, and thy God shalbe thy glory.
Isaiah 60:20 Thy Sunne shall neuer go doune, & thy Mone shal not be taken awaye, for the Lorde him selfe shalbe thy euerlastynge light, & thy sorowfull dayes shalbe rewarded the.
Isaiah 60:21 Thy people shalbe all godly, and possesse the land for euer: the floure of my plantinge, the worcke of my handes, whereof I wyll reioyce.
Isaiah 60:22 The youngest and leest shall growe into a thousande, and the symplest into a strong people. I the Lorde shall shortly bringe this thinge to passe in hys tyme.

CHAPTER: 61

Isaiah 61:1 The spirite of the Lorde God is with me, for the Lorde hath annointed me, & sent me, to preache good tydinges vnto the poore, that I myght binde vp the wounded hertes, that I myght preach delyueraunce to the captyue, and open the preson to them that are bounde:
Isaiah 61:2 that I myght declare the acceptable yeare of the Lorde, and the daye of the vengeaunce of oure God: that I myghte comforte al them that are in heauynesse,
Isaiah 61:3 that I might geue vnto them that mourne in Sion bewtye in the steade of ashes, ioyful oyntment for syghing, pleasaunt rayment for an heauy mynde: That they might be called excellente in ryghteousnesse, a plantinge of the Lord for hym to reioyce in.
Isaiah 61:4 They shal builde the longe roughe wyldernes, and set vp the olde deserte, They shal repayre the waste places, & such as haue bene voyde thorow out many generacions.
Isaiah 61:5 Straungers shall stande and fede your catel, and the Aleauntes shalbe your ploumen and repers.
Isaiah 61:6 But ye shalbe named the priestes of the lord, & men shall call you the seruauntes of oure God. Ye shall enioye the goodes of the Gentiles and triumphe in their substaunce.
Isaiah 61:7 For your greate reprofe & shame, shall they haue ioy that ye may haue parte with them. For they shall haue double possession in their lande, & euerlastinge ioy shalbe with them.
Isaiah 61:8 For I the Lorde, whiche loue right and hate robberye (though it were offred me) shal make their worckes of faithfulnes, and make an euerlastinge couenaunt with them.
Isaiah 61:9 Their sede also and their generacion shalbe knowne amonge the Gentiles, and amonge the people. All they that se them, shal knowe that they are the hye blessed sede of the Lord.
Isaiah 61:10 And therfore I am ioyful in the Lorde, and my soule reioyseth in my God. For he shall put vpon me the garment of health, & couer me with the mantle of righteousnes. He shal decke me lyke a brydegrom, and as a bryde that hath her apparell vpon her.
Isaiah 61:11 For lyke as the ground bringeth forth frute, & as the garden shuteth forth sede. So shall the Lorde God cause ryghteousnesses, and the feare of God to floryshe forthe before all the Heathen.

CHAPTER: 62

Isaiah 62:1 For Syons sake therfore wyll I not holde my tonge, and for Ierusalems sake I wil not ceasses vntil their righteousnesses breake forth as the shininge lyghte, & their health as a burninge lampe.
Isaiah 62:2 Then shal the Gentiles se thy ryghteousnesses and all kinges thy glorye. Thou shalt be named wyth a newe name, whyche the mouthe of the Lorde shal shewe.
Isaiah 62:3 Thou shalt be a croune in the hande of the Lorde, and a glorious garlande in the hande of thy God.
Isaiah 62:4 From this tyme forthe thou shalt neuer be called the forsaken, & thy land shal no more be called the wildernesse. But thou shalt be called Hephribah, & thy lande Beula: for the Lorde loueth the, and thy land shalbe inhabyted.
Isaiah 62:5 And lyke as a younge man taketh a doughter to mariage, so shall God mary him selfe vnto thy sonnes. And as a brydegrome is glad of his bride, so shall God reioyse ouer the.
Isaiah 62:6 I wyll set watchmen vpon thy walles (O Ierusalem) whiche shall neyther ceasse daye nor night to preache the Lorde. And ye also shal not kepe him close,
Isaiah 62:7 nor leaue to speake of him, vntill Ierusalem be set vp, & made the prayse of the worlde.
Isaiah 62:8 The Lorde hath sworne by his right hande, and by his strong arme, that from thence forthe he will not geue thy corne to be meate for thine enemies, nor thy wyne (wherin thou hast laboured) to be dryncke for the straungers.
Isaiah 62:9 But they that haue gathered in the corne shall eate it, and geue thanckes to the Lorde: and they that haue borne in the wyne, shal drincke it in in the court of my sanctuary.
Isaiah 62:10 Stande backe, and depart a sunder, ye that stand vnder the gate: make roume ye people, repayre the strete, and take awaye the stones, & set out a token for the people.
Isaiah 62:11 Beholde, the Lorde proclameth in the endes of the worlde: tell the doughter Syon: se, thy saluacyon commeth, beholde he bryngeth his treasure wyth hym, and hys worckes go before hym.
Isaiah 62:12 For they whome the Lorde delyuereth, shalbe called the holy people: and as for the, thou shalt be named the greatly occupied, and not the forsaken.

CHAPTER: 63

Isaiah 63:1 What is he thys, that cometh from Edom, with stayned read clothes of Bolra: (whyche is so costly cloth) and cometh in so nimbly wyth all his strength: I am he that teachech ryghteousnes, and am of power to helpe.
Isaiah 63:2 Wherfore then is thy clothinge reade, and thy rayment lyke his that treadeth in the wyne presse?
Isaiah 63:3 I haue troden the presse my self alone, and of al people, there was not one with me. Thus haue I troden doune myne enemyes in my wrath, and set my fete vpon them in my indignacyon. And their bloude sprange vpon my clothes, and so haue I stayned al my raiment.
Isaiah 63:4 For the day of vengeaunce that I haue taken in hande, and the yeare of my delyueraunce is come.
Isaiah 63:5 I loked aboute me, and there was noman to shewe me any helpe, I fell doune, & no man helde me vp. Then I held me by myne owne arme, and my feruentnesse susteyned me:
Isaiah 63:6 and thus haue I troden doune the people in my wrath, and bathed them in my displeasure: In so muche that I haue shed their bloude vpon the earth.
Isaiah 63:7 I wyl declare the goodnesse of the Lorde, yea and the prayse of the Lorde for all that he hath geuen vs, for the great good that he hath done for Israel: whyche he hath geuen them of hys owne fauoure, and accordynge to the multytude of hys louynge kyndnesses.
Isaiah 63:8 For he sayde: These no doute wylbe my people and no shrynkynge chyldren, and so he was their sauyoure.
Isaiah 63:9 In their troubles he forsoke them not, but the aungel that went forthe from his presence delyuered them. Of very loue & kindnesse that he had vnto them, redemed he them. He hath borne them, and caryed them vp euer, sence the worlde beganne.
Isaiah 63:10 But after they prouoked hym to wrath, and vexed hys holy mynd, he was their enemye, and fought against them him selfe.
Isaiah 63:11 Yet remembred he the olde tyme of Moses and hys people: How he brought them from the water of the sea, as a sheperde doth wyth his shepe: how he had geuen his holy spyryte amonge them:
Isaiah 63:12 howe he had led Moses by the ryght hande with hys glorious arme: how he had deuided the water before them (wherby he gat him selfe an euerlasting name)
Isaiah 63:13 how he led them in the depe as an horse is led in the playne, that they shoulde not stomble.
Isaiah 63:14 The spirite of the Lorde led them, as a tame beast goeth in the felde. Thus (O God) hast thou led thy people, to make thy selfe a glorious name wyth all.
Isaiah 63:15 Loke doune then from heauen, and beholde the dwellinge place of thy sanctuary and thy glory: how is it, that they gelousy, thy strength the multitude of thy mercyes, & thy louynge kindnesse, will not be entreated of vs.
Isaiah 63:16 Yet art thou oure father: For Abraham knoweth vs not, neither is Israel acquainted with vs. But thou Lorde art oure father and redemer and thy name is euerlastinge.
Isaiah 63:17 O Lord wherfore hast thou led vs out of thy waye? wherfore hast thou hardened our hertes, that we feare the not? Be at one with vs agayne, for thy seruauntes sake that are of the generacion of thine heretage.
Isaiah 63:18 Thy people hath had but litle of thy Sanctuarye in possession, for oure enemies haue taken it in.
Isaiah 63:19 And we are become euen as we were from the beginninge: but thou art not their Lorde, for they haue not called vpon thy name.

CHAPTER: 64

Isaiah 64:1 O that thou wouldest cleaue the heauen in sonder, & come doune that the mountaynes might melt awaye at thy presence,
Isaiah 64:2 lyke as at an hote fyre: and that the malicious might boyle, as the water doth vpon the fyre: Wherby thy name might be knowne amonge thyne enemies, and that the Gentiles might tremble before the.
Isaiah 64:3 That thou mightest come doune, with thy wonderous straung workes, then shoulde the hilles melt at thy presence.
Isaiah 64:4 For sence the beginninge of the worlde there was none (except thou O God) that hearde or perceyueth, neyther had anye eye sene, what thou dost for them, that put their trust in the.
Isaiah 64:5 Thou helpest him that doeth ryght with cherefulnesse, and them that thyncke vpon thy wayes. But lo, thou art angry, for we offend and haue euer be in sinne, there is not one whole.
Isaiah 64:6 We are al as vncleane thinge, and all oure ryghteousnesses are as the clothes defyled with the floures of a woman: we fall euerychone as the leafe, for oure synnes carye vs awaie like the winde.
Isaiah 64:7 There is no man that calleth vpon thy name, that standeth vp to take hold by the. Therfore hydest thou thy face from vs, and consumest vs, because of oure synnes.
Isaiah 64:8 But now O Lorde, thou father of oures: we are al the claye, and thou art our potter & we are al the worke of thy handes.
Isaiah 64:9 Be not to sore displeased (O Lorde) and kepe not our offences to longe in thy remembraunce, but considre that we are all thy people.
Isaiah 64:10 The cytyes of thy Sanctuary lye waste, Sion is a wildernesse, and Ierusalem a deserte.
Isaiah 64:11 Oure holy house whiche is oure bewty, where oure fathers praysed the, is brent vp: yea all oure commodities & pleasures are wasted awaye.
Isaiah 64:12 Wylt thou not be intreated (Lorde) for all this? Wylt thou holde thy peace, and scourge vs so sore?

CHAPTER: 65

Isaiah 65:1 They shal seke my, that hytherto haue not asked for me: they shall fynde me, that hitherto haue not sought me. Then shal I say immediatly to the people that neuer called vpon my name: I am here, I am here.
Isaiah 65:2 For thus longe haue I euer holden out my handes to an vnfaithfull people, that go not the ryght waye, but after their owne ymaginacyons:
Isaiah 65:3 To a people that is euer defyinge me to my face. They make their oblacyons in gardens, and their smoke vpon aulters of brycke,
Isaiah 65:4 they lurcke amonge the graues, and lye in the dennes all nyght. They eat swyne fleshe, and vncleane broth is in their vessels.
Isaiah 65:5 Yf thou comest nye them, they saye, touch me not, for I am holyer then thou. All these men when I am angry, shalbe turned to smoke and fyre, that shall burne for euer.
Isaiah 65:6 Beholde it is written before my face and shal not be forgotten, but recompenced. I shall rewarde it them in their bosome.
Isaiah 65:7 I meane youre misdedes, and the misdedes of youre fathers together (sayeth the Lorde) whyche haue made their smokes vpon the mountaynes, and blasphemed me vpon the hylles: therefore wyll I measure their olde dedes into their bosome agayne.
Isaiah 65:8 Moreouer thus sayeth the Lord: lyke as when one would gather holy grapes, men say vnto him: breake it not of for it is holy: euen so wyll I do also for my seruauntes sake, that I wyll not destroye them all.
Isaiah 65:9 But I wyl take a sede oute of Iacob, and out of Iuda one, to take possession of my hyl. My chosen shal possesse these thinges, and my seruauntes shal dwell there.
Isaiah 65:10 Saron shalbe a shepefolde, and the valleye of Achor shall geue the stallinge for the catel of my people, that feare me.
Isaiah 65:11 But as for you, ye are they, that haue forsaken the Lorde, and forgotten my holy hil. Ye haue set vs an aulter vnto fortune, and geuen ryche drincke offerynges vnto treasure.
Isaiah 65:12 Therfore will I nombre you with the swerde, that ye shalbe destroyed altogether. For when I called, noman gaue me answere: when I spake, ye herkened not vnto me, but dyd wyckednes before myne eyes, & chose the thing that pleased me not.
Isaiah 65:13 Therfore thus saieth the Lorde God: Beholde, my seruauntes shall eate, but ye shall haue honger. Beholde, my seruauntes shall dryncke, but ye shall suffre thurste. Beholde my seruauntes shalbe mery, but ye shalbe confounded.
Isaiah 65:14 Beholde, my seruauntes shall reioyce for very quyetnesse of herte: But ye shal crye for sorowe of herte, and complayne for vexacyon of mynde.
Isaiah 65:15 Youre name shal not be sworne by amonge my chosen, for God the Lorde shall slay you, and cal his seruauntes by another name.
Isaiah 65:16 Who so reioyseth vpon earthe shall reioyse in the true God. And who so sweareth vpon earth, shal sweare in the true God. For the olde emnyte shalbe forgotten and taken awaye out of my syght.
Isaiah 65:17 For lo, I shall make a newe heauen, and a newe earthe. And as for the olde, they shall neuer be thought vpon, nor kept in minde:
Isaiah 65:18 but men shalbe glad and euermore reioise, for the thinges, that I shall do. For why: Behold, I shal make a ioyfull Ierusalem,
Isaiah 65:19 yea and my selfe wyl reioyse with Ierusalem, and be glad with my people: And the voyce of wepynge and waylinge shall not be heard in her from thenceforth.
Isaiah 65:20 There shal neuer be chylde, nor olde man, that haue not their full dayes. But when the childe cometh to an hundreth yeare olde it shall dye. And yf he that is an hundreth yeare of age do wronge, he shalbe cursed.
Isaiah 65:21 They shalt buylde houses, and dwell in them: they shall plante vyneyardes, and eate the frute of them.
Isaiah 65:22 They shall not buylde, and another possesse: they shall not plante, and another eate. But the lyfe of my people shalbe lyke a tree, and so shall the worcke of their handes.
Isaiah 65:23 My chosen shall lyue longe, they shal not laboure in vayne, nor beget with trouble, for they that are the hye blessed sede of the Lord, and their frutes with them.
Isaiah 65:24 And it shalbe, that or euer they call, I shall answere them. While they are yet but thinckinge howe to speake. I shal heare them.
Isaiah 65:25 The wolfe and the lambe shall fede together, and the lyon shall eate haye like the bullocke. But earthe shalbe the serpentes meate. There shal noman hurte nor slaye another, in al my holy hyll, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 66

Isaiah 66:1 Thus sayeth the Lorde: Heauen is my seat, and the earth is my fote stole Where shal nowe the house stande, that ye wyll buylde vnto me. And where shalbe the place, that I dwell in?
Isaiah 66:2 As for these thynges, my hande had made them all, and they are all created, sayeth the Lorde. Whyche of them shall I then regarde? Euen hym, that is of a lowly troubled spyryte, and standeth in awe of my wordes.
Isaiah 66:3 For who so slaieth an oxe for me, doth me so great dishonour as he that killeth a man. He that kylleth a shepe for me, choketh a dogge. He that bryngeth me meateofferinges, offereth swynes bloude. Who so maketh me a memory all of incense, prayseth the thinge that is vnryght. Yet take they suche wayes in hand, and their soule delyteth in these abhomynacyons.
Isaiah 66:4 Therfore wyll I also haue pleasure in laughing him to scorne, & the thing that they feare wyll I brynge vpon them. For when I called, no man gaue answere: when I spake, they woulde not heare. But dyd wickednesse before myne eyes, and chose the thynges that displease me.
Isaiah 66:5 Heare the worde of God all ye, that feare the thynge whyche he speaketh. Your brethren that hate you, and cast you out for my names sake, saye: Let the Lorde magnyfye him selfe, that we may see youre gladnesse: and yet they shalbe confounded.
Isaiah 66:6 For as thouchinge the cytie and the temple, I heare the voyce of the Lorde, that wyll rewarde, and recompence his enemies,
Isaiah 66:7 lyke as when a wyfe bryngeth forth a man chylde, or euer she suffre the payne of the byrth, and anguysh of the trauayle.
Isaiah 66:8 Who euer hearde or sawe suche thinges? doth the grounde beare in one daye? or are the people borne all at ones, as Sion beareth her sonnes?
Isaiah 66:9 For thus sayeth the Lorde: Am I he that maketh other to beare, and beare not my selfe? Am not I he that beareth, and maketh baren? sayeth thy God
Isaiah 66:10 Reioyse with Ierusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that loue her. Be ioyful with her, all ye that mourneth for her.
Isaiah 66:11 For ye shall sucke comforte oute of her brestes, and be satysfyed. Ye shall taste, and haue delite in the plenteousnesse of her power.
Isaiah 66:12 For thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde, I wyll let peace into her, lyke a water floude, and the myght of the Heathen lyke a flowinge streame. Then shall ye sucke, ye shalbe borne vpon her sides and be ioyfull vpon her knees.
Isaiah 66:13 For lyke as a chylde is comforteth of hys mother, so shall I comforte you, and ye shalbe comforted in Ierusalem.
Isaiah 66:14 And when ye se thys, youre herte shall reioyse, and youre bones shall floryshe lyke an herbe. Thus shall the hande of the Lorde be knowne amonge his seruauntes, and his indignacyon amonge his enemyes.
Isaiah 66:15 For behold the Lorde shall come with fyre, and hys charet shalbe lyke a whirle winde, that he maye recompence his vengeaunce in his wrath and hys indignacyon wt the flamme of fyre.
Isaiah 66:16 For the Lorde shall iudge all fleshe with the fyre, and with his swearde, & there shalbe a greate nombre slayne of the Lorde.
Isaiah 66:17 Suche as haue made them selues holy and cleane in the gardens, and those that haue eaten swyne fleshe, myce, and other abhomynacyons, shalbe taken awaye together, sayeth the Lorde.
Isaiah 66:18 For I wyl come to gather all people and tonges wt their workes and ymaginacyons: these shall come, and se my glory.
Isaiah 66:19 Vnto them shall I geue a token, and geue a certayne of them (that be delyuered) amonge the Gentyles: into Celycia, Africa and Lidia (where men can handle bowes) into Italye also and Greke lande. The Iles farre of, that haue not hearde speake of me, and haue not sene my glorye, shall preache my prayse amonge the Gentyles,
Isaiah 66:20 and shall bringe all oure brethren for an offerynge vnto the Lorde, oute of all people vpon horses, charettes and horse litters, vpon Males and cartes to Ierusalem my holy hill (sayeth the Lorde) like as the children of Israel brynge the offerynge in cleane vessels, to the house of the Lorde.
Isaiah 66:21 And I shall take oute certayne of them for to be Pryestes and Leuytes, sayeth the Lorde.
Isaiah 66:22 For lyke as the newe heauen and the newe earthe whyche I will make, shalbe fast stablyshed by me, (sayeth the Lorde.) So shall youre seade and youre name contynue
Isaiah 66:23 and there shalbe a newe Mone for the other, and a newe Sabboth for the other, and all fleshe shall come to worshyppe, before me (sayeth the Lord.)
Isaiah 66:24 And they shall go forth and loke vpon the carions of them, that haue transgressed against me. For their wormes shall not dye, neyther shall their fyre be quenched, and al fleshe shall abhorre them.

BOOK: Jeremiah

CHAPTER: 1

Jeremiah 1:1 These are the Sermons of Ieremy the sonne of Helkiah the prieste, one of them that dwelt at Anathoth in the land of Beniamin:
Jeremiah 1:2 when the Lorde had fyrste spoken wyth him in the tyme of Iosiah the sonne of Amon kinge of Iuda, in the .xiij. yeare of his kingdome,
Jeremiah 1:3 and so during vnto the tyme of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah kynge of Iuda, and vntill .xi. yeares of Zedekiah the sonne of Iosiah kinge of Iuda were ended: when Ierusalem was taken, euen in the fyfth Moneth.
Jeremiah 1:4 The worde of the Lord spake thus vnto me:
Jeremiah 1:5 Before I fashyoned the in thy mothers wombe, I did know the. And or euer thou wast borne, I sanctifyed the, and ordeyned the, to be a Prophete vnto the people.
Jeremiah 1:6 Then sayde I: Oh Lorde God, I am vnmete, for I am yet but younge.
Jeremiah 1:7 And the Lorde answered me thus: Saye not so, I am to younge. For thou shalt go to al that I shall sende the vnto, and whatsoeuer I commaund the, that shalt thou speake.
Jeremiah 1:8 Be not afrayed of their faces, for I wilbe with the, to delyuer the, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 1:9 And with that, the Lorde stretched oute his hande, and touched my mouthe, and sayde moreouer vnto me. Beholde I put my wordes in thy mouth,
Jeremiah 1:10 & this daye do I set the ouer the people & kingedomes, that thou mayest rote oute, breake of, destroye, & make waste: and that thou mayest buylde vp and plante.
Jeremiah 1:11 After thys, the Lorde spake vnto me sayinge: Ieremy, what seyst thou? And I sayde: I se a wakinge roade.
Jeremiah 1:12 Then sayde the Lord: thou hast sene ryght, for I will watch diligentlye vpon my worde, to perfourme it.
Jeremiah 1:13 It happened afterwarde, that the Lorde spake to me againe, and sayde: What seyst thou? And I sayd: I do se a seethinge pot, lokinge from oute of the North hytherward.
Jeremiah 1:14 Then saide the Lorde vnto me: Oute of the Northe shall come a plage vpon all the dwellers of the lande.
Jeremiah 1:15 For lo, I wil cal all the officers of the kingdomes of the north (saieth the Lorde.) And they shall come, and euery one shall set the seate in the gates of Ierusalem, and in al their walles round aboute and thorowe al the cytyes of Iuda.
Jeremiah 1:16 And thorowe them shall I declare my iudgement, vpon all the wyckednesse of those men that haue forsaken me: that haue offered vnto straunge Goddes, and worshipped the workes of their owne handes.
Jeremiah 1:17 And therfore gyrde vp thy loines, arise, and tell them al, that I geue the in commaundement. Feare them not, I will not haue the to be afrayed of them.
Jeremiah 1:18 For beholde, this daye do I make the a strong fensed towne, an yron pyler, and a wall of stele agaynst the whole lande, against the kinges and myghtye men of Iuda, agaynste the priestes and people of the lande.
Jeremiah 1:19 They shall fyght against the, but they shall not be able to ouercome the: for I am with the, to delyuer the, sayeth the Lord.

CHAPTER: 2

Jeremiah 2:1 Moreouer, the worde of the Lord commaunded me thus:
Jeremiah 2:2 Go thy waye, crye in the eares of Ierusalem, and saye: Thus sayeth the Lorde: I remembre the for the kindnesse of thy youth, and because of thy stedfast loue: in that thou folowdest me thorowe the wildernesse, in an vntilled lande.
Jeremiah 2:3 Thou Israel wast halowed vnto the Lorde, and so was his fyrst frutes. Al they that deuoured Israel, offended: mysfortune fell vpon them, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 2:4 Heare therfore the worde of the Lorde, O thou house of Iacob, and al the generacion of the house of Israell.
Jeremiah 2:5 Thus sayeth the Lorde vnto you. What vnfaythfulnesse founde youre fathers in me, that they wente so farre awaye from me, fallinge to lightnesse, and beynge so vaine?
Jeremiah 2:6 They thought not in their hertes: Where haue we left the Lorde, that broughte vs oute of the lande of Egipte, that led vs thorowe the wildernesse, thorow a desert and roughe lande, thorow a drye and deadly land yea a lande that no man had gone thorowe, and wherin noman had dwelt.
Jeremiah 2:7 And when I had brought you into a plasaunt welbuilded lande, that ye might enioye the frutes and all the commodities of the same: ye went forth, and defyled my lande, and brought myne heretage to abhomynacion.
Jeremiah 2:8 The pryestes them selues sayde not once: where is the Lorde? They that haue the lawe in their handes, knowe me not. The sheperdes offende against me. The Prophetes do seruice vnto Baal, and folowe suche thinges as shall brynge them no profyt.
Jeremiah 2:9 Wherfore I am constrayned (sayeth the Lorde) to make my complaynte vpon you, and vpon youre chyldren.
Jeremiah 2:10 Go into the Iles of Cethim, and loke well: sende vnto Cedar, take diligent hede, and se, whether suche thinges be done there,
Jeremiah 2:11 whether the Gentiles them selues deale so fastly and vntruly with their goddes (whiche yet are no Goddes in dede.) But my people hath geuen ouer their hye honoure, for a thinge that maye not helpe them.
Jeremiah 2:12 Be astonished (O ye heauens) be afrayde and abashed at such thinge, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 2:13 For my people hath done two euyls. They haue forsaken me the well of the water of life and dygged them pyttes, yea vyle & broken pittes, that holde no water.
Jeremiah 2:14 Is Israell a bond seruaunt, or one of the houshold? Why is he then so spoiled?
Jeremiah 2:15 Why do they roare, and crye then vpon him, as a lyon? They haue made his lande waste, his cities are so brent vp, that there is noman dwellynge in them.
Jeremiah 2:16 Yea the chyldren of Noph and Taphnes haue defyled thy neck.
Jeremiah 2:17 Commeth not this vnto the, because thou hast forsaken the Lorde thy God, euer sence he led the by the waye.
Jeremiah 2:18 And what hast thou nowe to do in the strete of Egipte? to drincke foule water? Ether, what makest thou in the way to Assiria? To drincke water of the floud?
Jeremiah 2:19 Thyne owne wickednesse shall reproue the, and thy turnynge awaye shal condemne the: that thou maiest know and vnderstand, how euyl and hurtful a thinge it is, that thou hast forsaken thy Lorde thy God, and not feared him, sayeth the Lorde God of Hostes.
Jeremiah 2:20 I haue euer broken thy yocke of olde, and burste thy bondes: yet sayest thou: I wil nomore serue, but (lyke an harlot) thou runnest aboute vpon all hye hilles, and amonge all grene trees,
Jeremiah 2:21 where as I planted the out of noble grapes & good rotes. How art thou turned then into a bitter, vnfrutefull, and straunge grape?
Jeremiah 2:22 Yea, & that so sore: that thoughe thou wasshe the with Nitrus, and make thy self to fauoure with that swete smelling herbe of Borith: yet in my sight thou art stayned with thy wyckednesse, sayeth the Lorde thy God.
Jeremiah 2:23 Saye not now: I am not vncleane, and I haue not folowed the Goddes. Loke vpon thyne owne wayes in the woddes, valleyes and dennes, so shalt thou knowe, what thou hast done. Thou art lyke a swyft Dromedary, that goeth easely in his waye:
Jeremiah 2:24 and thy wantonnes is like a wilde Asse, that vseth the wildernesse, and that snoffeth and bloweth at his wyll. Who can tame the? All they that seke the, shal not fayle, but finde the in thine owne vnclennes.
Jeremiah 2:25 Thou kepest thy fote from nakednes, and thy throte from thyrste, and thynkest thus in thy selfe: tushe, I will take no sorow, I will loue the straunge Goddes, and hang vpon them.
Jeremiah 2:26 Lyke as a thefe that is taken with the dede commeth to shame, euen so is the house of Israell come to confusyon, the comen people their kynges and rulers, their priestes & prophetes.
Jeremiah 2:27 For they saye to a stocke: thou art my father, and to a stone: thou hast be gotten me, yea they haue turned their backe vpon me, & not their face. But in the tyme of their trouble, when they saye: stande vp, and helpe vs,
Jeremiah 2:28 I shal answere them: Where are now thy Goddes, that thou hast made the? byd them stande vp, & helpe the in the time of nede? For loke how many cityes thou hast (O Iuda) so many Goddes hast thou also.
Jeremiah 2:29 Wherfore then will ye go to lawe wyth me, seynge ye are all synners agaynste me, sayeth the Lorde?
Jeremiah 2:30 It is but lost laboure, that I smyte youre children, for they receyue not my correccyon. Youre owne swearde destroyeth youre Prophetes, lyke a deuourynge lyon.
Jeremiah 2:31 Yf ye be the people of the Lorde, then herken vnto this worde: Am I then become a wyldernesse vnto the people of Israel? or a lande that hath no light? Wherfore sayeth my people then: we are fallen of, and we wyl come no more vnto the?
Jeremiah 2:32 Doth a mayden forget her rayment, or a bryde her stomacher? And doth my people forget me so long?
Jeremiah 2:33 Why boastest thou thy wayes so hylye (to obtayne fauoure there thorowe) when thou hast yet stayned them with blasphemyes?
Jeremiah 2:34 Vpon thy wynges is founde the bloude of poore and innocent people, and that not in corners and holes onlye, but openly in all these places.
Jeremiah 2:35 Yet darrest thou saye: I am giltlesse: Tush, his wrath can not come vpon me. Beholde, I will reason with the because thou darrest say: I haue not offended.
Jeremiah 2:36 O how euill wil it before the, to abyde it, when it shalbe knowne, how oft thou hast gone bacwarde? For thou shalt be confounded, as well of Egipte, as of the Assirians:
Jeremiah 2:37 yea thou shalt go thy waye from them, and smyte thine handes together vpon thy heade. Because the Lorde shall brynge that confydence and hope of thyne to naught, and thou shalt not prospere with all.

CHAPTER: 3

Jeremiah 3:1 Comenly, when a man putteth awaye his wife, and she goeth from him, and marieth with another, then the question is: should he resorte vnto her any more after that? Is not this felde then defiled and vnclean? But as for the thou hast played the harlot with many louers, yet turne againe to me, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 3:2 Lyft vp thine eyes on euery side, and loke, yf thou be not defyled. Thou hast wayted for them in stretes, and as a murtherer in the wildernesse. Thorowe thy whordome and shameful blasphemies, is the lande defyled.
Jeremiah 3:3 This is the cause, that the rayne and eueninge dew hath ceased. Thou hast gotten the an whores foreheade, and canst not be ashamed.
Jeremiah 3:4 Els wouldest thou saye vnto me: O my father, thou art he that hast brought me vp, and led me from my youth.
Jeremiah 3:5 Wilt thou then put me awaye, and cast me of for euer? Or wilt thou withdrawe thy selfe cleane from me? Neuertheles, thou speakest suche wordes, but thou art euer doynge worse and worse.
Jeremiah 3:6 The Lord sayd also vnto me: in the time of Iosiah the kinge, hast thou sene what that shrinkinge Israel hath done? howe she hathe runne vp vpon all the hilles, and amonge all thicke trees, and there playeth the harlot?
Jeremiah 3:7 hast thou sene also (when she had done all thys) how I sayde vnto her: that she shoulde turne agayne vnto me, and yet she is not returned? Iuda that vnfaythfull syster of hers also saw this:
Jeremiah 3:8 Namely, that after I had well sene the aduoutrye of the shrynkynge harlot Israel. I put her awaye, and gaue her a byl of deuorcement. For al this, her vnfaithfull syster Iuda was not ashamed, but went backe and plaied the whore also.
Jeremiah 3:9 Yea and the noise of her whordome that defyled the whole lande. For she hath commytted her aduoutrye with stones and stocke.
Jeremiah 3:10 Neuerthelesse, her vnfaythfull syster Iuda is not turned vnto me again with ther whole herte, but faynedly, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 3:11 And the Lorde sayde vnto me. The bacslyder Israel is more ryghteous, then the vnfaythfull Iuda:
Jeremiah 3:12 and therfore go preache these wordes towarde the North, and saye: Thou shrenkinge Israel, turne agayne (sayeth the Lord) and I wyll not turne my face from you, for I am mercyfull, sayeth the Lorde, and I will not alwaye beare displeasure agaynste the:
Jeremiah 3:13 but on this condicion, that thou knowe thy greate blasphemy: Namely, that thou haste vnfaithful forsaken the Lorde thy God, and hast made thy selfe partaker of straung goddes vnder all grene trees, but hast had no wil to heare my voyce, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 3:14 O ye shrinkinge children, turne agayne, sayeth the Lorde: and I wilbe maried wyth you. For I will take one oute of the citie, and two oute of one generacyon from amonge you, and bring you out of Sion:
Jeremiah 3:15 and wil geue you herdmen, after mine owne mynd, which shal fede you with learninge and wysedome.
Jeremiah 3:16 Moreouer, when ye be increased and multyplied in the land, then (sayeth the Lorde) there shall no more boost be made of the arcke of the Lordes Testament: No man shal thincke vpon it, neyther shall any man make mencion of it: for from thence forth it shall neyther be visited, nor honoured with gyftes.
Jeremiah 3:17 Then shal Ierusalem be called the Lordes seate, and all Heathen shalbe gathered vnto it, for the name of the Lordes sake, whyche shalbe set vp at Ierusalem. And from that tyme forth, they shal folow no more the ymaginacion of their owne frowarde herte.
Jeremiah 3:18 Then those that be of the house of Iuda, shal go vnto the house of Israel, and they shal come together out of the North, into the same land, that I haue geuen youre fathers.
Jeremiah 3:19 I haue shewed also, howe I toke the vp beynge but a chylde, & gaue the a pleasaunt lande for thyne heretage, yea & a goodly Hoste of the heathen: & how I commaunded the, that thou shouldest cal me father only, & not to shrynck from me.
Jeremiah 3:20 But lyke as a woman fayleth her louer, so are ye vnfaithfull vnto me (O ye house of Israel) sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 3:21 And therfore the voyce of the chyldren of Israel was heard in euery side, wepinge & waylinge: for they haue defyled their waye, and forgotten God their Lorde.
Jeremiah 3:22 O ye shrinkynge chyldren, turne agayne, (sayinge: lo, we are thyne, for thou arte the Lorde oure God:) And so shall I heale your bacturnynges.
Jeremiah 3:23 The hylles fal, and al the hye pryde of the mountaynes, but the healthe of Israel standeth onely vpon God oure Lorde.
Jeremiah 3:24 Confusion hath deuoured oure fathers laboure from our youth vp: yea their shepe and bullockes, their sonnes and doughters.
Jeremiah 3:25 So do we also slepe in oure confusyon, and shame couereth vs: for we and oure fathers from oure youth vp vnto thys daye haue sinned agaynste the Lorde oure God, and haue not obeyed the voyce of the Lord oure God.

CHAPTER: 4

Jeremiah 4:1 O Israel, yf thou wylt turne the, then turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde. And yf thou wilt put awaye thine abhominacyons out of my sight, thou shalt not be moued.
Jeremiah 4:2 And shalt sweare: The Lorde liueth: in truthe, in equyte and ryghteousnesse: and al people shalbe fortunable and ioyful in him.
Jeremiah 4:3 For thus sayeth the Lorde, to al Iuda and Ierusalem: plowe your lande, and sowe not amonge the thornes.
Jeremiah 4:4 Be circumcised in the Lorde, and cut away the foreskinne of youre hertes, all ye of Iuda and all the indwellers of Ierusalem: that my indignacion breake not oute like fyre & kindle so that no man may quenche it, because of the wickednes of youre ymaginacions.
Jeremiah 4:5 Preache in Iuda and Ierusalem, crye out and speake: blow the trompettes in the land, crie that euery man may heare, and saye: Gather you together, and we will go into strong cyties.
Jeremiah 4:6 Set vp the token in Syon, spede you, and make no taryenge: for I will bringe a greate plage, and a greate destruccyon from the north.
Jeremiah 4:7 For the spoyler of the Gentyles is broken vp from his place, as a lyon oute of his denne, that he may make the land waste, and destroie the cities, so that noman maye dwell therin.
Jeremiah 4:8 Wherfore girde youre selues about with sacke clothe mourne and wepe for the fearfull wrath of the Lorde shall not be withdrawen from you.
Jeremiah 4:9 At the same tyme (saieth the Lorde) the hert of the kinge and of the Princes shalbe gone, the pryestes shalbe astonished, and the prophetes shalbe sore afraied.
Jeremiah 4:10 Then sayde I: O Lord God, hast thou disceyued then thys people and Ierusalem, saienge: ye shall haue peace, & now the swerde goeth thorowe their lyues?
Jeremiah 4:11 Then shall it be sayde to the people & to Ierusalem: There commeth a warm wind from the North thorow the waye of my people, but nether to fanne, nor to clense.
Jeremiah 4:12 After that shall there come vnto me a strong winde, and then will I also geue sentence vpon them.
Jeremiah 4:13 For lo, he commeth doune lyke as a cloude, and his charettes are lyke a stormye winde: hys horsemen are swyfter then the Aegle. Wo vnto vs, for we are destroyed.
Jeremiah 4:14 O Ierusalem wash thine herte from wyckednesse, that thou mayest be helped. Howe longe shal thy noysome thoughtes remayne with the.
Jeremiah 4:15 For a voice from Dan and from the hil of Ephraim speaketh out, and telleth of a destruccion.
Jeremiah 4:16 Beholde, the Heathen geue Ierusalem warninge, and preache vnto her, that her destroyers are comming from farre countrees. They tell the cities of Iuda the same also,
Jeremiah 4:17 they shal geue him warninge in euery place, lyke as the watchmen in the felde. For they haue prouoked me to wrath, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 4:18 Thy wayes and thy thoughtes, haue brought the vnto this, thys is thyne owne wickednesse and disobedience, that hath possessed thine herte:
Jeremiah 4:19 Ah my belye, ah my belye, (shalt thou crye) how is my hert so sore? my herte painteth within me, I can not be styl, for I haue hearde the cryeng of the trompettes and peales of warre.
Jeremiah 4:20 They crye murthur vpon murthur, the whole lande shall perishe. Immediatly my tentes were destroied, and my hanginges, in the twinckelinge of an eye.
Jeremiah 4:21 Howe longe shall I se the tokens of warre, and heare the noyse of the trompettes.
Jeremiah 4:22 Neuertheles this shal come vpon them, because my people is become folysh, and hath vtterly no vnderstandynge. They are the children of folishnes, and without any dyscrecion. To do euill, they haue wyt ynoughe: but to do wel, they haue no wisdome.
Jeremiah 4:23 I haue loked vpon the earth, and se it is waste, and voyde. I loked toward heauen, and it had no shyne.
Jeremiah 4:24 I behelde the mountaynes, and they trembled, and al the hilles were in a feare.
Jeremiah 4:25 I loked aboute me, and there was no bodye, and all the birdes of the ayre were awaye.
Jeremiah 4:26 I marked wel, and the plowed felde was become wast: yea all their cytyes were broken doune, at the presence of the Lorde, and indignacyon of his wrath.
Jeremiah 4:27 For thus hath the Lorde sayde: The whole lande shalbe desolate, yet will I not then haue done.
Jeremiah 4:28 And therfore let the earth mourne and let the heauen be sory aboue: for the thing that I haue purposed and taken vpon me to do, shall not repente me, and I wil not go from it.
Jeremiah 4:29 The whole lande shall fle, for the noyse of the horsmen and bowmen, they shal runne into dennes into woddes, and climme vp the stony rockes. All the cyties shalbe voyde, and noman dwellinge therin.
Jeremiah 4:30 What wilt thou now do, for thou beynge destroyed? For though thou clotest thy selfe wyth scarlet, and deckest the wyth goulde: thoughe thou payntest thy face with colours yet shalt thou trymme thy selfe in vayne. For those that hytherto haue bene thy great fauourers, shall abhorre the, and go aboute to slaye the.
Jeremiah 4:31 For (me thincke) I heare a noyse like as it were of a woman trauaylyng, or one laboringe of her fyrste chylde. Euen the voyce of the doughter of Syon, that casteth oute her armes, and souneth, sayenge: Ah wo is me, how sore vexed and faynte is my herte for them that are slayne?

CHAPTER: 5

Jeremiah 5:1 Loke thorow Ierusalem, beholde and se: Seke thorow the her stretes also wythin, yf ye can fynde one man, that doth equall and right, or that laboureth to be faythfull: and I shall spare hym (sayeth the Lorde.)
Jeremiah 5:2 For though they can saye: the Lorde liueth, yet do they sweare to disceyue:
Jeremiah 5:3 Where as thou (O Lorde) lokest only vpon faythe and truthe. Thou hast scourged them, but they toke no repentaunce: thou hast correcte them for amendement, but they refused thy correccion. They made their faces harder then a stone, and woulde not amende.
Jeremiah 5:4 Therfore I thought in my selfe: peraduenture they are so symple and folish, that they vnderstande nothinge of the Lordes waye, and iudgementes of our God.
Jeremiah 5:5 Therfore wil I go vnto their heades and rulers, and talke with them: yf they knowe the waie of the lord and the iudgementes of oure God. But these (in like maner) haue broken the yocke, and burste the bandes in sonder.
Jeremiah 5:6 Wherfore a lyon out of the wood shall hurte them, and a wolfe in the euenyng shall destroy them. The cat of the mountayne shal lye lurking by their cities, to teare in peces al them, that come thereoute. For theyr offences are manye, and theyr departynge awaye is greate.
Jeremiah 5:7 Shulde I then for al thys haue mercy vpon the? Thy chyldren haue forsaken me, & sworne by them that are no Goddes. And albe it they were bounde to me in maryage, yet they fell to aduoutrye, and haunted harlottes houses.
Jeremiah 5:8 In the desyre of vnclenly luste they are become lyke the stoned horse, euery man neyeth at hys neyghbours wyfe:
Jeremiah 5:9 Shulde I not correcte thys, sayeth the Lorde. Shulde I not be auenged of euerye people that is lyke vnto this?
Jeremiah 5:10 Clymme vp vpon theyr walles, beate them doune, but destroye them not vtterlye cut of theyr braunches, because they are not the Lordes.
Jeremiah 5:11 For vnfaythfully hath the house of Israell and Iuda forsaken me, (sayth the Lorde).
Jeremiah 5:12 They haue denyed the Lord, & sayde: it is not he. Tush, there shall no mysfortune come vpon vs, we shall se nether swerd nor hunger.
Jeremiah 5:13 As for the warnynge of the Prophetes, they take it but for wynde, yea there is none of these, which wyll tell them, that suche thynges shall happen vnto them.
Jeremiah 5:14 Wherfore thus sayth the Lord thy God of Hostes: because ye speake suche wordes, beholde: The wordes that are in thy mouth wyl I turne to fyre, & make the people to be wood, that it maye consume them.
Jeremiah 5:15 Lo, I wyll bryng a people vpon you from farre, O house of Israel (sayeth the Lorde) a myghtye people, and olde people, a people whose speache thou knowest not, neyther vnderstandest what they saye.
Jeremiah 5:16 Theyr arowes are sodane death, yea they them selues be very gyauntes.
Jeremiah 5:17 Thys people shall eate vp thy frute & thy meate, yea they shall deuoure thy sonnes and thy doughters, thy shepe and thy bullockes. They shall eate vp thy grapes & fygges. As for thy stronge and well fensed cyties, wherein thou dyddest trust, they shal destroy them with the swerde.
Jeremiah 5:18 Neuerthelesse I wyll not then haue done with you, saith the Lorde.
Jeremiah 5:19 But yf they saye: wherfore doeth the Lord our God all this vnto vs? Then answere them: because, that lyke as ye haue forsaken me, & serued straunge goddes in your owne lande, euen so shall ye serue other Goddes also in a straunge lande.
Jeremiah 5:20 Preach this vnto the house of Iacob, and crye it oute in Iuda, and saye thus:
Jeremiah 5:21 Heare thys (thou folyshe and vndiscrete people) ye haue eyes, but ye se not: eares haue ye, but ye heare not.
Jeremiah 5:22 Feare ye not me, sayeth the Lorde? Are ye not ashamed, to loke me in the face? which bynde the sea wyth the sande, so that it can not passe hys boundes: For thoughe it rage, yet can it do nothynge, and thoughe the waues thereof do swell, yet maye they not go ouer.
Jeremiah 5:23 But thys people hath a false and an obstinate herte, they are departed & gone awaye fro me.
Jeremiah 5:24 They thincke not in theyr hertes: O let vs feare the Lorde oure God, that geueth vs rayne early and late, when nede is, which kepeth euer styll the harueste for vs yearlye.
Jeremiah 5:25 Neuertheles youre mysdedes haue turned these from you, and your synnes haue robbed you hereof.
Jeremiah 5:26 For amonge my people are founde wicked personnes, that pryuelye laye snares & wayte for men, to take them & destroye them.
Jeremiah 5:27 And lyke as a net is ful of byrdes, so are their houses full of that which they haue gotten wt falshed and disceyte. Hereof commeth theyr greate substaunce and ryches,
Jeremiah 5:28 hereof are they fat and welthy, and are runne awaye fro me wyth shameful blasphemyes. They mynistre not the lawe, they make no ende of the fatherlesses cause, they iudge not the poore according to equite.
Jeremiah 5:29 Shulde I not punyshe these thynges, saith the Lorde? shulde I not be auenged of al suche people, as these be?
Jeremiah 5:30 Horryble and greuous thinges are done in the lande.
Jeremiah 5:31 The Prophetes teache falsely, and the priestes folowe them, and my people hath pleasure therein. What wyll come thereof at the laste.

CHAPTER: 6

Jeremiah 6:1 Come out of Ierusalem, ye strong children of Ben Iamin: blowe vp the trompettes ye Tecuytes, set vp a token vnto Bethcarem, for a plage and a greate myserye pepeth oute from the Northe.
Jeremiah 6:2 I wyll licken the doughter Syon to a fayr and tendre woman, and to her shall come the shepeherdes with theyr flockes.
Jeremiah 6:3 Theyr tentes shall they pytch rounde aboute her, and euery one shall fede them that are vnder his hand.
Jeremiah 6:4 Make battell agaynst her (shall they say) Aryse, let vs go vp, whyle it is yet daye. Alas, the daye goeth awaye, & the nyghte shadowes fal doune:
Jeremiah 6:5 Aryse, let vs go vp by nyght, and destroye her stronge holdes,
Jeremiah 6:6 for thus hath the Lorde of hostes commaunded. Hewe doune her trees, and set vp bulworkes agaynste Ierusalem. Thys is the cytye that must be punyshed, for in her is all malyciousnes.
Jeremiah 6:7 Lyke as a conduyte aboundeth in water, euen so thys cytye aboundeth in wyckednes. Robberye and vnrightuousnesse is heard in her, sorow and woundes are euer there in my sight.
Jeremiah 6:8 Amende the (O Ierusalem) leste I withdrawe my herte from the, and make the desolate: & thy lande also, that no man dwell in it.
Jeremiah 6:9 For thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes: The resydue of Israell shalbe gathered, as the remnaunt of grapes. And therfore turne thyne hande agayne into the basket, like the grape gatherer.
Jeremiah 6:10 But vnto whome shall I speake, whome shall I warne that he maye take hede? Theyr eares are so vncircumcyced, that they maye not heare. Beholde, they take the worde of God but for a scorne, & haue no luste therto.
Jeremiah 6:11 And therfore I am so ful of thyne indignacyon (O Lorde) that I maye suffre no longer. Shede oute thy wrath vpon the children that are withoute, and vpon all younge men. Yea the man must be taken presoner with the wife, and the aged with the crepel.
Jeremiah 6:12 Theyr houses with their landes and wyues shall be turned vnto straungers, when I stretche oute myne hande vpon the inhabitours of this land, sayeth the Lord.
Jeremiah 6:13 For from the leaste vnto the moost, they hang all vpon couetousnes: & from the Prophet vnto the prieste, they go all aboute wyth falshed and lyes.
Jeremiah 6:14 And besyde that, they heale the hurte of my people with swete wordes, sayinge: peace peace, when there is no peace at all.
Jeremiah 6:15 Therfore they must be ashamed, for they haue committed abhomynacyon. But howe shulde they be ashamed, when they knowe nothinge, neither of shame nor good nurtoure? And therfore they shall fall amonge the slayne, and in the houre when I shall vyset them, they shall be brought doune, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 6:16 Thus sayth the Lorde: go into the streates considre and make inquisicion for the old way and yf it be the good and right waye, then go therein, that ye maye fynde rest for your soules. But they saye: we wyll not walcke therin
Jeremiah 6:17 and I wil set watchemen ouer you, & therfore take hede vnto the voyce of the trompet. But they saye: we wyll not take hede.
Jeremiah 6:18 Heare therfore ye Gentyles, and thou congregacion shalt knowe, what I haue deuised for them.
Jeremiah 6:19 Heare thou earth also: beholde, I wyll cause a plage come vpon this people, euen the frute of theyr owne ymagynacions. For they haue not bene obedyente vnto my wordes and to my lawe, but abhorred them.
Jeremiah 6:20 Wherfore brynge ye me incense from Saba, & swete smellinge Calamus from farre countrees? Youre burntofferynges displease me, & I reioyse not in youre sacrifices.
Jeremiah 6:21 And therfore thus sayth the Lorde: beholde I will make this people fall, & there shall fall from amonge them the father with the chyldren, one neyghboure shall peryshe with another.
Jeremiah 6:22 Moreouer thus sayeth the Lorde: Behold, there shall come a people from the North, and a greate people shall aryse from the endes of the earthe,
Jeremiah 6:23 with bowes & with dartes shall they be weapened: It is a roughe & fearce people, an vnmercyfull people: theyr voyce roareth lyke the sea, they ryde vpon horses wel appoynted to the battel agaynst the, O doughter Sion.
Jeremiah 6:24 Then shall thys crye be heard: Our armes are feble, heuynes & sorowe is come vpon vs, as vpon a woman trauaylynge with chylde.
Jeremiah 6:25 No man go forth into the felde, no man come vpon the hye strete: for the swerde and feare of the enemye shalbe on euerye syde.
Jeremiah 6:26 Wherfore, gyrde a sack clothe aboute the (O doughter of my people) sprinkle thy selfe wyth ashes, mourne and wepe bytterlye, as vpon thy onely beloued sonne: For the destroyer shall sodenly fall vpon vs.
Jeremiah 6:27 The haue I set for a prouer of my harde people, to seke oute, and to trye theyr wayes.
Jeremiah 6:28 For they are al vnfaythfull and fallen awaye, they hange vpon fylthy lucre, they are cleane brasse & yron for they hurte and destroye euerye man.
Jeremiah 6:29 The bellous are brent in the fyre, the lead is consumed, the melter melteth in vayne, for the euyll is not taken awaye from them.
Jeremiah 6:30 Therfore shal they be called naughtye syluer, because the Lorde hath caste them oute.

CHAPTER: 7

Jeremiah 7:1 These are the wordes that GOD spake vnto Ieremie:
Jeremiah 7:2 Stande vnder the gates of the Lordes house & crye oute these wordes there, wt a loude voyce, and saye: Heare the worde of the Lorde all ye of Iuda, that go in at thys dore, to honoure the Lord.
Jeremiah 7:3 Thus saith the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel. Amend youre wayes and youre councels, and I wyll let you dwell in thys place.
Jeremiah 7:4 Truste not in false lyenge wordes, sayenge: here is the temple of the Lorde, here is the temple of the Lorde, here is the temple of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 7:5 For yf ye wyll amende youre wayes & councels, yf ye wyll iudge righte betwixte a man and hys neyghboure:
Jeremiah 7:6 yf ye wyl not oppresse the straunger, the fatherles & the wyddowe: yf ye wyll not shede innocent bloud in this place: yf ye wyll not cleue to straunge goddes to youre owne destruccyon:
Jeremiah 7:7 then wil I let you dwell in thys place, yea in the land that I gaue afore tyme vnto youre fathers for euer.
Jeremiah 7:8 But take hede, yea trust in councels, that begyle you & do you no good.
Jeremiah 7:9 For when ye haue stolen, murthered, committed aduoutrye, and periury: When ye haue offred vnto Baal, folowyng straunge & vnknowne Goddes.
Jeremiah 7:10 Then come ye, and stande before me in thys house, whiche hath my name geuen vnto it and say: Tush, we are absolued quite, though we haue done all these abhominacions.
Jeremiah 7:11 What? thincke you thys house that beareth my name, is a denne of theues? And these thinges are not done priuelye, but before myne eyes sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 7:12 Go to my place in Silah, wherevnto I gaue my name afore tyme, & loke wel what I did to the same place for the wyckednes of my people of Israell.
Jeremiah 7:13 And now, thoughe ye haue done all these dedes (sayth the Lorde) & I my selfe rose vp euer by tymes to warne you & to comen wyth you yet wolde ye not heare me: I called, ye wolde not aunswere.
Jeremiah 7:14 And therfore euen as I haue done vnto Siloh, so wil I do to thys house, that my name is geuen vnto (and that ye put your trust in) ye vnto the place that I haue geuen to you & youre fathers.
Jeremiah 7:15 And I shal thrust you of my syght, as I haue cast out all youre brethren the whole sede of Ephraim.
Jeremiah 7:16 Therfore thou shalt not praye for this people, thou shalt nether geue thankes, nor byd prayer for them: thou shalt make no intercessyon to me for them for in no wyse wil I heare the.
Jeremiah 7:17 Seyst thou not what they do in the cyties of Iuda, and wythoute Ierusalem?
Jeremiah 7:18 The chyldren gather stickes the fathers kyndle the fyre, the mothers kneade the doughe, to bake cakes for the quene of heauen, They poure out drincke offerynges vnto straunge goddes, to prouoke me vnto wrath:
Jeremiah 7:19 Howe be it they hurte not me (sayth the Lord) but rather confounde, and shame themselues.
Jeremiah 7:20 And therfore thus saith the Lorde God: beholde, my wrath and my indignacyon shalbe poured out vpon this place, vpon men & catel vpon the trees in the felde & all frute of the lande, and it shall burne so, that no man maye quenche it.
Jeremiah 7:21 Thus sayth the Lorde of Hostes, the God of Israel. Ye heape vp youre burntofferinges with youre sacrifyces, & eate the fleshe.
Jeremiah 7:22 But when I broughte youre fathers out of Egipt I spake no worde vnto them of burntofferynges & sacrifyces:
Jeremiah 7:23 but this I commaunded them, sayinge: herken & obeye my voyce, & I shalbe youre God, and ye shall be my people: so that ye walcke in all the wayes, whiche I haue commaunded you, that ye maye prospere.
Jeremiah 7:24 But they were not obedyent, they inclined not theyr eares there vnto, but wente after theyr owne ymagynacyons and after the mocyons of theyr owne wycked herte, & so turned them selues awaye, and conuerted not vnto me.
Jeremiah 7:25 And thys haue they done, from the tyme that youre fathers came oute of Egypte, vnto thys daye. Neuertheles, I sente vnto them my seruauntes all the Prophetes. I rose vp earlye & sente them worde,
Jeremiah 7:26 yet wolde they not herken, nor offre me theyr eares, but were obstynate and worse then theyr fathers.
Jeremiah 7:27 And thou shalt now speake all these wordes vnto them, but they shall not heare the: thou shalte crye vpon them but they shall not aunswere the.
Jeremiah 7:28 Therfore shalte thou saye vnto them: This is the people that neyther heareth the voyce of the Lord theyr God, nor receyueth hys correccyon. Faithfulues & trueth is cleane roted oute of theyr mouth.
Jeremiah 7:29 Wherfore cut of thyne hearre, and cast it awaye, take vp a complaynte in the whole lande for the Lorde shal caste awaye, and scatre the people, that he is displeased withall.
Jeremiah 7:30 For the chyldren of Iuda haue done euyll in my sight sayeth the Lord. They haue set vp theyr abhominacyons, in the house that hath my name, & haue defyled it.
Jeremiah 7:31 They haue also buylded an aulter at Topheth, which is in the valley of the chyldren of Hennom: that they might burne theyr sonnes and doughters, whiche I neuer commaunded them, neyther came it euer in my thought.
Jeremiah 7:32 And therfore beholde, the dayes shall come (sayeth the Lorde) that it shall no more be called Topheth, or the valleye of the chyldren of Hennom, but the valleye of the slayne, for in Topheth, they shall be buryed because they shall els haue no roume.
Jeremiah 7:33 Yea the dead bodyes of this people shall be eaten vp of the foules of the ayre & wylde beastes of the earth, and no man shall fraye them awaye.
Jeremiah 7:34 And as for the voyce of myrth and gladnesse of the cytyes of Iuda, and Ierusalem the voyce of the brydegrome & of the bryde: I wil make them ceasse, for the lande shall be desolate.

CHAPTER: 8

Jeremiah 8:1 At the same tyme sayeth the Lord the bones of the kinges of Iuda, the bones of hys prynces, the bones of the priestes & prophetes, yea & the bones of the citesens of Ierusalem, shalbe broughte oute of theyr graues
Jeremiah 8:2 & layed against the sunne, the Mone and all the heauenlye hoste, whom they loued, whome they serued whome they rayne after, whome they soughte & worshypped. They shall nether be gathered together nor buryed, but shall lye vpon the earthe, to theyr shame and despysynge.
Jeremiah 8:3 And all they that remayne of thys wycked generacyon, shall desyre rather to dye then to lyue: wheresoeuer they remayne, & where as I scatre them, sayth the Lorde of hoostes.
Jeremiah 8:4 This shalte thou saye vnto them also: Thus sayeth the Lorde: Do men fall so, that they aryse not vp agayne? And turne they so farre awaye, that they neuer conuerte?
Jeremiah 8:5 Wherfore then is this people and Ierusalem gone to farre backe, that they turne not agayne. They are euer the longer the more obstynate, & wyl not be conuerted.
Jeremiah 8:6 For I haue loked, & consydered: but there is no man that speaketh a good worde: there is no man that taketh repentaunce for hys synne, that wyll so muche as saye: wherfore haue I done thys? But euerye man (as sone as he is turned backe) runneth forth styl, lyke a wylde horse in a battayle.
Jeremiah 8:7 The Storke knoweth hys appoynted tyme, the Turtledoue, the Swalowe & the Crane consydre the tyme of theyr trauayle: but my people wyll not know the tyme of the punyshmente of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 8:8 Howe darre ye saye then: we are wyse, we haue the lawe of the Lorde amonge vs. Beholde, the disceytfull penne of the scrybes, setteth forth lyes:
Jeremiah 8:9 therfore shall the wyse be confounded, they shalbe afrayed and taken: for lo, they haue caste oute the worde of the Lorde: what wysdom can then be among them?
Jeremiah 8:10 Wherfore I will geue their wyues vnto aleauntes, and their feldes to destroyers. For from the loweste vnto the hyeste, they folowe all fylthy lucre: & from the Prophete vnto the prieste, they deale al with lyes.
Jeremiah 8:11 Neuertheles, they heale the hurte of my people with swete wordes, saying: peace, peace wher there is no peace at all.
Jeremiah 8:12 Fye for shame, how abhominable thinges do they? and yet they be not ashamed, yea thei knowe of no shame. Wherfore in the tyme of theyr vysytacion they shall fall among the dead bodyes, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 8:13 Moreouer I wyll gather them in (sayth the Lorde) so that there shall not be one grape vpon the vyne, neyther one fygge vpon the fygge tree, and the leaues shalbe plucte of. Then wyll I cause them to departe, & saye:
Jeremiah 8:14 why prolong we the tyme? Let vs gather our selues together, & go into the stronge cytye, there shall we be in reste: For the Lorde oure God hath put vs to sylence, and geuen vs water myxte with gal, to drincke: because we haue synned agaynst hym.
Jeremiah 8:15 We loked for peace, and we fare not the better, we wayted for the tyme of health, and lo, here is nothynge but trouble.
Jeremiah 8:16 Then shall the noyse of his horses be hearde from Dan, the whole lande shall be afrayed at the neyenge of his stronge horses: for they shal go in, & deuoute the lande, with al that is in it: the cities, and those that dwel therin.
Jeremiah 8:17 Moreouer, I will sende Cockatryces and serpentes amonge you (which wyl not be charmed) & they shall byte you, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 8:18 Sorowe is come vpon me, and heuynes vexeth my herte,
Jeremiah 8:19 for lo, the voyce of the crieng of my people is hearde from a farre countre: Is not the Lorde in Syon? Is not the kynge in her? Wherfore then haue they greued me (shall the Lorde saye) with theyr ymages and folyshe straunge fashyons?
Jeremiah 8:20 The harueste is gone, the Sommer hath an ende, and we are not helped.
Jeremiah 8:21 I am sore vexed, because of the hurte of my people: I am heuye and abashed,
Jeremiah 8:22 for there is no more Tryacle at Galaad, & there is no Physycyen, that can heale the hurte of my people.

CHAPTER: 9

Jeremiah 9:1 O who wil geue my heade water ynough, and a wel of teares for myne eyes: that I may wepe night and day, for the slaughter of my people?
Jeremiah 9:2 Wold God that I had a cotage some where farre from folcke that I myghte leaue my people, & go from them for they be all aduoutrers and a shrynkynge sorte.
Jeremiah 9:3 They bende theyr tunges lyke bowes, to shute oute lyes. As for the trueth, they may nothynge awaye with all in the worlde. For they go from one wyckednes to another, & hold nothinge of me, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 9:4 Yea one must kepe him selfe from another no man maye safely truste his owne brother: for one brother vndermyneth another, & one neyghboure begyleth another.
Jeremiah 9:5 Yea one dyssembleth with another, & they deale wyth no trueth. They haue practysed theyr tunges to lye, and taken greate paynes to do myschefe.
Jeremiah 9:6 They haue set theyr stole in the myddest of dysceyte, and for very dyssemblynge falshede they wyll not knowe me, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 9:7 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: beholde, I wyll melte them, and trye them, for what shulde I els do to my people?
Jeremiah 9:8 Their tunges are lyke sharpe arowes, to speake disceyte. Wyth theyr mouthe they speake peaceably to theyr neyghboure, but preuely they laye wayte for hym.
Jeremiah 9:9 Shulde I not punyshe them for these thynges, sayeth the Lorde? Or shulde I not be auenged of any suche people as thys?
Jeremiah 9:10 Vpon the mountaynes wyl I take vp a lamentacyon and sorowfull crye, and a mournynge vpon the fayre playnes of the wyldernes: Namely, howe they are so brente vp, that no man goeth there anye more. Yea a man shall not heare one beaste crye there. Byrdes and catell are al gone from thence.
Jeremiah 9:11 I wyll make Ierusalem also an heape of stones, and a denne of venymous wormes. And I wyll make the cytyes of Iuda so wast, that no man shall dwell therein.
Jeremiah 9:12 What man is so wyse, as to vnderstande thys? Or to whome hath the Lorde spoken by mouth, that he may shewe this, and saye: O thou lande, why peryshest thou so? Wherfor art thou so brent vp, & lyke a wyldernesse, that no man goeth thorowe?
Jeremiah 9:13 Yea the Lorde hymselfe tolde the same vnto them, that forsoke hys lawe, and kepte not the thynge that he gaue them in commaundement, neither lyued thereafter:
Jeremiah 9:14 but folowed the wyckednes of theyr owne hertes, and serued straunge Goddes, as theyr fathers taught them.
Jeremiah 9:15 Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israell: Beholde, I wyll fede this people with wormewood, and geue them gal to drincke.
Jeremiah 9:16 I wyll scatre them also among the Heathen, whome neyther they nor theyr fathers haue knowne: & I will sende a swearde amonge them, to persecute them, vntyl I bring them to naughte.
Jeremiah 9:17 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: loke that ye call for mournynge wyues, and send for wyse wemen: that they come shortly,
Jeremiah 9:18 & synge a mournyng song of you: that the teares maye fall oute of oure eyes, and that oure eye lyddes maye gusshe oute of water.
Jeremiah 9:19 For there is a lamentable noyse heard of Sion: O how are we so sore destroyed? O howe are we so piteously confounded? We muste forsake oure owne naturall countreye, & we are shote out of oure owne lodgynges.
Jeremiah 9:20 Yet heare the worde of the Lorde (O ye wemen) and let your eares regard the wordes of hys mouth: that ye may learne your doughters to mourne, and that euerye one maye teache her neighbouresse, to make lamentacyon.
Jeremiah 9:21 Namely thus Death is climminge vp in at oure windowes he is come into oure houses, to destroye the chylde before the dore, and the younge man in the strete.
Jeremiah 9:22 But tell thou planelye, thus sayeth the Lorde: The dead bodyes of men shall lye vpon the grounde, as the dong vpon the felde, and as the heye after the mower, and there shalbe no man to take them vp.
Jeremiah 9:23 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde: Let not the wyse man reioyse in his wisdome, nor the stronge man in hys strength, neyther the ryche man in hys ryches:
Jeremiah 9:24 But who so wyl reioyse, let hym reioyse in this, that he vnderstandeth and knoweth me: for I am the Lorde, which do mercy, equite, and ryghtuousnes vpon the earth. Therefore haue I pleasure in suche thynges, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 9:25 Beholde, the tyme commeth (sayth the Lorde) that I will vyset all them, whose foreskinne is vncyrcumcysed.
Jeremiah 9:26 The Egypcians, the Iewes, the Edomytes, the Ammonytes, the Moabites, and the shauen Madyanites, that dwell in the wildernes. For all the Gentyles are vncyrcumcysed in the fleshe, but all the house of Israell are vncyrcumcysed in the herte.

CHAPTER: 10

Jeremiah 10:1 Heare the worde of the Lorde, that he speaketh vnto the, O thou house of Israell:
Jeremiah 10:2 Thus sayth the Lorde: Ye shall not learne after the maner of the Heathen, & ye shall not be afrayed for the tokens of heauen: for the Heathen are afrayed of suche:
Jeremiah 10:3 yea all the customes and lawes of the Gentiles are nothinge, but vanite. They hewe doune a tree in the wood with the handes of the worcke man, and fashyon it with the axe:
Jeremiah 10:4 they couer it ouer with gold or siluer, they fasten it with nayles and hammers, that it moue not.
Jeremiah 10:5 It standeth as styfe as the palmetree, it can not neyther speake nor go, but must be borne. Be not ye afrayed of suche, for they can do neyther good nor euill.
Jeremiah 10:6 But there is none lyke vnto the, O Lorde, & great is the name of thy power.
Jeremiah 10:7 Who wolde not feare the? Or what Kinge of the Gentyles wolde not obeye the. For amonge all the wyse men of the Gentyles, & in all their kyngdomes, there is none that maye be lickened vnto the.
Jeremiah 10:8 They are all together vnlearned and vnwyse. All theyr conninge is but vanyte:
Jeremiah 10:9 namelye, woode, syluer, whiche is brought oute of Tharsis, and beaten to plates: and golde from Ophir, a worcke that is made with the hande of the craftesmen and the caster, clothed with yelowe sylcke & scarlet: euen so is the worcke of theyr wyse men altogether.
Jeremiah 10:10 But the Lorde is a true God, a lyuynge God, and an euerlastinge kyng. Yf he be wroth, the earthe shaketh: all the Gentiles maye not abyde his indygnacyon.
Jeremiah 10:11 As for theyr Goddes, it maye well be sayde of them: they are Goddes, that made neyther heauen nor earthe: therfore shall they peryshe from the earthe, & from al thynges vnder heauen
Jeremiah 10:12 But (as for oure God) he made the earth with his power, and with hys wysdom hath he fynished the whole compasse of the worlde, wyth hys discrecion hath he spred oute the heauens.
Jeremiah 10:13 At his voyce the waters gather together in the ayre, he draweth vp the cloudes from the vttermoste partes of the earth: he turneth lyghtenyng to rayne, & bryngeth forth the windes oute of theyr treasures:
Jeremiah 10:14 Hys wysdom maketh all men fooles. And confounded be all casters of ymages, for that they cast, is but a vayne thynge, and hath no lyfe.
Jeremiah 10:15 The vayne craftesmen with theyr worckes, that they in theyr vanite haue made, shall peryshe one with another in the tyme of vysitacyon.
Jeremiah 10:16 Neuertheles, Iacobs porcyon is not suche: but it is he, that hath made all thynges, and Israel is the rode of hys enherytaunce: The Lorde of Hostes is his name.
Jeremiah 10:17 Put awaye thyne vnclennesse oute of the lande, thou that arte in the stronge cyties.
Jeremiah 10:18 For thus sayth the Lorde: Beholde, I wyl nowe thruste oute the inhabitours of this land a greate waye of, and trouble them of suche a fashyon, that they shall no more be founde.
Jeremiah 10:19 Alas how am I hurte? Alas, howe paynefull are my scourges vnto me? For I consydre this sorowe by my selfe, & I must suffre it.
Jeremiah 10:20 My tabernacle is destroyed, and al my coardes are broken. My children are gone fro me, & can no where be found. Nowe haue I none to sprede oute my tente, or to set vp my hanginges.
Jeremiah 10:21 For the herdmen haue done folyshly, that they haue not soughte the Lorde. Therfor haue they dealt vnwysely wyth theyr cattell, and all are scatred abroade.
Jeremiah 10:22 Beholde, the noyse is harde at hande, and greate sedycyon out of the north: to make the cytyes of Iuda a wyldernesse, and a dwellynge place for Dragons.
Jeremiah 10:23 Now I knowe (O Lorde) that it is not in mans power to ordre hys owne wayes, or to rule hys owne steppes and goinges.
Jeremiah 10:24 Therfor chasten thou vs, O Lorde, but wyth fauoure and not in thy wrath, brynge vs not vtterlye to naught.
Jeremiah 10:25 Poure oute thyne indygnacion rather vpon the Gentyles, that knowe the not, and vpon the people that call not on thy name: And that because they haue consumed, deuoured and destroyed Iacob, and haue roted out hys glorye.

CHAPTER: 11

Jeremiah 11:1 This is another Sermon, which the Lorde commaunded Ieremy for to preache, saying:
Jeremiah 11:2 Hear the wordes of the couenaunt, & speake vnto all Iuda, and to all them that dwell at Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 11:3 And saye thou vnto them: Thus sayth the Lorde God of Israell. Cursed be euerye one that is not obedient vnto the wordes of this couenaunt:
Jeremiah 11:4 whiche I commaunded vnto youre fathers, what tyme as I brought them oute of Egypte, from the yron fornace, sayinge: Be obedient vnto my voyce, & do accordynge to all that I commaund you: so shall ye be my people, & I wilbe youre God,
Jeremiah 11:5 and will kepe my promyse, that I haue sworne vnto youre fathers: Namelye, that I wolde geue them a lande which floweth with mylcke and hony, as ye se, it is come to passe vnto this daye. Then aunswered I, and sayd: Amen. It is euen so Lorde, as thou sayest.
Jeremiah 11:6 Then the Lorde sayde vnto me agayne: preache this in the cytyes of Iuda & round about Ierusalem, & saye: Heare the wordes of this conuenaunt, that ye maye kepe them.
Jeremiah 11:7 For I haue diligently exorted youre fathers, euer sence the tyme that I broughte them oute of the land of Egipte, vnto this daye. I gaue them warnyng by tymes, sayenge: herken vnto my voyce:
Jeremiah 11:8 Neuertheles, they wolde not obeye me nor enclyne theyr eares vnto me, but folowed the wicked ymaginacions of theyr owne hertes. And therfore haue I accused them as transgressours of all the wordes of this couenaunt, that I gaue them to kepe, whiche they (not with vnderstandynge) haue not kepte.
Jeremiah 11:9 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: It is founde oute, that whole Israell and all these citesens of Ierusalem are gone backe.
Jeremiah 11:10 They haue turned them selues to the blasphemyes of theyr forefathers, whiche had no luste to heare my worde. Euen lykewyse haue these also folowed straunge Goddes, and worshypped them. The house of Israell and Iuda haue broken my couenaunt, whiche I made wyth their fathers.
Jeremiah 11:11 Therfore thus sayth the Lorde: Beholde, I wyll sende a plage amonge you, whiche ye shall not be able to escape: and though ye crye vnto me, I wyll not heare you.
Jeremiah 11:12 Then shal the tounes of Iuda and the cytezyns of Ierusalem go, and call vpon theyr Goddes, vnto whom they made theyr oblacyons: but they are not able to helpe them in tyme of theyr trouble.
Jeremiah 11:13 For as manye cytyes as thou haste, O Iuda, so many Goddes haste thou also: And loke how many stretes there be in the (O Ierusalem) so manye shamefull aulters haue ye set vp, to offre vpon them vnto Baal.
Jeremiah 11:14 But praye not thou for thys people, byd neyther prayse nor prayer for them, for thoughe they crye vnto me in theyr trouble, yet wyl I not heare them.
Jeremiah 11:15 O thou beloued, why doest thou so shamefull greate blasphemyes in my house, euen as though that holy flesh myght absolue the, specially when thou haste made thy boaste of thy wickednes.
Jeremiah 11:16 The Lorde called the a grene olyue tree, a fayre one, a fruteful one, a goodly one, but nowe that there is a contrarye reporte of the abroade, he wyl burne the vp, & destroye thy braunches.
Jeremiah 11:17 For the Lorde of hostes that planted the, hath deuysed a plage for the, (O thou house of Israell and Iuda) for the euyll that ye haue done to prouoke hym to wrath, in that ye dyd seruyce vnto Baal.
Jeremiah 11:18 This (O Lord) haue I learned of the, and vnderstand it, for thou hast shewed me theyr ymaginacions.
Jeremiah 11:19 But I (as a meke lambe) was caried awaye to be slayne: not knowing, that they had deuised soche a councell agaynst me sayenge: We wyll destroye hys meate wyth woed, & dryue hym out of the lande of the lyuing: that his name shall neuer be thought vpon.
Jeremiah 11:20 Therfore I wyll beseche the now (O Lord of hostes) thou rightuous iudge, thou that tryest the reynes and the hertes: lett me se the aunged of them, for vnto the haue I committed my cause.
Jeremiah 11:21 The Lord therfore spake thus of the citezyns of Anothoth, that sought to slaye me, sayenge: Preache not vnto vs in the name of the Lord, or els thou shalt dye of oure handes.
Jeremiah 11:22 Thus (I saye) spake the Lorde of hostes: Beholde, I will viset you. Youre yonge men shall peryshe wyth the swearde, your sonnes & your daughters shall vtterlye dye of honger,
Jeremiah 11:23 so that none shall remayne. For vpon the cytezyns of Anathoth wil I bring a plage, the yeare of their visitacion.

CHAPTER: 12

Jeremiah 12:1 O Lorde, thou art more rightuous then that I shulde dyspute with the: Neuertheles, lett me talke wyth the in thynges resonable. How happeneth it, that the waye of the vngodlye is so prosperous: and that it goeth so well with them, which (without eny shame) offende and lyue in wyckednesse?
Jeremiah 12:2 Thou plantest them, they take rote, they growe, and brynge forth fruite: They booste moch of the, yet doest thou not punish them.
Jeremiah 12:3 But thou Lorde (to whom I am well knowne) thou that hast sene, and proued my herte, take them awaye, lyke as a flocke is caryed to the slaughter house, & apoynte them for the daye of slaughter.
Jeremiah 12:4 Howlonge shall the lande mourne, and al the herbes of the felde perysh, for the wyckednes of them that dwell therin? The catell and the byrdes are gone, yet saye they: tush, God wyll not destroye vs vtterly.
Jeremiah 12:5 Seing thou art weery in runninge with the fote men, how wilt thou then runne with horses? In a peaceable sure lande thou mayest be safe, but how wilt thou do in the furyous pryde of Iordane?
Jeremiah 12:6 For thy brethren and thy kynred haue all together despised the, & cried out vpon the in thine absence. Beleue them not, though they speake fayre wordes to th
Jeremiah 12:7 As for me (saye I) I haue forsaken myne owne dwellyng place, & left myne heretage. My life also that I loue so well, haue I geuen in to the handes of myne enemyes.
Jeremiah 12:8 Myne heretage is become vnto me, as a Lyon, in the wod. It cried out vpon me, therfore haue I forsaken it.
Jeremiah 12:9 Myne heretage is vnto me, as a speckled byrde, a byrde of dyuerse coloures is vpon it. Go hence, and gathere all the beastes of the felde together, that they maye eate it vp.
Jeremiah 12:10 Dyuerse herdmen haue broken downe my vyneyarde, and troden vpon my porcyon. Of my pleasaunt porcion, they haue made a wyldernes & deserte.
Jeremiah 12:11 They haue layed it waste: and now that it is waste, it sygheth vnto me. Yee the whole lande lyeth waste, and no man regardeth it.
Jeremiah 12:12 The destroyers come ouer the heeth euery waye, for the swearde of the Lorde shall consume from the one ende of the lande to the other, & no flesh shall haue reste.
Jeremiah 12:13 They shall sowe wheate, and reepe thornes. They shall take heretage in possession, but it shall do them no good. And ye shalbe confounded of youre owne wynnynges, because of the greate wrath of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 12:14 Thus sayeth the Lorde vpon all myne euell negbours, that laye hande on myne heretage, whiche I haue geuen my people of Israel: Beholde, I will plucke them (namely Israel) out of their lande, & put out the house of Iuda from amonge them.
Jeremiah 12:15 And when I haue roted them out, I wylbe at one wyth them agayne, and wyll haue mercye vpon them: & brynge them agayne, euery man to hys owne heritage, and in to his land.
Jeremiah 12:16 And yf they (namely that trouble my people) wyll lerne the wayes of them, to sweare by my name: The Lorde lyueth (lyke as they lerned my people to sweare by Baal) then shall they be rekened amonge my people.
Jeremiah 12:17 But yf they will no obeye then wyll I rote out the same folke & destroy them, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 13

Jeremiah 13:1 Moreouer, thus sayde the Lorde vnto me: go thy waye, and gett the a lynen breche, and gyrde it aboute thy loynes, and let it not be wet.
Jeremiah 13:2 Then I got me a breche, accordynge to the commaundement of the Lorde, and put it about my loynes.
Jeremiah 13:3 After this, the Lord spake vnto me agayn:
Jeremiah 13:4 Take the breche that thou hast prepared and put aboute the, and gett the vp, and go vnto Euphrates, and hyde it in a hole of the rock.
Jeremiah 13:5 So went I, and hydde it, as the Lorde commaunded me.
Jeremiah 13:6 And it happened longe after this, that the Lorde spake vnto me: Vp, and get the to Euphrates, and fet the breche from thence, which I commaunded the to hyde there.
Jeremiah 13:7 Then went I to Euphrates, & dygged vp, & toke the breche from the place where I had hyd it: & beholde, the breche was corrupt, so that it was profytable for nothinge.
Jeremiah 13:8 Then sayde the Lorde vnto me:
Jeremiah 13:9 Thus sayeth the Lord: Euen so wyll I corrupte the pryde of Iuda, & the hye mynde of Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 13:10 This people is a wycked people, they wyll not heare my worde, they folowe the wicked ymagynacyons of their owne herte, & hange vpon straunge Goddes, them haue they serued & worshypped: & therfore they shalbe as this breche, that serueth for nothynge.
Jeremiah 13:11 For as straytelye as a breche lyeth vpon a mans loynes, so strately dyd I bynde the whol house of Israell, and the whole house of Iuda vnto me, sayeth the Lorde: that they myght be my people: that they myght haue a gloryous name: that they myght be in honoure: but they wolde not obeye me.
Jeremiah 13:12 Therfore laye thys rydle before them, and saye: Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israel: Euery pot shalbe fylled with wyne. And they shall saye: thinckest thou we knowe not, that euery pot shalbe fylled with wyne?
Jeremiah 13:13 Then shalt thou saye vnto them: Thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde: I shall fyll all the inhabytours of this lande with dronckennes, the Kynges that syt vpon Dauids stole, the Prestes and Prophetes, with all that dwell at Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 13:14 And I wyll shute them one agaynst another, yee the fathers agaynst the sonnes, sayeth the Lorde. I wyll not pardon them, I will not spare them, ner haue pytye vpon them: but destroye them.
Jeremiah 13:15 Be obedient, geue are, take no dysdayne at it, for it is the Lorde hym selfe that speaketh.
Jeremiah 13:16 Honoure the Lorde youre God herein, or he take hys lyght from you, and or euer youre fete stomble in darcknesse at the hylle lest when ye loke for the lyght, he turne it into the shadowe and darcknesse of death.
Jeremiah 13:17 But yf ye wyll not heare me, that geue you secrete warnyng, I will mourne fro my whole hert for youre stubburnesse. Pyteouslye wyll I wepe, and the teares shall gusshe out of myne eyes. For the Lordes flocke shall be caryed awaye captyue.
Jeremiah 13:18 Tell the kynge and the rulers: Humble youre selues, sett you downe lowe, for the crowne of youre glory shall fall from your head.
Jeremiah 13:19 The cities towarde the south shalbe shut vp, and no man shall open them. All Iuda shalbe caried away captyue, so that none shall remayne.
Jeremiah 13:20 Lyft vp youre eyes, and beholde them, that come from the North: Lyke a fat flocke shall they fall vpon the.
Jeremiah 13:21 To whom wylt thou make thy mone, when they come vpon the? for thou hast taught them thy selfe, and made them maysters ouer the. Shall not sorowe come vpon the, as on a woman trauaylinge with childe:
Jeremiah 13:22 And yf thou woldest saye then in thyne herte: Wherfore come these thinges vpon me? Euen for the multitude of thy blasphemyes, shall thy hinder partes and thy fete be discouered.
Jeremiah 13:23 For lyke as the man of Iude maye chaunge hys skyne, and the cat of the mountayne her spottes: so maye ye that be exercysed in euell, do good.
Jeremiah 13:24 Therfore will I scatre you, lyke as the stobble that is taken awaye with the south wynde.
Jeremiah 13:25 This shall be youre porcyon, and the porcyon of youre measure, wher with ye shal be rewarded of me, sayeth the Lorde: because ye haue forgotten me, and put youre trust in disceytfull thinges.
Jeremiah 13:26 Therfore shall I turne thy clothes ouer thy head, and discouer thy thyghes, that thy preuities maye be sene,
Jeremiah 13:27 thy aduoutrye, thy deedly malice, thy beastlinesse and thy shamefull whordome. For vpon the feldes and hylles I haue sene thy abhominacions. Wo be vnto the (O Ierusalem) when wylt thou euer be clensed eny more?

CHAPTER: 14

Jeremiah 14:1 The worde of the Lorde shewed vnto Ieremye, concernynge the derth of the fruites.
Jeremiah 14:2 Iuda shal mourne, men shall not go moch more thorow hys gates: the lande shalbe no more had in reputacyon, and the crie of Ierusalem shall breake out.
Jeremiah 14:3 The Lordes shall sende their seruauntes to fetch water, and when they come to the welles, they shall fynde no water, but shall carye their vessels home emptye. They shall be ashamed and confounded, & shall couer their heades.
Jeremiah 14:4 For the grounde shalbe dried vp, because there commeth no rayne vpon it. The plowmen also shalbe a shamed, & shall couer their heades.
Jeremiah 14:5 The Hynde shall forsake the yonge fawne, that he bringeth forth in the felde because there shalbe no grasse.
Jeremiah 14:6 The wylde Asses shall stande in the Mosse, and drawe in their wynde lyke the Dragons, their eyes shall fayle for want of grasse.
Jeremiah 14:7 Doutles oure owne wickednesse rewarde vs: But Lorde do thou accordinge to thy name, though oure transgressyons and synnes be many.
Jeremiah 14:8 For thou art the comforte & helpe of Israel in the tyme of trouble. Why wilt thou be as a straunger in the Lande, and as one that goeth ouer the felde, and commeth in onely to remayne for a night?
Jeremiah 14:9 Why wilt thou make thy self a cowarde, and as it were a gyaunte that yet maye not helpe? For thou art ours (O Lorde) and we beare thy name, therfore forsake vs not.
Jeremiah 14:10 Then spake the Lorde, concernynge this people that haue pleasure to go so nymblye with their fete, and leaue not of, and therfore displease the Lorde: in so much, that he wyll now bringe agayne to remembraunce al their mysdedes, and punysh all their synnes.
Jeremiah 14:11 Yee euen thus sayde the Lorde vnto me: Thou shalt not praye to do this people good.
Jeremiah 14:12 For though they fast, I wyll not heare theyr prayers. And though they offre burntoffringes & sacrifices, yet wyll not I accepte them. For I will destroye them with the swearde, honger and pestilence.
Jeremiah 14:13 Then answerede I: O Lorde God, the prophetes saye vnto them: Tush, ye shal se no swearde, and no honger shall come vpon you, but the Lorde shall geue you continuall rest in this place.
Jeremiah 14:14 And the Lorde sayde vnto me: The prophetes preach lyes vnto them in my name. I haue not spoken wyth them, nether gaue I them eny charge, nether dyd I sende them: yet they preach vnto you false visions, charming vanite, & disceytfulnesse of their owne herte.
Jeremiah 14:15 Therfore thus saieth the Lorde: As for those prophetes that preache in my name (whom I neuertheles haue not sent) and that saye: Tush, there shall nether batell ner honger be in this lande: Wyth swearde and with honger shall those prophetes perysh,
Jeremiah 14:16 and the people to whom they haue preached shalbe cast out of Ierusalem, dye of honger, and be slayne wyth the swearde (and there shallbe no man to burye them) buth they and their wyues, their sonnes and their daughters. For thus wyll I poure their wyckednes vpon them.
Jeremiah 14:17 This shalt thou saye also vnto them: Myne eyes shall wepe without ceassynge daye and night. For my people shalbe destroyed wyth great harme, and shall perysh wyth a great plage.
Jeremiah 14:18 For yf I go in to the felde, lo, it lyeth all full of slayne men. If I come in to the cytye, lo, they be all fameshed of honger. Yee their prophetes also and prestes shall be led in to an vnknowne lande.
Jeremiah 14:19 Haste thou then vtterlye forsaken Iuda? (sayde I) Doest thou so abhorre Syon? Or hast thou so plaged vs, that we can be healed nomore? We loked for peace, and there commeth no good: for the tyme of health, and lo, here is nothynge but trouble:
Jeremiah 14:20 We knowlege (O Lorde) all oure mysdedes, & the synnes of oure fathers, that we haue offended the.
Jeremiah 14:21 Be not dyspleased (O Lorde) for thy names sake, forgett not thy louynge kyndnes: Remembre the trone of thyne honoure, breake not the couenaunt, that thou hast made with vs.
Jeremiah 14:22 Are there eny amonge the goddes of the Gentiles that sende rayne or geue the showers of heauen? Doest not thou it O Lorde oure God, in whom we trust? Yee Lorde, thou doest all these thinges.

CHAPTER: 15

Jeremiah 15:1 Then spake the Lorde vnto me, & sayde: Though Moses and Samuel stode before me, yet haue I no herte to thys people. Dryue them awaye, that they maye go out of my syght.
Jeremiah 15:2 And yf they saye vnto the: Whyther shall we go? Then tell them: The Lorde geueth you thys answere: Some vnto death, some to the swearde, some to honger, some in to captyuyte.
Jeremiah 15:3 For I will bryng foure plages vpon them sayeth the Lorde. The swearde shall strangle them, the dogges shal deuoure them, the foules of the ayre, and beastes of the earth shall eate them vp, and destroye them.
Jeremiah 15:4 I wyll scatter them aboute also in all kyngdomes and landes to be plaged, because of Manasseh the sonne of Hezekiah kynge of Iuda, for the thinges that he dyd in Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 15:5 Who shall then haue pyte vpon the O Ierusalem? Who shall be sory for the? Or who shall make intercession, to opteyne peace for the?
Jeremiah 15:6 seynge thou goest fro me, & turnest backwarde, sayeth the Lorde? Therfore I will stretch out myne hand agaynst the, to destroy the, and I wyll not be intreated.
Jeremiah 15:7 I will scatre the abrode with fanne no euery side of the lande: I wyll waste my people and destroye them, for they haue had no luste to turne from their owne wayes.
Jeremiah 15:8 I wyll make their wyddowes mo in nombre, then the sandes of the sea. Vpon the mothers of their chyldren, I shall brynge a destroyer in the noone daye. Sodenlye & vnawarres, shall I sende a feare vpon their cyties.
Jeremiah 15:9 She that hath borne .vij. chyldren, shall haue none, here herte shal be full of sorowe. The Sunne shall fayle her in the cleare daye, when she shalbe confounded and faynte for very heuynesse. As for those that remayne, I wyll delyuer them vnto the swearde of their enemyes, sayth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 15:10 O mother, alas that euer thou dydest beate me, an enemye and hated of the whose lande: Though I neuer lente ner receyued vpon vsury, yet all men speake euell vpon me.
Jeremiah 15:11 And the Lorde answered me: Lede not I the then vnto good? Come not I to the, when thou art in trouble: & helpe the, when thyne enemye oppresseth the?
Jeremiah 15:12 Doth one yron hurte another, or one metall that commeth from the North, another?
Jeremiah 15:13 As for youre ryches and treasure, I wyll geue them out in to a praye, not for eny money, but because of all your synnes, that ye haue done in all youre coastes.
Jeremiah 15:14 And I wyll brynge you with youre enemyes in to a lande, that ye knowe not: for the fyre that is kyndled in my indignacyon, shall burne you vp.
Jeremiah 15:15 O Lorde (sayde I then) thou knowest all thinges, therfore remembre me, & vyset me, delyuer me fro my persecuters: Recyeue not my cause in thy longe wrath, yet thou knowest, that for thy sake I suffre rebuke.
Jeremiah 15:16 When I had found thy wordes, I ate them vp gredely: they haue made my herte ioyfull & glad. For I call vpon thy name, O Lorde God of Hostes.
Jeremiah 15:17 I dwell not amonge the scorners, nether is my delyte therin: but I dwell only in the feare of thy hand, for thou hast fylled me with bytternes.
Jeremiah 15:18 Shall my heuynes endure for euer? Are my plages then so greate, that they maye neuer be healed? Wilt thou be as a water, that falleth, and can not continue?
Jeremiah 15:19 Vpon these wordes, thus sayde the Lorde vnto me: If thou wylt turne agayne, I shall set the in my seruyce: and yf thou wylt take out the thynge that is precious from the vile, thou shalt be euen as myne owne mouth. They shall conuerte vnto the, but turne not thou vnto them:
Jeremiah 15:20 & so shall I make the a stronge wall of stele agaynst this people. They shall fyght agaynst the, but they shall not preuayle. For I my selfe will be with the, to helpe the, and delyuer the, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 15:21 And I wyll rydd the out of the handes of the wycked, and delyuer the out of the hande of Tirauntes.

CHAPTER: 16

Jeremiah 16:1 Moreouer, thus sayde the Lorde vnto me:
Jeremiah 16:2 Thou shalt take the no wyfe, ner beget chyldren in this place.
Jeremiah 16:3 For of the chyldren that are borne in thys place, of their mother that haue borne them, and of their fathers that haue begotten them in thys lande, thus sayeth the Lorde:
Jeremiah 16:4 They shal dye an horrible deeth, no man shall mourne for them, ner burye them, but they shall lye as donge vpon the earth. They shall perishe thorow the swearde and honger, and their bodyes shall be meate for the foules of the ayre, & beastes of the earth.
Jeremiah 16:5 Agayne, thus sayeth the Lorde: Go not vnto them, that come together, for to mourne and wepe: for I haue taken my peace from this people (saieth the Lorde) yee my fauoure & my mercy.
Jeremiah 16:6 And in this lande shall they dye, olde and yonge, and shall not be buryed: no man shall bewepe them, no man shall clyppe or shaue hym selfe for them.
Jeremiah 16:7 There shal not one viset another, to mourne with them for their deed, or to comforte them. One shall not offre another the cuppe of consolacyon, to forget their heuynes for father & mother.
Jeremiah 16:8 Thou shalt not go in to their feaste house, to syt downe, moche lesse to eate or drincke with them.
Jeremiah 16:9 For thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israell: Beholde, I shall take awaye out of this place, the voyce of myrth and gladnesse, the voyce of the brydegrome and of the bryde: yee & that in youre dayes, that ye maye se it.
Jeremiah 16:10 Now when thou shewest thys people all these wordes, and they saye vnto the: Wherfore hath the Lorde deuysed all thys greate plage for vs? Or what is the offence & synne, that we haue done agaynst the Lord oure God?
Jeremiah 16:11 Then make thou them this answere: Because youre fathers haue forsaken me (sayth the Lord) and haue cleued vnto straunge goddes, whom they haue honoured and worshypped: but me haue they forsaken, & haue not kepte my lawe.
Jeremiah 16:12 And ye with youre shamefull blasphemyes, haue exceaded the wyckednes of youre fathers. For euery one of you foloweth the frowarde and euell ymagynacyon of his owne herte, and is not obedient vnto me.
Jeremiah 16:13 Therfore wyll I cast you oute of this lande, in to a lande that ye and youre fathers knowe not: and there shall ye serue straunge goddes daye and nyght, there wyll I shewe you no fauoure.
Jeremiah 16:14 Behold therfore (sayeth the Lorde) the dayes are come, that it shall nomore be sayed: The Lorde lyueth, whyche brought the chyldren of Israell out of the lande of Egypte:
Jeremiah 16:15 but, it shall be sayde, the Lord lyueth, that brought the chyldren of Israell from the North, and from all landes where I had scatred them. For I wyll brynge them agayne in to the lande, that I gaue vnto their fathers.
Jeremiah 16:16 Beholde (sayeth the Lorde) I wyll sende out many fyshers to take them, & after that wyll I sende out manye hunters to hunte them out, from all mountaynes and hylles & out of the caues of stones.
Jeremiah 16:17 For myne eyes beholde all their wayes, and they can not be hyd fro my face, nether can their wycked dedes be kepte close out of my syght.
Jeremiah 16:18 But firste wyll I sufficientlye rewarde their shamefull blasphemies and synnes, wherwyth they haue defyled my lande: Namely, wyth their stinckyng Idols and obhominacions, wherwith they haue fylled myne heretage.
Jeremiah 16:19 O Lorde, my strength, my power, and refuge in tyme of trouble. The Gentyles shall come vnto the from the endes of the worlde, and saye: Verely our fathers haue cleued vnto lyes, their Idols are but vayne & vnprofitable.
Jeremiah 16:20 How can a man make those his goddes, which are not able to be goddes.
Jeremiah 16:21 And therfore I wyll ones teach them, sayeth the Lorde, I wyll shewe them my hande & my power, that they maye knowe, that my name is the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 17

Jeremiah 17:1 Youre synne (O ye of the trybe of Iuda) is written in the table of youre hertes, and grauen so vpon the edges of your aulters wyth a penne of yron and wyth an adamant clawe:
Jeremiah 17:2 that youre chyldren also maye thincke vpon youre aulters, woddes, thicke trees, hie hylles, mountaynes & feldes.
Jeremiah 17:3 Wherfore, I will make all youre substaunce & treasure be spoyled, for the great synne that ye haue done vpon your hye places thorow out all the coastes of youre lande.
Jeremiah 17:4 Ye shall be cast out also from the heretage, that I gaue you. And I wyll subdue you vnder the heuy bondage of youre enemyes, in a lande that ye knowe not. For ye haue mynystred fyre to my indignacyon, whyche shall burne euermore.
Jeremiah 17:5 Thus sayeth the Lorde: Cursed be the man that putteth his trust in man, & that taketh flesh for hys arme: and he, whose herte departeth from the Lorde.
Jeremiah 17:6 He shall be lyke the heeth, that groweth in the wildernes. As for the good thing that is for to come, he shal not se it: but dwell in a drye place of the wildernes, in a salt and vnoccupied lande.
Jeremiah 17:7 O blessed is the man, that putteth hys trust in the Lorde, and whose hope is the Lorde hym selfe.
Jeremiah 17:8 For he shalbe as a tre, that is planted by the water syde: which spredeth out the rote vnto moystness, whom the heate can not harme, when it commeth, but his leaues are grene. And though there growe but lytle frute because of drouth, yet is he not carefull, but he neuer leaueth of to brynge forth fruite.
Jeremiah 17:9 Amonge all thynges lyuinge, man hath the moste disceytfull and vnsercheable herte. Who shall then knowe it?
Jeremiah 17:10 Euen I the Lorde search out the grounde of the herte, & trye the reynes, and rewarde euery man accordinge to hys wayes, and acordynge to the fruyte of his councels.
Jeremiah 17:11 The dysceytfull maketh a nest, but bryngeth forth no yonge. He commeth by ryches, but not ryghtuously. In the middest of his life must he leaue them behinde hym, and at the last be founde a very foole.
Jeremiah 17:12 But thou (O Lord) whose trone is moste gloryous, excellent and of most antyquite, whych duellest in the place of oure holye reste:
Jeremiah 17:13 Thou art the comforte of Israell. All they that forsake the, shal be confounded: all they that departe from the, shalbe wrytten in earth, for they haue forsaken the Lorde the very condyte of the waters of lyfe.
Jeremiah 17:14 Heale me, O Lord, and I shall be whole: saue thou me, and I shalbe saued, for thou art my prayse.
Jeremiah 17:15 Beholde, these men saye vnto me: Where is the worde of the Lord: Lett it come.
Jeremiah 17:16 Where as I neuertheles ledynge the flocke in thy wayes, haue compelled none by violence. For I neuer desyred eny mans deeth, this knowest thou well. My wordes also were right before the.
Jeremiah 17:17 Be not now terryble vnto me, O Lorde, for thou art he in whom I hope, when I am in parell.
Jeremiah 17:18 Let my persecuters be confounded, but not me: let them be afrayed, and not me. Thou shalt bringe vpon them the tyme of their plage, and shalt destroye them right sore.
Jeremiah 17:19 Agayne, thus hath the Lorde sayde vnto me: Go and stande vnder the gate, where thorow the people and the kynges of Iuda go out and in, yee vnder all the gates of Ierusalem,
Jeremiah 17:20 and saye vnto them: Heare the worde of the Lorde, ye kynges of Iuda, and al thou people of Iuda, and all ye cytesyns of Ierusalem, that go thorowe thys gate:
Jeremiah 17:21 Thus the Lorde commaundeth: Take hede for youre lyues, that ye carye no burthen vpon you in the Sabboth, to brynge it thorowe the gates of Ierusalem:
Jeremiah 17:22 ye shall beare no burthen also out of youre houses in the Sabboth. Ye shall do no laboure therin, but halowe the Sabboth, as I commaunded youre fathers.
Jeremiah 17:23 How be it they obeyed me not, nether herkened they vnto me: but were obstynate & stubburne, & nether obeyed me, nor receyued my correccyon.
Jeremiah 17:24 Neuertheles, yf ye will heare me (sayet the Lord) & beare no burthen in to the cytie thorow this gate vpon the Sabboth: If ye wyll halowe the Sabboth, so that ye do no worcke therin:
Jeremiah 17:25 then shall there go thorowe the gates of this cytie, kynges and prynces, that shall syt vpon the stole of Dauid: They shall be caried vpon charettes, and ryde vpon horses, both they and their prynces. Yee whole Iuda and all the cytesyns of Ierusalem shall goo here thorowe, and this cytye shall euer be the more and more inhabyted.
Jeremiah 17:26 There shall come men also from the cyties of Iuda, from aboute Ierusalem, & from the lande of BenIamin, from the playne feldes, from the mountaynes and from the wyldernesse: whiche shall brynge burntofferynges, sacrifyces, oblacions, and incense, and offre vp thanckesgeuyng in the house of the Lord.
Jeremiah 17:27 But yf ye wyll not be obedyent vnto me, to halow the Sabboth, so that ye will beare youre burthens thorow the gates of Ierusalem vpon the Sabboth: Then shall I set fyre vpon the gates of Ierusalem, and it shall burne vp the houses of Ierusalem, and no man shall be able to quench it.

CHAPTER: 18

Jeremiah 18:1 This is another communicacion, that God had with Ieremye, sayinge:
Jeremiah 18:2 Aryse, and go downe into the Potters house, and there shall I tell the more of my mynde.
Jeremiah 18:3 Now when I came to the Potters house, I founde hym makynge his worcke vpon a whele.
Jeremiah 18:4 The vessell that the Potter made of claye, brake amonge hys handes: So he beganne a new, and made another vessell, accordynge to hys mynde.
Jeremiah 18:5 Then sayde the Lorde thus vnto me:
Jeremiah 18:6 Maye not I do with you, as this Potter doth, O ye house of Israel, sayeth the Lord? Beholde, ye house of Israell: ye are in my hande, euen as the claye in the Potters hande.
Jeremiah 18:7 When I take in hande to rote out, to destroye, or to waste awaye eny people or kingdome:
Jeremiah 18:8 yf that people (agaynst whom I haue this deuysed) conuerte from their wickednes: Immediatly, I repente of the plage, that I deuysed to brynge vpon them.
Jeremiah 18:9 Agayne. When I take in hande, to buylde, or to plante a people or a kyngdome:
Jeremiah 18:10 yf the same people do euell before me, and heare not my voyce: Immediatly, I repente of the good, that I deuyse to do for them.
Jeremiah 18:11 Speake now therfore vnto whole Iuda, and to them that dwell at Ierusalem: Thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde, I am deuysynge a plage for you, and am takynge a thynge in hande agaynst you. Therfore let euery man turne from hys euell waye, take vpon you the thinge that is good, and do ryght.
Jeremiah 18:12 But they saye: No more of this, we wyll folowe oure owne ymagynacyons, and do euery man accordyng to the wylfulnesse of his owne mynde.
Jeremiah 18:13 Therfore thus sayeth the Lord: Aske amonge the Heathen, yf eny man hath hearde soch horryble thynges, as the daughter of Syon hath done.
Jeremiah 18:14 Shall not the snowe (that melteth vpon the stony rockes of Libanus) moysten the feldes? Or maye the sprynges of waters be so grauen awaye, that they runne no more, geue moystnesse, ner make fruitefull?
Jeremiah 18:15 But my people hath so forgotten me, that they haue made sacryfyce vnto vayne Goddes. And whyle they folowed their owne wayes they are come out of the hye strete, & gone in to a fote waye not vsed to betroden.
Jeremiah 18:16 Where thorowe they haue brought their lande in to an euerlastyng wyldernesse and scorne: So that whosoeuer trauayleth therby: shalbe abashed, and wagge their heades.
Jeremiah 18:17 With an East wynde will I scatre them, before their enemyes. And when their destruccion commeth, I wyll turne my backe vpon them, but not my face.
Jeremiah 18:18 Then sayde they: come, let vs ymagyn smothynge agaynst this Ieremy. Yee thys dyd euen the prestes, to whom the lawe was commytted: the Senatours, that were the wysest, and the prophetes, whiche wanted not the worde of God. Come (sayde they) lett vs cut out hys tunge, & let vs not regarde his wordes.
Jeremiah 18:19 Consydre me, O Lorde, and heare the voyce of myne enemies.
Jeremiah 18:20 Do they not recompence euell for good, when they dygg a pyt for my soule? Remembre, how that I stode before the, to speake for them, and to turne awaye thy wrath from them.
Jeremiah 18:21 Therfore let their chyldren dye of hunger and lett them be oppressed with the swearde. Let their wyues be robbed of their chyldren, and become widdowes: let their housbandes be slayne, lett their yonge men be kylled with the swearde in the felde.
Jeremiah 18:22 Let the noyse be herde out of their houses, when the murtherer commeth sodenly vpon them: For they haue digged a pyt to take me, and layed snares for my fete.
Jeremiah 18:23 Yet Lorde, thou knowest all their councell, that they haue deuysed, to slaye me. And therfore forgeue them not their wyckednes, and let not their synne be put out of thy syght: but lett them be iudged before the as the gyltye: Thys shalt thou do vnto them in the tyme of thy indygnacyon.

CHAPTER: 19

Jeremiah 19:1 Moreouer, thus sayde the Lorde vnto Ieremy: Go thy waye, and bye the an erthen pytcher, & bringe forthe the Senatours, & chefe preastes
Jeremiah 19:2 in to the valley of the chyldren of Hennon, which lieth before the porte that is made of bryck, & shewe them there the wordes, that I shall tell the,
Jeremiah 19:3 & saye thus vnto them: Heare the worde of the Lorde, ye kynges of Iuda, and ye cytesyns of Ierusalem: Thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes the God of Israel: Beholde, I will bring soche a plage vpon this place, that the eares of all that heare it, shall glowe.
Jeremiah 19:4 And that because they haue forsaken me, and vnhalowed this place, and haue offred in it vnto straunge goddes: whome nether they, their fathers, ner the kynges of Iuda haue knowne. They haue fylled this place also with the bloude of innocentes,
Jeremiah 19:5 for they haue sett vp an aulter vnto Baall, to burne their children for a burntofferynge vnto Baall, which I nether commaunded, ner charged them, nether thought ones there vpon.
Jeremiah 19:6 Beholde therfore, the time commeth (saieth the Lorde) that this place shall nomore be called. Topheth, ner the valley of the children of Hennom, but the valley of slaughter.
Jeremiah 19:7 For in thys place wyll I slaye the Senatours of Iuda and Ierusalem, and kyll them downe with the swearde in the syght of their enemyes and of them that seke their lyues. And theyr deed carcases wyll I geue to be meate for the foules of the ayre, and beastes of the felde.
Jeremiah 19:8 And I wyll make this cytie so desolate, and despysed, that who so goeth ther by, shall be abashed and ieast vpon her, because of al her plages.
Jeremiah 19:9 I wyll fede them also with the fleshe of their sonnes and their daughters. Yee euery one shall eate vp another in the besegynge & straytnesse, wherwith their enemyes (that seke their lyues) shall kepe them in.
Jeremiah 19:10 And the pytcher shalt thou breake in the syght of the men, that shalbe wyth the, and saye vnto them:
Jeremiah 19:11 Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: Euen so wyll I destroye thys people and cytie: as a Potter breaketh a vessell, that can not be made whole agayne. In Topheth shall they be buried, for they shall haue none other place.
Jeremiah 19:12 Thus wyll I do vnto this place, also sayeth the Lorde, and to them that dwell therin: yee I wyl do to thys citie as vnto Topheth.
Jeremiah 19:13 (For the houses of Ierusalem & the houses of the kynges of Iuda are defyled, lyke as Topheth) because of all the houses, in whose parlers they dyd sacryfyce vnto all the hooste of heauen and poured out drincke offringes vnto straunge goddes.
Jeremiah 19:14 And so Ieremye came from Topheth, where the Lorde had sent hym to prophecye, and stode in the courte of the house of the Lorde, and spake to all the people:
Jeremiah 19:15 Thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes the God of Israell: Beholde, I will brynge vpon this cytie and vpon euery towne aboute it, all the plages that I haue deuysed agaynst them: for they haue bene obstinate, & wolde not obeye my warnynges.

CHAPTER: 20

Jeremiah 20:1 When Phashur the preaste, the sonne of Emer, chefe in the house of the Lorde, herde Ieremy preache so stedfastly:
Jeremiah 20:2 he smote Ieremye, & put hym in the stockes, that are by the hye gate of BenIamim, in the house of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 20:3 The nexte daye folowynge Phashur brought Ieremye out of the stockes agayne. Then sayde Ieremy vnto hym: The Lorde shall call the nomore Phashur (that is excellent and increasynge) but Magor (that is fearfull and afrayed) euery where.
Jeremiah 20:4 For thus sayeth the Lorde: beholde, I wyll make the afrayed, the thy selfe, and all that fauoure the: which shall peryshe wyth the swearde of their enemyes, euen before thy face. And I wyll geue whole Iuda vnder the power of the kynge of Babylon, which shall carie some vnto Babylon presoners, & slaye some with the swearde.
Jeremiah 20:5 Moreouer, all the substaunce of this lande, all their precyous and gorgeous worckes, all costlynesse, & all the treasure of the Kynges of Iuda: wyll I geue in to the handes of their enemyes, which shall spoyle them, and carie them vnto Babylon.
Jeremiah 20:6 But as for the (O Phashur) thou shalt be caried vnto Babylon with all thine housholde, & to Babylon shalt thou come, where thou shalt dye, and be buryed: thou & all thy fauourers, to whom thou hast preached lyes
Jeremiah 20:7 O Lorde, thou makest me weake, but thou refreshest me, & makest me stronge agayne. All the daye longe am the despysed, & laughed to scorne of euery man:
Jeremiah 20:8 because I haue now preached longe agaynst malycious Tyranny, & shewed them of destruccion. For the which cause they cast the worde of the Lorde in my teeth, and take me euer to the worst.
Jeremiah 20:9 Wherfore, I thought from hence forth, not to speake of hym, ner to preach eny more in hys name. But the worde of the Lorde was a very burnynge fyre in my herte and in my bones, which when I wolde haue stopped I might not.
Jeremiah 20:10 For why, I herde so many derisyons and blasphemies, yee euen of myne owne companions, and of soch as were conuersaunte with me: whiche wente aboute, to make me afrayed, sayinge, vpon hym, let vs go vpon him to feare hym and make hym holde his tonge: that we maye ouer come hym, and be auenged of hym.
Jeremiah 20:11 But the Lorde stode by me, lyke a myghtie giaunte: therfore my persecuters fell, and coulde do nothing. They shall be sore confounded, for they haue done vnwysely, they shall haue an euerlastynge shame.
Jeremiah 20:12 And now, O Lorde of Hostes, thou ryghtuous sercher (which knowest the reynes and the very hertes:) let me se them punished, for vnto the I commytte my cause.
Jeremiah 20:13 Synge vnto the Lorde, and prayse hym, for he hath deliuered the soule of the oppressed, from the hande of the violent.
Jeremiah 20:14 Cursed be the daye, wher in I was borne: vnhappye be the daye, wherin my mother brought me forth.
Jeremiah 20:15 Cursed be the man, that brought my father the tydinges, to make hym glad, saying: thou hast gotten a sonne.
Jeremiah 20:16 Lett it happen vnto that man, as to the cyties whiche the Lorde turned vp syde downe (when he had hearde longe the wicked rumoure of them)
Jeremiah 20:17 because he slewe me not, as sone as I came out of my mothers wombe, & because my mother was not my graue her selfe, that the byrth mighte not haue come out, but remayned styl in her.
Jeremiah 20:18 Wherfore came I forth of my mother wombe? To haue experience of all laboure & sorow? & to leade my lyfe wyth shame?

CHAPTER: 21

Jeremiah 21:1 These are the wordes that the Lord spake vnto Ieremye what time as Kynge Zedekiah sent vnto hym Pashur the sonne of Melchiah, and Sophoniah the sonne of Maasiah preaste, saying:
Jeremiah 21:2 Aske councell at the Lorde (we praye the) of oure behalfe, for Nabuchodonosor the Kynge of Babylon besegeth vs, yf the Lorde (peraduenture) wyll deale wyth vs, accordynge to his maruelous power, and take hym from vs.
Jeremiah 21:3 Then spake Ieremy. Geue Zedekiah this answere.
Jeremiah 21:4 Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israell, beholde, I wyll turne backe the weapens, that ye haue in youre handes, wherwith ye fyght agaynst the kynge of Babylon and the Caldees, whyche besege you rounde aboute the walles, and I wyl brynge them together in to the myddest of this cyti
Jeremiah 21:5 and I my selfe wyll fight agaynst you, with an outstretched hande, and with a mightye arme, in great displeasure and terrible wrath
Jeremiah 21:6 and wyll smyte them, that dwell in this cytye: yee both men and catell shall dye of the pestilence.
Jeremiah 21:7 And after this (sayeth the Lorde) I shall delyuer Zedekiah the kynge of Iuda, & hys seruauntes, his people (& soch as are escaped in the cytie, from the pestilence, swearde, and honger) in to the power of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon: yee in to the handes of their enemyes, in to the handes of those that folowe vpon their lyues, whiche shall smyte them with the swearde: they shall not pytie them, they shall not spare them, they shall haue no mercye vpon them.
Jeremiah 21:8 And vnto this people thou shalt saye: Thus sayeth the Lord: beholde, I laye before you the waye of lyfe and death.
Jeremiah 21:9 Who so abydeth in this cytie, shall perish: ether wt the swearde, with honger, or with pestilence. But who so goeth out to holde on the Chaldees parte, that besege it, he shall saue hys lyfe, and, shall wynne hys soule for a praye.
Jeremiah 21:10 For I haue sett my face agaynst this cytie (sayeth the Lord) to plage it, and to do it no good. It muste be geuen in to the hande of the kynge of Babylon, and be brent with fyre.
Jeremiah 21:11 And vnto the house of the kynge of Iuda, saye thus: Heare the worde of the Lord
Jeremiah 21:12 (O thou house of Dauid) for thus saieth the Lord: Ministre ryghtuousnes, and that soone, delyuer the oppressed from vyolent power: or euer my terryble wrath breake oute lyke a fyre, and burne so, that no man maye quench it, because of the wyckednes of youre ymagynacions.
Jeremiah 21:13 Beholde (sayeth the Lorde) I will come vpon you, that dwell in the valleyes, rockes & feldes, & saye: Tush: who will make vs afrayed? or who will come into oure houses?
Jeremiah 21:14 For I wyll vyset you (sayeth the Lorde) because of the wickednes of youre inuencions and wyll kyndle soch a fyre in youre wod, as shall consume all, that is aboute you.

CHAPTER: 22

Jeremiah 22:1 Thus sayde the Lorde also: Goo downe in to the house of the kyng of Iuda, and speake there these wordes,
Jeremiah 22:2 & saye: Heare the worde of the Lorde, thou kyng of Iuda that syttest in the kyngly seate of Dauid: thou and thy seruauntes and thy people, that go in and out at this gate.
Jeremiah 22:3 Thus the Lorde commaundeth: kepe equyte and ryghtuousnesse, delyuer the oppressed from the power of the violent: do not greue ner opppresse the straunger, the fatherlesse ner the wyddowe, and shede no innocent bloude in this place.
Jeremiah 22:4 And yf ye kepe these thinges faythfully, then shall there come in at the dore of thys house kynges, to syt vpon Dauids seate: they shall be caryed in Charettes and ryde vpon horses, both they & their seruauntes, & their people:
Jeremiah 22:5 But yf ye wyll not be obedient vnto these commaundementes, I sweare by myne owne selfe (sayeth the Lorde) this house shall be waste.
Jeremiah 22:6 For thus hath the Lord spoken vpon the kynges house of Iuda: Thou art the head as Galaad is in Libanus. What wylt thou saye of it, yf I make the not so waste (& thy cyties also) that no man shall dwell therin?
Jeremiah 22:7 I will prepare a destroyer with his weapens for the, to hew downe thy specyall Cedre trees and to cast them in the fyre.
Jeremiah 22:8 And all the people that go by this cytie, shall speake one to another: Wherfore hath the Lorde done thus vnto thys noble cytye?
Jeremiah 22:9 Then shall it be answered: because they haue broken the couenaunt of the Lorde their God, & haue worshipped & serued straunge goddes.
Jeremiah 22:10 Mourne not ouer the deed, & be not wo for them, but be sory for hym that departeth awaye: for he commeth not agayne, and seeth his natyue countre no more.
Jeremiah 22:11 For thus sayeth the Lorde, as touchynge Selum the sonne of Iosiah kynge of Iuda, whiche raygned after his father, and is caryed oute of this place: He shall neuer come hether agayne,
Jeremiah 22:12 for he shall dye in the place, whervnto he is led captiue, and shall se this lande nomore.
Jeremiah 22:13 Wo worth him, that buyldeth hys house with vnrightuousnes, and hys parlers with the good that he hath gotten by violence: which neuer recompenseth hys neyghbours laboure, ner payeth hym his hyre.
Jeremiah 22:14 He thyncketh in hym selfe: I wyll buylde me a wyde house, and gorgeous parlers: He causet windowes to be hewen therin, and the sylynges and geastes maketh he of Cedre, & paynteth them with Zenober.
Jeremiah 22:15 Thinckest thou to raigne, now that thou prouokest me to wrath wyth the Cedre trees? Dyd not thy father eate and drincke, and prospere well, as longe as he dealt wt equite and ryghtuousnesse?
Jeremiah 22:16 Yee when he helped the oppressed and poore to their ryght then prospered he well. From whence came this, but onlye because he had me before hys eyes, sayth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 22:17 Neuertheles, as for thyne eyes & thine herte, they loke vpon couetousnesse, to shede innocent bloude, to do wronge and violence.
Jeremiah 22:18 And therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde agaynst Iehoakim, the sonne of Iosiah kynge of Iuda: They shall not mourne for hym (as they vse to do) alas brother, alas syster: Nether shall they saye vnto hym: Alas syre, alas for that noble prynce.
Jeremiah 22:19 But as an Asse shall he be buried, corrupte and be cast without the gates of Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 22:20 Clymme vp the hyll of Libanus (O thou daughter Sion) lyft vp thy voyce vpon Basan, crye from all partes: for all thy louers are destroyed.
Jeremiah 22:21 I gaue the warnynge, whyle thou wast yet in prosperyte. But thou saydest: I wyll not heare. And thys maner haste thou vsed from thy youth, that thou woldest neuer heare my voyce.
Jeremiah 22:22 All thy herdmen shalbe dryuen wyth the wynde, and thy derlynges shalbe caryed awaye in to captyuite: Then shalt thou be brought to shame & confusyon, because of all thy wickednes:
Jeremiah 22:23 that thou dwellest vpon Libanus, & makest thy neste in the Cedre trees. O how greate shall thy mourning be, when thy sorowes come vpon the, as a woman trauelynge with chylde?
Jeremiah 22:24 As truelye as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde) Though Conaniah the sonne of Iehoakim kynge of Iuda were the sygnet of my ryght hande, yet wyll I plucke hym of:
Jeremiah 22:25 And I wyl geue the in to the power of them that seke to slaye the, and in to the power of the in that thou fearest: in to the power of Nabuchodonosor the Kynge of Babylon, and in to the power of the Caldees.
Jeremiah 22:26 Moreouer, I wyll sende the, and thy mother that bare the, into a straunge lande, where ye were not borne, and there shall ye dye.
Jeremiah 22:27 But as for the lande that ye will desyre to returne vnto ye shall neuer come at it agayne.
Jeremiah 22:28 This man Conaniah shall be lyke an ymage robbed and torne in peces, which pleaseth no man, for all hys apparell. Wherfore both he & hys sede shal be sent awaye, and cast out in to a lande, that they knowe not.
Jeremiah 22:29 O thou earth, earth, earth: heare the worde of the Lorde:
Jeremiah 22:30 Wryte this man amonge the outlawes, for no prosperite shall this man haue all hys lyfe longe. Nether shall eny of his sede be so happie, as to syt vpon the seate of Dauid, and to beare rule in Iuda.

CHAPTER: 23

Jeremiah 23:1 Wo be vnto the shepherdes, that destroye, and scatre my flocke, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:2 Wherfore, thys is the commaundement of the Lorde God of Israel, vnto the shepherdes that fede my people: Ye scatre and thrust out my flocke, & loke not vpon them. Therfore now wyll I vyset the wickednes of youre ymaginacyons, sayeth the Lorde:
Jeremiah 23:3 And will gather together the remnaunt of my flocke, from all landes that I had dryuen them vnto, & will bringe them agayne to their pastures, that they maye growe and increase.
Jeremiah 23:4 I wyll sett shepherdes also ouer them whiche shall fede them. They shall no more feare and drede, for there shall none of them be loste, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:5 Beholde, the tyme commeth, sayeth the Lorde, that I will rayse vp the ryghtuous braunche of Dauid, which shall beare rule, and discusse matters wyth wysdome, & shall sett vp equyte & rightuousnes agayne in the earth.
Jeremiah 23:6 In hys tyme shall Iuda be saued and Israell shall dwell without feare. And thys is the name that they shall call hym: euen the Lorde oure ryghtuous maker.
Jeremiah 23:7 And therfore beholde, the tyme commeth, sayeth the Lorde, that it shall no more be sayde: the Lorde lyueth, which brought the chyldren of Israell out of the lande of Egypte:
Jeremiah 23:8 But the Lorde lyueth, which brought forth, and led the sede of the house of Israell, out of the North lande, and from all countrees where I had scatred them, & they shall dwell in their owne lande agayne.
Jeremiah 23:9 My herte breaketh in my bodye because of the false prophetes, all my bones shake: I am become lyke a droncken man (that by the reason of wyne can take no reste) for verye feare of the Lorde, and of hys holy wordes:
Jeremiah 23:10 Because the lande is full of aduouterers, where thorow it is destroyed and mourneth, and the pleasaunt pastures of the deserte are dryed vp. Yee the waye that men take, is wycked, and their gouernaunce is nothinge lyke the holy worde of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:11 For the prophetes & the prestes them selues are poluted ypocrytes, and their wyckednes haue I founde in my house, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:12 Wherfore, their waye shall be slypperye in the darcknesse, where in they maye stacker and fall. For I wyll bringe a plage vpon them, euen the yeare of their visytacyon, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:13 I haue sene foly amonge the Prophetes of Samaria that they preached for Ball, & disceyued my people of Israel.
Jeremiah 23:14 I haue sene also amonge the Prophetes of Ierusalem foule aduouterye, and presumptuous lyes. They take the moste shamefull men by the hande, flatryng them, so that they can not returne from their wickednes. All these wyth their cytesyns are vnto me, as Sodom, and as the inhabitours of Gomorre.
Jeremiah 23:15 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes concernynge the prophetes: Beholde, I wyll fede them with wormwod, and make them dryncke the water of gall. For from the prophetes of Ierusalem is the sycknes and ypocrisye come in to all the lande.
Jeremiah 23:16 And therfore the Lorde of Hostes geueth you this warnynge: Heare not the wordes of the prophetes, that preach vnto you, and disceyue you: for they speake the meanynge of their owne herte, and not out of the mouth of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:17 They saye vnto them, that despyse me: The Lorde hath spoken it: Tush, ye shall prospere ryght well. And vnto all them, that walcke after the luste of their owne herte, they saye: Tushe, there shall no misfortune happen you.
Jeremiah 23:18 For who hath sytten in the councell of the Lord, that he hath hearde and vnderstande, what he is aboute to do? Who hath marcked hys deuyce, and herde it?
Jeremiah 23:19 Beholde, the stormy wether of the Lorde (that is his indignacyon) shall go forth, and shall fal downe vpon the head of the vngodlye.
Jeremiah 23:20 And the wrath of the Lorde shall not turne agayne, vntyll he perfourme and fulfull the thoughte of his herte. And in the latter dayes ye shall knowe his meanynge.
Jeremiah 23:21 I haue not sent these Prophetes (sayeth the Lorde) and yet they ranne. I haue not spoken to them, and yet they preached.
Jeremiah 23:22 But yf they had contynued in my councell and herde my wordes: they had turned my people from their euell wayes and wycked ymagynacyons.
Jeremiah 23:23 Am I then God that seyth but the thynge, whiche is nye at hande, and not that is farre of? Sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:24 Maye eny man hyde hym self so, that I shal not se him? sayeth the Lorde. Do not I fulfyll heauen and earth? sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:25 I haue herde well ynough, what the prophetes saye, that preache lyes in my name, sayinge: I haue dreamed, I haue dreamed.
Jeremiah 23:26 How longe wyll this continue in the prophetes hertes, to tell lyes, and to preach the craftye sotylete of their owne herte?
Jeremiah 23:27 Whose purpose is (wyth the dreames that euery one tell) to make my people forgete my name, as their forefathers dyd, when Baal came vp.
Jeremiah 23:28 The prophet that hath a dreame, let hym tell it: and he that vnderstandeth my worde, lett hym shewe it faythfully. For what hath chaffe and wheate to do together? sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:29 Is not my worde lyke a fyre, sayeth the Lorde, and lyke an hammer, that breaketh the harde stone?
Jeremiah 23:30 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde: beholde, I wyll vpon the prophetes, that steale my worde priuely from euery man.
Jeremiah 23:31 Beholde, here am I (sayeth the Lorde) agaynst the prophetes, that take vpon their tunges to speake: The Lorde hath sayde it.
Jeremiah 23:32 Beholde, here am I (sayeth the Lorde) agaynst those prophetes, that darre prophecye lyes, and dysceyue my people with their vanities, and myracles, whom I neuer sent, ner commaunded them. They shall do thys people greate harme, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 23:33 If this people, ether eny prophet or preste aske the, and saye: what is the burthen of the Lorde? Thou shalt saye vnto them: What burthen? Therfore wyll I cast you fro me (sayeth the Lord) because ye youre selues are a burthen.
Jeremiah 23:34 And the prophet, preste or people that vseth this terme (the burthen of the Lord) hym wyll I viset, and hys house also.
Jeremiah 23:35 But thus shall ye saye, euery one to another: What answere hath the Lorde geuen? or, what is the Lordes commaundement?
Jeremiah 23:36 And as for the burthen of the Lorde, ye shall speake nomore of it: for euerye mans owne worde is his burthen, because ye haue altered the wordes of the lyuynge God the Lorde of Hostes oure God.
Jeremiah 23:37 Thus shall euerye man saye to the Prophetes: what answere hath the Lorde geuen the? Or, what sayeth the Lord?
Jeremiah 23:38 And not ones to name the burthen of the Lorde. Therfore thus sayeth the Lord: For so moch as ye haue vsed thys terme (the burthen of the Lorde) where as I not withstandinge sent vnto you and forbade you to speake of the Lordes burthen.
Jeremiah 23:39 Beholde therfore, I wyll repute you as a burthen, & will cast you out of my presence: yee and the cytie also, that I gaue you and youre fathers:
Jeremiah 23:40 & will brynge you to an euerlastynge confusyon, and in to soch a shame, as shall neuer be forgotten.

CHAPTER: 24

Jeremiah 24:1 The Lorde shewed me a vysion: Beholde, there stode two maundes of fygges before the temple of the Lord, after that Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon had led awaye captyue Iechoniah the sonne of Iehoakim kynge of Iuda, the mightie men also of Iuda, with the worckmaysters, and connynge men of Ierusalem, vnto Babylon.
Jeremiah 24:2 In the one maunde were verye good fyges, euen lyke as those that be fyrst rype. In the other maunde were verye naughtye fyges, which might not be eaten, they were so euell.
Jeremiah 24:3 Then sayde the Lorde vnto me, what seyste thou Ieremy? I sayde: fyges, wherof some be verye good, and some so euell, that no man maye eate them.
Jeremiah 24:4 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, after this maner:
Jeremiah 24:5 Thus sayeth the Lorde the God of Israell: lyke as thou knowest the good fyges, so shall I knowe the men led awaye, whom I haue sent out of thys place in to the lande of the Caldees, for their profyte:
Jeremiah 24:6 and I wyll set myne eyes vpon them for the best, for I will brynge them agayne in to this lande: I wyll buylde them vp, and not breake them downe: I will plante them, and not rote them out.
Jeremiah 24:7 And I wyll geue them an herte, to knowe, how that I am the Lorde. They shalbe my people, and I wyll be their God, for they shall returne vnto me wt their whole herte.
Jeremiah 24:8 And lyke as thou knowest the naughtye fyges, whyche maye not be eaten, they are so euell: Euen so wyll I (sayeth the Lorde) lett Zedekiah the Kynge of Iuda (ye and all hys princes, and the resydue of Ierusalem that remayne ouer in this lande, and them also that dwell in Egypte) to be vexed & plaged in all kyngdomes & landes.
Jeremiah 24:9 And wyll make them to be a reprofe, a comen by worde, a laughinge stocke and shame, in all the places, where I shall scatre them.
Jeremiah 24:10 I wyll sende the swearde, honger & pestilence amonge them, vntyll I haue cleane consumed them out of the lande, that I gaue vnto them and their fathers.

CHAPTER: 25

Jeremiah 25:1 A sermon that was geuen vnto Ieremy, vpon all the people of Iuda: In the fourth yeare of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah Kynge of Iuda, that was, in the fyrste yeare of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babilon,
Jeremiah 25:2 Which sermon, Ieremy the prophet made vnto all the people of Iuda, and to all the inhabitours of Ierusalem, on thys maner.
Jeremiah 25:3 From the .xiij. yeare of Iosiah the sonne of Amon kynge of Iuda, vnto this present daye (that is euen .xxiij. yeare) the worde of the Lorde hath bene commytted vnto me. And so I haue spoken to you, I haue rysen vp early I haue geuen you warnyng in season, but ye wolde not heare me.
Jeremiah 25:4 Though the Lorde hath sent his seruauntes, all the prophetes vnto you in season: Yet wolde ye not obeye, ye wolde not enclyne youre eares to heare.
Jeremiah 25:5 He sayde: turne agayne euery man from hys euell waye, & from your wicked ymaginacions, and so shall ye dwell for euer in the lande, that the Lorde promesed you & youre forefathers:
Jeremiah 25:6 And go not after straunge goddes serue them not, worshipe them not, and angre me not wyth the worckes of youre handes: then wyll not I punish you.
Jeremiah 25:7 Neuertheles, ye wolde not heare me (sayeth the Lorde) but haue defyed me with the worckes of youre handes, to youre owne greate harme.
Jeremiah 25:8 Wherfore thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: Because, ye haue not herkened vnto my worde,
Jeremiah 25:9 lo, I wyll sende out, call for all the people, that dwell in the North, sayeth the Lorde, and will prepayre Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon my seruaunt, and will bringe them vpon this lande, & vpon all that dwell therin, and vpon all the people that are aboute them, & will vtterly rote them oute. I wyll make of them a wyldernesse, a mockage and a continuall deserte.
Jeremiah 25:10 Moreouer, I will take from them the voyce of gladnesse and solace, the voyce of the brydegrom & the bryde, the voyce of the anoynted, wyth the cresshettes:
Jeremiah 25:11 and this whole lande shall become a wyldernes, & they shall serue the sayde people & the kynge of Babylon, thre score yeares and ten.
Jeremiah 25:12 When the .lxx. yeares eare expyred, I wyll vyset also the wickednesse of the kynge of Babylon & hys people sayeth the Lorde: ye and the land of the Caldees, and wyll make it a perpetuall wyldernes,
Jeremiah 25:13 and will fulfyl al my wordes vpon that land, which I haue deuysed agaynst it: ye all that is wrytten in this boke, whyche Ieremy hath prophecyed of al people:
Jeremiah 25:14 so that they also shal be subdued vnto diuerse nacyons and greate kinges, for I wil recompense them, accordyng to theyr dedes and worckes of their owne handes.
Jeremiah 25:15 For thus hath the Lord God of Israel spoken vnto me: Take this wyne cuppe of indignacion fro my hande, that thou mayeste cause al the people, to whom I sende the, for to drincke of it:
Jeremiah 25:16 that when they haue drouncken therof, they may be mad, and out of their wyttes, when the swearde commeth, that I wyll sende amonge them.
Jeremiah 25:17 Then toke I the cuppe from the Lordes hande, and made all the people dryncke therof, vnto whom the Lorde had sent me.
Jeremiah 25:18 But fyrst the cytie of Ierusalem, and all the cytyes of Iuda, theyr kinges and princes to make them desolate, waste, despised & cursed according as it is come to passe this day.
Jeremiah 25:19 Ye & Pharao the kinge of Egipt, his seruauntes, his prynces & hys people altogether one with anoth
Jeremiah 25:20 & al kinges of the land of Hus, al kinges of the Philistines lande, Ascalon, Azah, Accaron & the remnaunt of Asdod,
Jeremiah 25:21 the Edomites, the Moabites & the Ammonites:
Jeremiah 25:22 al the kinges of Tirus & Sidon: the kynges of the Iles, that are beyonde the se:
Jeremiah 25:23 Dedan, Thema, Buz and the shauen Ismaelites:
Jeremiah 25:24 all the kynges of Araby, and (generally) all the kynges that dwell in the deserte:
Jeremiah 25:25 all the kynges of Zamri, al the kinges of Elam, all the kynges of the Meedes,
Jeremiah 25:26 all kynges towarde the North, whether they be farre or nye, euery one with his neyghboures: Ye and all the kyngdomes that are vpon the whole earth. The kynge of Sezach, sayde he, shal drincke with them also.
Jeremiah 25:27 And saye thou vnto them: This is the commaundement of the Lorde of hostes the God of Israel: Drincke and be droncken, spewe & fall, that ye neuer ryse: and that thorow the swearde, whyche I wyll sende amonge you.
Jeremiah 25:28 But yf they wyl not receyue the cuppe of thy hande, and drincke it, then tell them: Thus doeth the Lord of Hostes threaten you: drinck it ye shal, and that shortly.
Jeremiah 25:29 For lo, I begynne to plage the cyty, that my name is geuen vnto: thynke ye then, that I will leaue you vnpunyshed? Ye shal not go quyte. For why, I call for a swearde vpon al the inhabitours of the earth, sayeth the Lord of Hostes.
Jeremiah 25:30 Therfore tell them all these wordes, and saye vnto them: The Lorde shall crye from aboue, and let hys voyce be hearde from his holy habitacion. Wyth a greate noyse shall he crye from his courte regall. He shall geue a greate voyce (like the grape gatherers) and the sounde thereof shalbe hearde vnto the endes of the worlde.
Jeremiah 25:31 For the Lorde had a iudgement to geue vpon all people, and wyll holde hys courte of iustice with all fleshe and punyshe the vngodly, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 25:32 For thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes: Beholde, a miserable plage shall go from one people to another, and a greate stormye water shall aryse from all the endes of the earth.
Jeremiah 25:33 And the same daye shall the Lorde hym selfe slaye them, from one ende of the earth to another. There shall no mone be made for any of them, none gathered vp, none buried: but shal lye as donge vpon the grounde.
Jeremiah 25:34 Mourne (O ye shepeherdes) & crie: sprinkle youre selues wyth ashes, O ye rammes of the flocke: for the tyme of youre slaughter is fulfilled, and ye shall fall lyke vessels conningly made for pleasure.
Jeremiah 25:35 The shepherdes shall haue no waye to fle, and the rammes of the flocke shall not escape.
Jeremiah 25:36 Then shall the shepeherdes crye horryblye, & the rammes of the flocke shall mourne: for the Lorde shall consume theyr pasture,
Jeremiah 25:37 & theyr best feldes shall lye dead because of the horryble wrath of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 25:38 They shall forsake theyr foldes lyke as a lyon: For theyr landes shalbe waste, because of the wrathe of the destroyer, and because of hys feareful indygnacyon.

CHAPTER: 26

Jeremiah 26:1 In the begynninge of the raigne of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah kinge of Iuda, came thys worde from the Lorde, saying:
Jeremiah 26:2 Thus sayeth the Lorde: Stand in the courte of the Lordes house, and speake vnto all them whiche (oute of the cyties of Iuda) come to do worshyppe in the Lordes house, all the wordes that I commaunde the to saye. Loke that thou kepe not one worde backe,
Jeremiah 26:3 yf (peraduenture) they wyll herken, and turne euery man from hys wycked waye: that I maye also repente of the plage, whiche I haue determed to brynge vpon them, because of theyr wycked inuencyons.
Jeremiah 26:4 And after thys maner shalte thou speake vnto them: Thus saith the Lorde: yf ye wyll not obeye me, to walcke in my lawes, whiche I haue geuen you,
Jeremiah 26:5 and to heare the wordes of my seruauntes the Prophetes, whome I sente vnto you, rysynge vp tymelye, and styl sendyng: If ye wyll not folowe them (I saye)
Jeremiah 26:6 then wyll I do to this house, as I dyd vnto Siloh, and wil make this cytie to be abhorred of all the people of the earth.
Jeremiah 26:7 And the priestes the Prophetes and all the people hearde Ieremye preache these wordes, in the house of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 26:8 Nowe when he had spoken oute all the wordes, that the Lorde commaunded hym to preach vnto all the people, then the Priestes, the Prophetes, and all the people toke holde vpon him, and sayde: thou shalte dye.
Jeremiah 26:9 How darrest thou be so bolde, as to saye in the name of the Lord it shall happen to thys house as it dyd vnto Siloh? and this citie shalbe so waste, that no man shall dwell therein?
Jeremiah 26:10 And when all the people were gathered aboute Ieremye in the house of the Lorde, the prynces of Iuda hearde of this rumoure and they came sone oute of the Kynges palace, into the house of the Lorde, and sat them doune before the new dore of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 26:11 Then spake the priestes and the Prophetes vnto the rulers, & to all the people, these wordes: This man is worthy to dye, for he hath preached agaynste this citie, as ye youre selues haue hearde with youre eares.
Jeremiah 26:12 Then sayde Ieremye vnto the rulers and to all the people: The Lorde hath sente me to preache agaynste this house and agaynst this cytie all the wordes that ye haue hearde.
Jeremiah 26:13 Therfore amende youre wayes, and your aduysementes, and be obedyente vnto the voyce of the Lorde youre God: so shall the Lorde repent of the plage, that he had deuysed against you.
Jeremiah 26:14 Nowe as for me: I am in youre handes, do wyth me, as ye thincke expedyent & good.
Jeremiah 26:15 But thys shal ye know: yf ye put me to death ye shall make youre selues, thys cytye and al the inhabytours thereof, gyltye of innocente bloude. For thys is of a trueth: that the Lorde hath sente me vnto you, to speake al these wordes in youre eares.
Jeremiah 26:16 Then sayde the rulers and the people vnto the priestes and Prophetes: This man maye not be condemned to death, for he hath preached vnto vs in the name of the Lorde oure God.
Jeremiah 26:17 The Elders also of the lande stode vp, and sayde thus vnto all the people:
Jeremiah 26:18 Micheah the Morasthite, which was a Prophet vnder Ezekiah kynge of Iuda, spake to all the people of Iuda: Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: Syon shalbe plowed lyke a felde, Ierusalem shalbe an heape of stones, and the hyll of the Lordes house shalbe turned to an hye wood.
Jeremiah 26:19 Dyd Ezekiah the kyng of Iuda, & the people of Iuda put him to death for this? No, verely but rather feared the Lord, & made their prayer vnto hym. For the whiche cause also the Lorde repented of the plage, that he had deuysed agaynst them. Shulde we then do suche a shamefull dede agaynst oure soules:
Jeremiah 26:20 There was a Prophete also, that preached styflye in the name of the Lorde, called Vriah the sonne of Semeiah of Cariathiarim: this man preached also agaynst thys cytye and against this lande, accordynge to all as Ieremye sayth.
Jeremiah 26:21 Nowe when Iehoakim the kyng wyth al the estate and prynces had hearde his wordes, the kynge went about to slaye hym. When Vriah perceyued that, he was afrayed, & fled, and departed into Egypte.
Jeremiah 26:22 Then Iehoakim the kinge sente seruauntes into the lande of Egypte. Namely, Elnathan the sonne of Achabor, and certayne men with him into Egipte,
Jeremiah 26:23 whiche fetched Vriah oute of Egypte, and brought hym vnto kyng Iehoakim that slewe hym with the sweard, and caste hys dead bodye into the comon peoples graue.
Jeremiah 26:24 But Ahikam the sonne of Saphan helped Ieremye, that he came not into the handes of the people to be slayne.

CHAPTER: 27

Jeremiah 27:1 In the beginninge of the raigne of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah kynge of Iuda, came this word vnto Ieremye from the Lorde, which spake thus vnto me:
Jeremiah 27:2 Make the bondes & chaynes, & put them aboute thy necke,
Jeremiah 27:3 & sende them to the kynge of Edom, the Kynge of Moab, the kynge of Ammon, the Kynge of Tyrus, and to the Kynge of Sydon: and that by the messaungers, whiche shall come to Ierusalem vnto Zedekiah the kynge of Iuda,
Jeremiah 27:4 and byd them saye vnto theyr maisters Thus sayth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israell, speake thus vnto youre maysters:
Jeremiah 27:5 I am he that made the earthe, the men, & the catell that are vpon the grounde, with my great power and outstretched arme, & haue geuen it vnto whome it pleased me.
Jeremiah 27:6 And nowe wyl I delyuer all these landes into the power of Nabuchodonosor the Kynge of Babylon, my seruaunt. The beastes also of the felde shall I geue hym to do hym seruyce.
Jeremiah 27:7 And all people shall serue hym, and hys sonne, and hys chyldes chyldren, vntyll the tyme of the same lande become also: yea many people & greate Kynges shall serue hym.
Jeremiah 27:8 Moreouer, that people and kyngedome whiche wyll not serue Nabuchodonosor, and that wyll not put theyr neckes vnder the yock of the kynge of Babylon: the same people wil I vpset with the swearde, wyth honger, with pestylence, vntyll I haue consumed them in hys handes, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 27:9 And therfore folowe not youre Prophetes, sothsayers, expounders of dreames, charmers and wytches whiche saye vnto you: ye shall not serue the Kynge of Babylon.
Jeremiah 27:10 For they preache you lyes: to brynge you farre from your lande, and that I myghte caste you oute, and destroye you.
Jeremiah 27:11 But the people that put theyr neckes vnder the yocke of the Kynge of Babylon, and serue hym, those I wyll let remayne styll in theyr owne lande (sayeth the Lorde) and they shall occupye it, and dwell therein.
Jeremiah 27:12 All these thynges tolde I Zedekiah the Kynge of Iuda, and sayde: Put youre neckes vnder the yocke of the Kynge of Babylon, & serue hym & hys people, that ye maye lyue.
Jeremiah 27:13 Why wylte thou and thy people perysh with the swearde, wyth honger, wyth pestylence: lyke as the Lorde hath deuysed for all people, that wyll not serue the kynge of Babylon?
Jeremiah 27:14 Therfore geue no eare vnto those Prophetes that tell you: Ye shall not serue the kynge of Babylon, for they preache you lyes,
Jeremiah 27:15 neyther haue I sente them, sayeth the Lorde: howebeit they are bolde, falsely to prophecye in my name, that I myghte the sooner dryue you oute, and that ye myghte peryshe wyth youre preachers.
Jeremiah 27:16 I spake to the Pryestes also, and to all the people: Thus sayth the Lorde: Heare not the wordes of those Prophetes, that preache vnto you, and saye: Beholde, the vessels of the Lordes house shall shortly be brought hyther agayne from Babylon: For they prophecye lyes vnto you.
Jeremiah 27:17 Heare them not, but serue the Kynge of Babylon, that ye maye lyue. Wherfore will ye make this citie to be destroyed?
Jeremiah 27:18 But yf they be true Prophetes in very dede, and yf the worde of the Lorde be commytted vnto them, then let them praye the Lord of Hoostes, that the remnaunte of the ornamentes (whiche are in the house of the Lorde, and remayne yet in the house of the King of Iuda and at Ierusalem) be not caryed to Babylon also.
Jeremiah 27:19 For thus hath the Lorde of hostes spoken concerning the pylers, the lauer, the seate and the resydue of the ornamentes that yet remaine in this citie,
Jeremiah 27:20 which Nabuchodonosor the King of Babylon toke not, when he caryed awaye Iechoniah the sonne of Iehoakim Kynge of Iuda, wyth all the power of Iuda and Ierusalem, from Ierusalem vnto Babylon, captyue.
Jeremiah 27:21 Yea thus hath the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israell spoken, as touchynge the resydue of the ornamentes of the Lordes house of the kynge of Iudaes house, and of Ierusalem:
Jeremiah 27:22 They shalbe caryed vnto Babylon, & there they shall remayne, vntyll I vpset them sayeth the Lorde. Then wyll I brynge them hyther agayne.

CHAPTER: 28

Jeremiah 28:1 And thys was done in the same yeare: euen in the begynnynge of the raygne of Zedekiah kynge of Iuda. Bvt in the fourthe yeare of the raygne of Zedekiah kyng of Iuda, in the fyfth moneth, It happened, that Hananiah the sonne of Assur the Prophet of Gabaon, spake to me in the house of the Lord, in the presence of the priestes & of al the people, & sayd.
Jeremiah 28:2 Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: I haue broken the yocke of the kynge of Babilon,
Jeremiah 28:3 and after two yeare wyll I bryng againe into thys place, all the ornamentes of the Lordes house, that Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon caryed awaye from thys place vnto Babylon.
Jeremiah 28:4 Yea, I wyll brynge agayne Iechoniah the sonne of Iehoakim the kynge of Iuda hym selfe, with all the prysonners of Iuda (that are caryed vnto Babylon) euen into this place sayeth the Lorde, for I wyll breake the yoeke of the kynge of Babylon.
Jeremiah 28:5 Then the Prophet Ieremye gaue aunswere vnto the Prophete Hananiah, before the prestes and before all the people that were presente in the house of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 28:6 And the Prophet Ieremye sayd: Amen: the Lord do that, & graunt the thynge, whiche thou hast prophecyed: that he maye brynge agayne all the ornamentes of the Lordes house, and restore all the presonners from Babylon into the place.
Jeremiah 28:7 Neuertheles, herken thou also, what I wyll saye, that thou and all the people maye heare:
Jeremiah 28:8 The Prophetes that were before vs in tymes paste, whiche prophecyed of warre, or trouble, or pestilence,
Jeremiah 28:9 eyther of peace, vpon many nacyons and greate kyngedomes, were proued by this (yf God had sende them in very dede) when the thynge came to passe, whiche that Prophete tolde before.
Jeremiah 28:10 And Hananiah the Prophete toke the chaine from the Prophet Ieremies neck, and brake it
Jeremiah 28:11 and with that sayde Hananiah, that all the people myghte heare: Thus hath the Lorde spoken: Euen so wyll I breake the yocke of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon, from the necke of all nacyons, yea & that within thys two yeare. And so the Prophete Ieremye went hys waye.
Jeremiah 28:12 Now after that Hananiah the prophet had taken the chayne from the Prophete Ieremyes necke, and broken it: The worde of the Lord came vnto the Prophete Ieremy saiynge:
Jeremiah 28:13 Go, and tell Hananiah these wordes: Thus sayeth the Lorde: Thou haste broken the chayne of wode, but in steade of woode thou shalte make chaynes of yron.
Jeremiah 28:14 For thus sayth the Lorde of hostes the God of Israel: I will put a yocke of yron vpon the necke of all thys people, that they maye serue Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon, yea & so shal they do. And I wyll geue him the beastes in the felde.
Jeremiah 28:15 Then sayde the Prophete Ieremye vnto the prophet Hananiah: Heare me (I praye the) Hananiah: The Lorde hath not sent the, but thou bringest this people into a false belefe.
Jeremiah 28:16 And therfore thus sayth the Lorde: beholde, I wyll sende the out of the land, & within a year thou shalte dye because thou haste falsely spoken agaynste the Lord.
Jeremiah 28:17 So Hananiah the Prophete dyed the same yeare in the seuenth moneth.

CHAPTER: 29

Jeremiah 29:1 This is the copye of the lettre, that Ieremye the Prophete sent from Ierusalem vnto the presoners: the Senatours, priestes, prophetes, and al the people, whome Nabuchodozor had led vnto Babylon:
Jeremiah 29:2 after the tyme that kynge Iechoniah, and his Quene, hys chamberlaynes the princes of Iuda & Ierusalem the worckemaysters of Ierusalem were departed thyther.
Jeremiah 29:3 Whiche lettre Elasah the sonne of Saphan and Gamariah the sonne of Helkiah dyd beare, whome Zedekiah the kynge of Iuda sente vnto Babylon to Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon: these were the wordes of Ieremyes lettre.
Jeremiah 29:4 Thus hathe the Lorde of hostes the God of Israell spoken vnto all the presonners, that were led from Ierusalem vnto Babilon:
Jeremiah 29:5 buyld you houses to dwell therein: plante you gardens, that ye maye enioye the frutes thereof:
Jeremiah 29:6 take you wyues, to beare you sonnes & doughters: prouyde wyues for youre sonnes, and husbandes for youre doughters, that they maye get sonnes and doughters, and that ye maye multyplye there. Laboure not to be fewe,
Jeremiah 29:7 but seke after peace & prosperite of the citie, where in ye be presoners, and praye vnto God for it: For in the peace thereof, shall youre peace be.
Jeremiah 29:8 For thus sayth the Lorde of hostes the God of Israell: Let not those prophetes and sothsayers that be amonge you dysceyue you: and beleue not youre owne dreames.
Jeremiah 29:9 For why, they preach you lyes in my name, and I haue not sente them, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 29:10 But thus sayeth the Lorde: When ye haue fulfylled .lxx. yeares at Babylon, I wil bring you home, & of myne owne goodnes I wyll carye you hyther agayne vnto this place.
Jeremiah 29:11 For I knowe what I haue deuysed for you sayeth the Lorde. My thoughtes are to geue you peace, and not trouble (whiche I geue you all redye) & that ye might haue hope agayn.
Jeremiah 29:12 Ye shal crye vnto me, ye shall go & call vpon me, & I shall heare you.
Jeremiah 29:13 Ye shall seke me & fynde me, Yea, yf so be that ye seke me with your whole herte,
Jeremiah 29:14 I wyl be founde of you (sayeth the Lord) & wil delyuer you out of preson, & gather you together agayne oute of all places, wherein I haue scatred you, sayeth the Lord: & wil bring you agayne to the same place, from whence I caused you to be caryed awaye captyue.
Jeremiah 29:15 But where as ye say, that God hath raysed you vp Prophetes at Babylon:
Jeremiah 29:16 Thus hath the Lorde spoken (concernyng the kyng that sytteth in the stole of Dauid, and all the people that dwell in thys cytye, youre brethren that are not gone with you into captyuyte)
Jeremiah 29:17 Thus (I saye) speaketh the Lorde of hoostes: Beholde I wyll sende a swearde, honger and pestilence vpon them, and wyll make them like vntymelye fyges, that maye not be eaten for bytternes.
Jeremiah 29:18 And I wyll persecute them wyth the swearde, with honger and death. I wyll delyuer them vp to be vexed of all Kyngedomes, to be cursed, abhorred, laughed to scorne, and put to confusyon of all the people, amonge whome I haue scatred them:
Jeremiah 29:19 and that because they haue not bene obedyent vnto my commaundementes (sayeth the Lorde) whiche I sente vnto them by my seruauntes the prophetes. I stode vp earlye, and sent vnto them, but they wolde not heare, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 29:20 Heare therfore the worde of the Lorde, all ye presonners, whome I sent from Ierusalem vnto Babylon:
Jeremiah 29:21 Thus hath the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israell spoken, of Ahab the sonne of Colaiah, and of Zedekiah the sonne of Maasiah, whiche prophecye lyes vnto you in my name: Beholde I wyll delyuer them into the hande of Nabuchodonozor the kynge of Babylon, that he maye slaye them before youre eyes.
Jeremiah 29:22 And all the presonners of Iuda that are in Babylon, shall take vpon them thys terme of cursynge, and saye: Now God do vnto the, as he dyd vnto Zedekiah & Ahab, whome the kynge of Babylon rosted in the fyre,
Jeremiah 29:23 because they synned shamefullye in Israell. For they haue not only defyled their neighbours wyues, but also preached lieng wordes in my name, whiche I haue not commaunded them. Thys I testifye, and assure, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 29:24 But as for Semeiah the Nehelamyte thou shalte speake vnto him:
Jeremiah 29:25 Thus sayeth the Lorde of hoostes the God of Israell: Because thou haste sealed letters vnder thy name, vnto all the people that is at Ierusalem, and to Sophoniah the sonne of Maasiah the priest, yea and sente them to al the priestes: wherein thou wrytest thus vnto hym:
Jeremiah 29:26 The Lorde hath ordened the to be prieste in steade of Iehoiada the prieste, that thou shuldest be the chefe in the house of the Lorde aboue all Prophetes and preachers, and that thou myghteste put them in preson, or in the stockes,
Jeremiah 29:27 How happeneth it then, that thou haste not reproued Ieremye of Anathoth, whiche neuer leaueth of hys prophecyenge,
Jeremiah 29:28 And besyde all thys, he hath sente vs worde vnto Babylon, and tolde vs planelye, that oure captyuyte shall longe endure: that we shuld buylde vs houses to dwel there in, and to plante vs gardens, that we mighte enioye the frutes thereof.
Jeremiah 29:29 Whiche lettre Sophoniah the prieste dyd rede, and let Ieremye the Prophet heare it.
Jeremiah 29:30 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremye, sayenge:
Jeremiah 29:31 Sende worde to all them that be in captiuite, on thys maner: Thus hath the Lorde spoken concernynge Semeiah the Nehelamite: Because that Semeiah hath prophecyed vnto you wythoute my commyssyon, & broughte you into a false hope,
Jeremiah 29:32 therfor thus the Lorde doeth certyfye you: Beholde, I wyll vpset Semeiah the Nehelamite, and hys sede: so that none of hys shall remayne amonge thys people, and none of them shall se the good, that I wyl do for thys people, saith the Lorde, For he hath preached falsely of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 30

Jeremiah 30:1 These are the wordes, that the Lorde shewed vnto Ieremye, sayenge:
Jeremiah 30:2 Thus saith the Lorde God of Israell: Wryte vp dylygentlye al the wordes, that I haue spoken vnto the, in a boke.
Jeremiah 30:3 For lo, the time commeth (sayth the Lorde) that I wyl brynge agayne the presonners of my people of Israel and Iuda, sayeth the Lord: For I wyl restore them vnto the lande, that I gaue to theyr fathers, and they shall haue it in possessyon.
Jeremiah 30:4 Agayne, these wordes spake the Lorde, concernynge Israell and Iuda:
Jeremiah 30:5 Thus sayeth the Lord: We heare a terryble crye, fear & disquietnesse.
Jeremiah 30:6 For what els doth thys sygnyfye, that I se? Namely, that al strong men smyte, euerye man hys hande vpon hys loynes, as a woman in the payne of her trauayle. Who euer sawe a man trauayle wyth chylde? Enquere thereafter, and se. Yea al theyr faces are maruelous pale:
Jeremiah 30:7 Alas for this daye, whiche is so dredefull, that none maye be lykened vnto it: and alas for the tyme of Iacobs trouble, from the whiche he shall yet be delyuered.
Jeremiah 30:8 For in that daye, sayeth the Lorde, I wyll take his yocke from of thy rocke, & breake thy bondes. They shall no more serue straunge Goddes vnder hym,
Jeremiah 30:9 but they shall do seruyce vnto God their Lorde, and to Dauid theyr Kynge, whome I wyll rayse vp vnto them.
Jeremiah 30:10 And as for the, O my seruaunt Iacob, feare not (sayth the Lord) and be not afrayed, O Israell. For lo, I wyll helpe the also from farre, and thy sede from the lande of theyre captiuite. And Iacob shall turne agayne, he shalbe in rest, and haue a prosperous lyfe, and no man shal make hym afrayed.
Jeremiah 30:11 For I am wyth the, to helpe the, sayeth the Lorde. And thoughe I shall destroye all the people, amonge whome I haue scatred the, yet wyll I not destroy the but correcte the, and that with dyscrecion. For I knowe, that thou arte in no wyse wythoute faute.
Jeremiah 30:12 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde: I am sory for thy hurte and woundes.
Jeremiah 30:13 There is no man to medle with thy cause, or to bynde vp thy woundes: there maye no man helpe the.
Jeremiah 30:14 All thy louers haue forgotten the, and care nothynge for the. For I haue geuen the a cruell stroke, and chastened the roughly: and that for the multitude of thy mysdedes, for thy synnes haue had the ouer hande.
Jeremiah 30:15 Why makest thou moue for thy harme? I my selfe haue pyte of thy sorowe, but for the multytude of thy mysdedes and synnes, I haue done this vnto the.
Jeremiah 30:16 And therfore all they that deuoure the, shalbe deuoured, and all thyne enemyes shall be led into captiuite. All they that make the wast, shalbe wasted them selues: and al those that robbe the, wyl I make also to be robbed.
Jeremiah 30:17 For I wyll geue the thy healthe agayne, and make thy woundes whole, sayeth the Lorde, because they reuyled the, as one caste awaye, and despysed, O Syon.
Jeremiah 30:18 For thus sayth the Lorde: Beholde, I will set vp Iacobs tentes agayne, and defende his dwellynge place. The cytye shalbe buylded in her olde estate, and the houses shall haue theyr ryghte foundacyon.
Jeremiah 30:19 And oute of them shall go thankesgeuynge, and the voyce of ioye. I wyll multyplye them, and they shall not mynishe: I shall endue them wyth honoure, and no man shall subdue them.
Jeremiah 30:20 Theyr chyldren shalbe as a fore tyme, and theyr congregacyon shall continue in my syghte. And all those that vexe them, wyll I vyset.
Jeremiah 30:21 A captayne also shall come of them, and a prince shall sprynge oute from the myddest of them: hym wyll I chalenge to my self, and he shall come vnto me. For what is he, that geueth ouer hys herte to come vnto me, sayth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 30:22 Ye shalbe my people also, and I wylbe youre GOD.
Jeremiah 30:23 Beholde, on the other syde shall the wrathe of the Lorde breake oute as a stormye water, as a myghtye whyrle wynde: and shall fall vpon the heades of the vngodly.
Jeremiah 30:24 The terryble dyspleasure of the Lorde shall not leaue of, vntyll he haue done, and perfourmed the intente of hys herte, whiche in the latter dayes ye shal vnderstande.

CHAPTER: 31

Jeremiah 31:1 At the same tyme (sayeth the Lorde) shall I be the God of all the generacions of Israel, and they shalbe my people.
Jeremiah 31:2 Thus saieth the Lorde: The people of Israel which escaped in the wyldernes from the swearde, founde grace to come into their rest.
Jeremiah 31:3 Euen so shall the Lorde nowe also apeare vnto me from farre, & saye: I loue the with an euerlasting loue, therfore do I sprede my mercye before the.
Jeremiah 31:4 I will repayre the agayne (O thou doughter of Israel) that thou mayest be faste and sure. Thou shalt take thy tabrettes againe, and go forth with them, that lede the daunce.
Jeremiah 31:5 Thou shalte plante vynes agayne vpon the hylles of Samaria, and the grape gatherers shall plante, and synge.
Jeremiah 31:6 And when it is tyme, the watche men vpon the mounte of Ephraim shall crye: Aryse, let vs go vp vnto Syon to oure Lorde God,
Jeremiah 31:7 for thus sayeth the Lorde: Reioyce wyth gladnes because of Iacob, crye vnto the heade of the Gentyles: speake oute, synge, and saye: The Lorde shall delyuer hys people, the remnaunte of Israell, and make them whol
Jeremiah 31:8 Beholde, I wyll brynge them agayne from oute of the north lande, and gather them from the endes of the worlde, wyth the blynde and lame that are amonge them, wyth the wemen that be greate wyth chylde, and suche as be also delyuered: and the companye of them that come agayne, shall be greate.
Jeremiah 31:9 They departed from hence in heuynes, but wyth ioye wyll I brynge them hyther agayne. I wyl lede them by the ryuers of water in a straighte waye, where they shall not stomble: For I wyll be Israels father, and Ephraim shalbe my fyrstborne.
Jeremiah 31:10 Heare the worde of the Lorde, O ye Gentyles, preache in the Iles that lye farre of, & saye: he that hath scatred Israell, shall gather hym together agayne, and shall kepe hym as a shepeherde doth hys flocke.
Jeremiah 31:11 For the Lorde shall redeme Iacob, and ryde hym from the hand of the vyolente.
Jeremiah 31:12 And they shal come, & reioyce vpon the hyll of Syon, and shall haue plenteousnes of goodes, whiche the Lorde shall geue them: Namely, wheate, wyne, oyle yonge shepe & calues. And theyr concyence shalbe as well watred garden, for they shal no more be hongrye.
Jeremiah 31:13 Then shall the mayde reioyce in the daunce yea both yonge and olde folkes. For I wyll turne theyr sorowe into gladnesse, and wyll comforte them, and make them ioyfull, euen from theyr hertes.
Jeremiah 31:14 I wyll poure plenteousnes vpon the hertes of the Priestes, and my people shalbe satisfyed with good thinges, saith the Lorde.
Jeremiah 31:15 Thus sayth the Lorde: The voyce of heuynes, wepinge and lamentacyon came vp into heauen: euen of Rachell mournynge for her chyldren, and wolde not be comforted, because they were awaye.
Jeremiah 31:16 But now sayeth the Lorde: leaue of from wepynge and crienge, withholde thyne eyes from feares, for thy laboure shalbe rewarded sayeth the Lorde. And they shall come againe oute of the lande of theyr enemyes:
Jeremiah 31:17 Yea euen thy posterite shall haue consolacion in thys, (saieth the Lorde) that thy children shall come agayne into theyr owne lande.
Jeremiah 31:18 Moreouer I hearde Ephraim, that was led awaye captyue, complayne on thys maner: O Lorde, thou haste correcte me, and thy chastening haue I receyued, as an vntamed calfe. Conuerte thou me, and I shalbe conuerted, for thou arte my Lorde God:
Jeremiah 31:19 Yea as sone as thou turnest me, I shall refourme my self: and when I vnderstande, I shall smyte vpon my thyghe. For verelye I haue committed shamefull thinges: O let my youth beare this reprofe and confusyon.
Jeremiah 31:20 Vpon this complainte, I thoughte thus by my selfe: is not Ephraim my deare sonne? Is he not the chylde, with whom I haue had all myrthe and pastyme? For sence the tyme that I fyrst commened with him, I haue him euer in remembraunce: therfore my verye herte dryueth me vnto hym, gladly and louynglye will I haue mercy vpon him, sayth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 31:21 Get the watchemen, prouyde teachers for the set thyne herte vpon the right waye, that thou shuldest walcke, and turne agayne (O thou doughter of Israell) turne agayne to these cytyes of thyne.
Jeremiah 31:22 Howe longe wilte thou go astraye, O thou shrinkinge doughter? For the Lorde wil worke a new thynge vpon earthe: A woman shall compasse a man.
Jeremiah 31:23 For thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes the God of Israell: It wil come therto, that when I haue brought Iuda oute of captyuyte, these wordes shalbe hearde in the lande and in his cities: The Lorde, whiche is the fayre brydegrome of ryghtuousnesse, make the frutefull O thou holy hyll:
Jeremiah 31:24 And there shall dwell Iuda, and all her cities, the shepeherdes and husband men.
Jeremiah 31:25 For I shall fede the hongry soule, & refreshe al faint hertes.
Jeremiah 31:26 When I heard this I came agayne to my selfe, and mused, like as I had bene waked oute of a swete slepe.
Jeremiah 31:27 Beholde (sayeth the Lorde) the dayes come, that I will sowe the house of Israell and the house of Iuda, with men & with catell.
Jeremiah 31:28 Yea it shall come therto, that lyke as I haue gone about in tymes paste to rote them out, to scatre them, to breake them doune, to destroye them and chasten them: Euen so wyll I also go dylygentlye aboute, to buylde them vp agayne and to plante them, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 31:29 Then shall it no more be sayde: the fathers haue eaten a sower grape, and the chyldrens teeth are set on edge:
Jeremiah 31:30 for euerye one shall dye for his owne misdede, so that who so eateth a sower grape, hys teeth shalbe set on edge.
Jeremiah 31:31 Beholde, the dayes come (sayeth the Lord) that I wil make a newe couenaunt with the house of Israell & with the house of Iuda:
Jeremiah 31:32 not after the couenaunte that I made wyth theyr fathers, when I toke them by the hande, and led them oute of the lande of Egypte: whiche couenaunte they brake, wherfore I punyshed them sore, sayeth the Lorde:
Jeremiah 31:33 But thys shall be the couenaunte that I wyll make with the house of Israel after those dayes, sayeth the Lorde: I wyll plante my lawe in the inwarde partes of them, & wryte it in theyr hertes, and wilbe theyr God, and they shalbe my people.
Jeremiah 31:34 And from thence forth shall no man teache his neyghboure or his brother, and say know the Lorde: But they shall all knowe me, from the loweste vnto the hyeste, sayeth the Lorde. For I wyll forgeue theyr mysdedes, and wil neuer remembre theyr sinnes any more.
Jeremiah 31:35 Thus sayth the Lorde which gaue the sunne to be a lyght for the daye, and the mone and starres to shyne in the night: whiche moueth the sea, so that the floudes thereof waxe fearce: hys name is the Lorde of hostes.
Jeremiah 31:36 Lyke as thys ordynaunce shal neuer be taken out of my sight sayeth the Lorde: So shall the sede of Israell neuer ceasse, but all waye be a people before me.
Jeremiah 31:37 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde: lyke as the heauen aboue can not be measured, and as the foundacyons of the earth beneth may not be soughte oute: So will I also not caste oute the whole sede of Israell, for that they haue committed. sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 31:38 Beholde the dayes come sayeth the Lorde, that the cytie of the Lord shalbe enlarged from the toure of Hananeel, vnto the gate of the corner wall.
Jeremiah 31:39 From thence shall the ryghte measure be taken before her vnto the hyll toppe of Gareb, and shall come aboute Gaath,
Jeremiah 31:40 and the whole, valleye of the dead karcases, and of the ashes, and all Ceremoth vnto the broke of Cedron: and from thence vnto the corner of the horsgate toward the Easte, where as the Sanctuarye of the Lorde also shall be set. And when it is nowe buylded, and set vp of this fashyon it shall neuer be broken, nor caste doune any more.

CHAPTER: 32

Jeremiah 32:1 These wordes spake the Lord vnto Ieremye, in the tenthe yeare of Zedekiah kynge of Iuda, whyche was the .xviij. yeare of Nabuchodonozor,
Jeremiah 32:2 what tyme as the kinge of Babylons hoste laied seage vnto Ierusalem. But Ieremy the Prophete laye bounde in the courte of the preson, whiche was in the kinge of Iudaes house:
Jeremiah 32:3 where Zedekiah the king of Iuda caused hym to be layed, because he had prophecyed of this maner: Thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde, I wil delyuer this cytye into the handes of the Kyng of Babilon, which shall take it.
Jeremiah 32:4 As for Zedekiah the Kynge of Iuda, he shall not be able to escape the Chaldees, but surely he shal come into the handes of the kynge of Babylon: whiche shal speake with him mouth to mouth, and one of them shal loke another in the face.
Jeremiah 32:5 And Zedekiah shalbe caryed vnto Babylon, and there shall he be, vnto the tyme that I vyset him, sayeth the Lorde. But yf thou takest in hand to fight against the Caldees, thou shalt not prospere.
Jeremiah 32:6 And Ieremy sayde. Thus hath the Lorde spoken vnto me:
Jeremiah 32:7 Beholde, Hananeel the sonne of Selum, thyne Vncles sonne shall come vnto the, and require the to redeme the lande, that lyeth in Anathoth vnto thy selfe: for by reason of kinred it is thy parte to redeme it, and to bye it oute.
Jeremiah 32:8 And so Hananeel myne vncles sonne came to me in the courte of the preson (according to the worde of the Lorde) and sayde vnto me: Bye my lande (I pray the) that lyeth in Anathoth in the countreye of Beniamin: for by heretage thou hast right to lowse it oute for thy selfe, therfore redeme it. Then I perceyued, that this was the commaundement of the lord,
Jeremiah 32:9 and so I lowsed the lande from Hananeell of Anathoth, myne Vncles sonne, and weyed him there the moneye: euen seuen sycles, and ten syluer pens.
Jeremiah 32:10 I caused him also to make me a writtinge and to seale it, and called recorde therby, and weyed him there the money vpon the waightes.
Jeremiah 32:11 So I toke the euydence with the copye (when it was orderly sealed and read ouer)
Jeremiah 32:12 and I gaue the euydence vnto Baruch the sonne of Neriah, the sonne of Maasiah in the sight of Hananeel my cosen, and in the presence of the witnesses, that be named in the euidence, and before all the Iewes that were therby in the courte of the preson.
Jeremiah 32:13 I charged Baruch also before them, saying:
Jeremiah 32:14 The Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel commaundeth the, to take his sealed euydence wt the copie, & to lay it in an earthen vessel, that it may longe continue.
Jeremiah 32:15 For the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israell hath determed, that houses, feldes and vyneyardes shalbe possessed agayne in thys lande.
Jeremiah 32:16 Now when I had delyuered the euydence vnto Baruch the sonne of Neriah, I besought the Lorde, sayinge:
Jeremiah 32:17 O Lorde God, it is thou that hast made heauen and earthe wyth thy greate power, and hye arme, and there is nothinge to harde for the.
Jeremiah 32:18 Thou shewest mercy vpon thousandes, thou recompencest the wickednes of the fathers, into the bosume of the children, that come after them.
Jeremiah 32:19 Thou art the greate and myghtie God, whose name is the Lorde of Hostes, greate in counsel, and infinite in thought. Thine eyes loke vpon all the wayes of mens chyldren, to rewarde euery one after his waye, and according to the frutes of his inuencyons.
Jeremiah 32:20 Thou hast done greate tokens and wonders in the lande of Egipt (as we se this daye) vpon the people of Israel, and vpon those men: to make thy name greate, as it is come to passe this daye.
Jeremiah 32:21 Thou hast brought thy people Israell out of the land of Egipt, with tokens, wt wondres, with a mightye hande, with a stretched out arme, and with greate terriblenes:
Jeremiah 32:22 & hast geuen them this lande, lyke as thou hast promysed vnto their fathers: Namely, that thou wouldest geue them a land, that floweth with mylcke and honye.
Jeremiah 32:23 Now when they came therin, and possessed it, they folowed not thy voyce, and walcked not in thy law: but all that thou commaundedest them to do, that haue they not done, & therfore come al these plages vpon them.
Jeremiah 32:24 Behold, there are bullworckes made now against the citie, to take it: and it shabe wonne of the Caldees that besege it, with swerde, wt honger and death, and loke what thou haste spoken, that same shall come vpon them. For lo, all thinges are present vnto the:
Jeremiah 32:25 Yet sayest thou vnto me (O Lord God) and commaundest me, that I shal louse a pece of land vnto my selfe, and take witnesses therto: and yet in the meane season the citie is delyuered into the power of the Caldees.
Jeremiah 32:26 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me sayinge.
Jeremiah 32:27 Beholde, I am the Lorde God of all fleshe, is there any thinge then to harde for me?
Jeremiah 32:28 Therfore thus sayde the Lorde: beholde, I shall delyuer this cytie into the power of the Caldees, and into the power of Nabuchodonozor the kynge of Babilon, they shal take it in.
Jeremiah 32:29 For the Caldees shal come, and wynne this citie, and set fyre vpon it. And burne it, wt the gorgeous houses, in whose parlers they haue made sacrifice vnto Baal, and poured drinckeofferynges vnto straunge goddes, to prouoke me vnto wrath.
Jeremiah 32:30 For seynge the chyldren of Israel, and the chyldren of Iuda haue wrought wickednes before me euer from their youth vp, what haue they els done, but prouoked me wyth the worckes of their owne handes? sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 32:31 Or what hath this cytie bene els, but a prouokinge of my wrath, euer sence the day that I buylded it, vnto this houre? Wherin I cast it out of my sight,
Jeremiah 32:32 because of the great blasphemies of the chyldren of Israell, and Iuda, whiche they haue done to prouoke me: yea, they, their kynges, their princes, their priestes their prophetes, whole Iuda, and al the cytesins of Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 32:33 When I stode vp earlye, and taught them and instructe them, they turned their backes to me, and not their faces.
Jeremiah 32:34 They woulde not heare, to be refourmed and correcte. They haue set their Goddes into the house, that is halowed vnto my name, to defyle it.
Jeremiah 32:35 They haue buylded hyr places for Baal in the valleye of the children of Heunom, to vow their sonnes and doughters vnto Moloch: whiche I neuer commaunded them, neyther came it euer in my thought, to make Iuda sinne with suche abnominacion.
Jeremiah 32:36 Moreouer thus hath the Lorde God of Israel spoken, concerninge this cytie, whiche (as ye youre selues confesse) shalbe deliuered into the hande of the kinge of Babylon, when it is wonne with the swearde, wyth hunger, and with pestilence.
Jeremiah 32:37 Beholde, I wyll gather them together from all landes, wherin I haue scatred them in my wrath, in my fearfull, and greate displeasure: and wyll brynge them agayne vnto this place, where they shal dwell safely.
Jeremiah 32:38 And they shalbe my people, and I wilbe their God.
Jeremiah 32:39 And I wyll geue them one herte and one waye, that they maye feare me all the dayes of their lyfe, that they and their children after them maye prospere.
Jeremiah 32:40 And I wyll set vp an euerlastinge couenaunt with them, Namely, that I will neuer ceasse to do them good, and that I will put my feate in ther hertes so that they shall not runne awaye from me.
Jeremiah 32:41 Yea I wyll haue a lust and pleasure to do them good, and faythfully to plante them in this lande, with my whole herte, and with al my soule.
Jeremiah 32:42 For thus sayeth the Lorde: lyke as I haue brought all thys great plage vpon this people: so wyll I also brynge vpon them all the good, that I haue promised them.
Jeremiah 32:43 And men shall haue their possessions in thys lande, whereof ye saye now, that it shall neyther be inhabited of people nor of catell, but be delyuered into the handes of the Caldees:
Jeremiah 32:44 Yea lande shalbe bought for money, & euidences made thervpon and sealed before witnesses in the countre of Beniamin, and round about Ierusalem, in the cyties of Iuda, in the cities that are vpon the mountaynes, and in them that lye beneth, yea and in the cytyes that are in the deserte. For I will bringe their presonners hyther agayne, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 33

Jeremiah 33:1 Moreouer the worde of the Lord came vnto Ieremye on this maner, when he was yet bound in the courte of the preson.
Jeremiah 33:2 Thus sayeth the Lorde, whiche fulfilleth the thynge that he speaketh, the Lorde whyche perfourmeth the thinge that he taketh in hand: euen he, whose name is the lord:
Jeremiah 33:3 thou hast cryed vnto me, and I haue hearde the: I haue shewed greate and hye thinges, whiche were vnknowen vnto you.
Jeremiah 33:4 Thus (I saye) spake the Lorde God of Israel, concerninge the houses of this citie, and the houses of the kinges of Iuda: that they shalbe broken thorow the ordynaunce & weapens,
Jeremiah 33:5 when the Caldees come to besege them & they shalbe filled wt the dead karcases of men, whom I will slaye in my wrath and displeasure: when I turne my face from this cytye, because of all her wickednes.
Jeremiah 33:6 Beholde (saieth the Lorde) I will heale their woundes, and make them whole: I wyll open them the treasure of peace and trueth.
Jeremiah 33:7 And I will returne the captyuyte of Iuda and Israell, and I will set them vp agayne, as they were afo
Jeremiah 33:8 From all misdedes (wherein they haue offended against me) I will clense them. And al their blasphemes whiche they haue done agaynst me, when they regarded me not, I will forgeue them.
Jeremiah 33:9 And this shall get me a name, a prayse and honoure, amonge all people of the earthe, whiche shall heare al the good, that I will shewe vnto them: yea they shalbe afrayed and astounded at all the good deedes and benefytes, that I will do for them.
Jeremiah 33:10 Moreouer thus sayeth the Lorde: In this place, wherof ye saye that it shalbe a wyldernesse, wherein neyther people nor catell shall dwel: in lyke maner in the cities of Iuda and wythoute Ierusalem (whyche also shalbe voyde, that neyther people nor catell shal dwel there)
Jeremiah 33:11 Shall the voice of gladnesse be hearde agayne, the voyce of the Brydegrome and of the bryde, the voyce of them that shall synge: Prayse the Lorde of Hostes, for he is louinge and his mercy endureth for euer, and the voyce of them that shall offer vp gyftes in the house of the Lorde. For I will restore the captiuite of this lande, as it was afore, saieth the Lord.
Jeremiah 33:12 Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: It shall come yet therto, that in this lande, whiche is voyde from men and catel, and in al the cities of the land, there shalbe set vp sheperdes cotages:
Jeremiah 33:13 in the cytyes vpon the mountaynes, and in the cyties that lay vpon the plaine, and in the deserte. In the lande of Ben Iamin, in the feldes of Ierusalem, and in the cities of Iuda, shall the shepe be nombred agayn, vnder the hand of him, that telleth them, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 33:14 Beholde, the tyme commeth, sayth the Lorde that I wil perfourme that good thing, which I haue promysed vnto the house of Israell & to the house of Iuda.
Jeremiah 33:15 In those dayes and at the same tyme, I wil bringe forthe vnto Dauid, the braunche of righteousnes, and he shal do equite and ryghteousnesse in the lande.
Jeremiah 33:16 In those dayes shal Iuda be helped, and Ierusalem shall dwel safe, and he that shal cal her, is euen God our ryghteous maker.
Jeremiah 33:17 For thus the Lorde promyseth: Dauid shal neuer want one, to syt vpon the stole of the house of Israell:
Jeremiah 33:18 neyther shal the priestes and Leuites want one to offre alwaye before me burntofferinges, to kyndle the meatofferynges, and to prepare the sacryfyces.
Jeremiah 33:19 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto Ieremy after this maner.
Jeremiah 33:20 Thus sayeth the lord: May the couenaunt whiche I haue made wt daye and night be broken, that there shoulde not be day and night in due season?
Jeremiah 33:21 Then maye my couenaunt also be broken, whyche I made with Dauid my seruaunte, and so he not to haue a sonne to reygne in hys Trone. So shall also the Priestes and Leuites neuer fayle, but serue me.
Jeremiah 33:22 For lyke as the starres of heauen may not be nombred, neither the sand of the sea measured: so will I multyplie the seade of Dauid my seruaunt, and of the Leuites my mynisters.
Jeremiah 33:23 Moreouer the worde of the Lorde came to Ieremy saying:
Jeremiah 33:24 Considrest thou not what this people speaketh? Two kinredes (saye they) had the Lorde chosen, and those same two hath he cast awaie: for so farre is my people come, that they haue no hope to come together any more, and to be one people again.
Jeremiah 33:25 Therfore thus saieth the Lorde: Yf I haue made no couenaunt with day and night, and geuen no statute vnto heauen and earth:
Jeremiah 33:26 then will I also cast awaye the sede of Dauid my seruaunt: so that I will take no prynce oute of his sede, to rule the posterite of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. But yet I will turne again their captiuite, and be mercyfull vnto them.

CHAPTER: 34

Jeremiah 34:1 These are the wordes whiche the Lord spake vnto Ieremy, what tyme as Nabuchodonozor the kinge of Babylon, and all hys Hostes, (out of all the kyngedomes that were vnder hys power) and all his people, fought agaynste Ierusalem, and all the cytyes thereof.
Jeremiah 34:2 Thus saieth the Lord God of Israel: Go, & speake to Zedekiah the kinge of Iuda, and tell him: The Lorde sendeth the this worde: Beholde, I wyll delyuer this cytie into the hande of the kinge of Babylon, he shal burne it,
Jeremiah 34:3 and thou shalt not escape his handes, but shalt be led awaye presoner, and delyuered into hys power. Thou shalt loke the kinge of Babylon in the face, and he shal speake wt the mouth to mouth, & then shalt thou go to Babylon.
Jeremiah 34:4 Yet heare the worde of the Lorde, O Zedekiah thou Kynge of Iuda. Thus sayeth the Lorde vnto the: Thou shalt not be slayne with the swerde,
Jeremiah 34:5 but shalt dye in peace. Lyke as thy forefathers the kinges thy progenitours, were brente, so shalt thou be brent also, & in the mourninge they shall saye: Oh Lorde. For thus haue I determined sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 34:6 Then spake Ieremy the Prophet all these wordes vnto Zedekiah king of Iuda in Ierusalem:
Jeremiah 34:7 what tyme as the kinge of Babylons hoste beseged Ierusalem, and the remnaunt of the cytyes: Namely, Lachis, and Azecah, whiche yet remayned of the stronge defensed cities of Iuda.
Jeremiah 34:8 These are the wordes that the Lord spake vnto Ieremy the Prophete, when Zedekiah was agreed with al the people at Ierusalem, that there shoulde be proclamed a lyberte,
Jeremiah 34:9 so that euery man shoulde let his seruaunt and handmayde go fre, Hebrue and Hebruesse, & no Iewe to holde his brother as a bond man.
Jeremiah 34:10 Now as they had consented, euen so they were obedient, and let them go fre.
Jeremiah 34:11 But afterward they repented, & toke agayne the seruauntes and handemaydens, whome they had let go fre, and so made them bonde agayne.
Jeremiah 34:12 For the whiche cause the worde of the Lord came vnto Ieremy from the Lorde him selfe, saying.
Jeremiah 34:13 Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israell: I made a couenaunt with youre fathers when I brought them oute of Egypte, (that they shoulde no more be bondmen) sayinge:
Jeremiah 34:14 When seuen yeares are oute, euery man shall let his bought seruaunte an Hebrue go fre, yf he haue serued him syxe yeares. But your fathers obeyed me not, and herkened not vnto me.
Jeremiah 34:15 As for you, ye were now turned, & dyd ryght before me, in that ye proclamed, euery man to let his neyghboure go fre, & in that ye made a couenaunt before me, in the temple that beareth my name.
Jeremiah 34:16 But yet ye haue turned your selues agayne, and blasphemed my name. In this, that euery man hath required hys seruaunte and handmayden againe whom ye had let go quite and fre, and compelled them to serue you agayne, and to be youre bondmen.
Jeremiah 34:17 And therfore thus sayeth the lord: ye haue not obeyed me, euery man to proclame fredom vnto his brother and neighbour: wherfore I wil call you vnto a fredome, sayeth the Lorde, euen vnto the swerde, to the pestilence, & to honger, & will make you to be plaged in all the kingedomes of the earthe.
Jeremiah 34:18 Yea those men that haue broken my couenaunt, and not kepte the wordes of the appoyntment, which they made before me: when they hewed the calfe in two, and when there wente thorowe the two halfes therof.
Jeremiah 34:19 The Princes of Iuda, the Princes of Ierusalem, the gelded men, the priestes and all the people of the lande, whiche wente thorowe the two sides of the calfe.
Jeremiah 34:20 Those men will I geue into the power of their enemies, & into the handes of them that folowe vpon their lyues. And their dead bodies shalbe meate for the foules of the ayre, and beastes of the felde.
Jeremiah 34:21 As for Zedekiah the Kynge of Iuda and his Princes, I wil delyuer them into the power of their enemies, and of them that desyre to slaye them, and into the hande of the kynge of Babylons hoste whyche now is departed from you.
Jeremiah 34:22 But thorowe my commaundement (sayeth the Lord) they shall come again before this cytye, they shall fyght agaynste it, winne it, and burne it. Moreouer I wyll laye the cities of Iuda so wast, that no man shal dwell therin.

CHAPTER: 35

Jeremiah 35:1 The wordes, whiche the Lorde spake vnto Ieremy, in the raigne of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah Kynge of Iuda, are these:
Jeremiah 35:2 Go vnto the house of the Rechabites, and cal them out, and brynge them to the house of the Lorde into some commodyous place, and geue them wyne to dryncke.
Jeremiah 35:3 Then toke I Iazaniah the sonne of Ieremye, the sonne of Habaziniah, and his brethren and all his sonnes, and the whole houshold of the Rechabytes,
Jeremiah 35:4 and brought them to the house of the Lorde, into the closet of the chyldren of Hanan the sonne of Iegedaliah the man of God: which was by the closet of the Princes, that is aboue the closet of Maasiah the sonne of Selum, whiche is the chefe of the treasurye.
Jeremiah 35:5 And before the sonnes of the kynred of the Rechabites, I set pottes full of wyne, and cuppes, and sayde vnto them: Dryncke wyne.
Jeremiah 35:6 But they sayde: we dryncke no wyne, for Ionadab the sonne of Rechab oure father commaunded vs sayinge: yea and youre sonnes shall neuer dryncke wyne, buylde no houses, sowe no sede, plante no vynes,
Jeremiah 35:7 yea ye shall haue no vyneyardes: but for all youre tyme ye shall dwel in tentes, that ye maye liue longe in the lande wherin ye be straungers.
Jeremiah 35:8 Thus haue we obeyed the commaundement of Ionadab the sonne of Rechab oure father, in al that he hath charged vs, & so we dryncke no wine all oure lyue longe: we nor our wiues, oure sonnes and oure doughters.
Jeremiah 35:9 Neyther buyld we any house to dwell therin we haue also amonge vs neither vyneyardes nor corne lande to sowe:
Jeremiah 35:10 but we dwell in tentes, we obeye, and do accordynge vnto all, that Ionahab oure father commaunded vs.
Jeremiah 35:11 But now that Nabuchodonozor the Kyng of Babilon came vp into the lande, we sayde: come, let vs go to Ierusalem, that we maye escape the Hoste of the Caldees and the Assirians, and so we dwell nowe at Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 35:12 Then came the word of the lord vnto Ieremy sayenge:
Jeremiah 35:13 Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: Go and tell whole Iuda & al the enhabitours of Ierusalem: Wil ye not be refourmed, to obey my wordes? saieth the Lord.
Jeremiah 35:14 The wordes which Ionadab the sonne of Rechab commaunded his sonnes, that they shoulde dryncke no wine, are fast and surely kepte: for vnto this day they drincke no wine, but obeye their fathers commaundemente. But as for me, I haue stand vp early, I haue spoken vnto you, and geuen you earnest warnynge, and yet haue ye not bene obedient vnto me.
Jeremiah 35:15 Yea, I haue sent my seruauntes, al the prophetes vnto you, I rose vp early, and sent you worde, sayinge: O turne you, euery man from his wicked waye: amende your lyues, and go not after straunge Goddes, to worshyppe them, that ye may contynue in the land which I haue geuen vnto you & your fathers but ye would neither heare me, nor folow me.
Jeremiah 35:16 The children of Ionadab Rachabs sonne haue stedfastly kepte their fathers commaundement, that he gaue them, but this people is not obedient vnto me.
Jeremiah 35:17 And therfore thus saieth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israell: Beholde I will brynge vpon Iuda and vpon euery one that dwelleth in Ierusalem, al the trouble that I haue deuysed agaynst them. For I haue spoken vnto them, but they woulde not folowe. I haue called vnto them, neuertheles they woulde geue me no answere.
Jeremiah 35:18 Ieremye also spake vnto the housholde of the Rechabites: Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the god of Israel: For so muche as ye haue obeyed the commaundement of Ionadab youre father, & kepte all his preceptes, and done accordynge vnto all that he hath bidden you:
Jeremiah 35:19 Therefore thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes, the God of Israell: Ionadab the sonne of Rechab shall not fayle, but haue one of his stocke, to stand alway before me.

CHAPTER: 36

Jeremiah 36:1 In the fourth year of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah King of Iuda, came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremye sayinge:
Jeremiah 36:2 Take a boke, & wryte therin all the wordes, that I haue spoken vnto the, to Israel, to Iuda, and to all the people, from the tyme that I beganne for to speake vnto the (in the raygne of Iosiah) vnto thys daye.
Jeremiah 36:3 That when the house of Iuda heareth of the plage whych I haue deuised for them, they may peraduenture turne, euery man from his wicked waye, that I maye forgeue their offences and synnes.
Jeremiah 36:4 Then dyd Ieremy call Baruch the sonne of Neriah, and Baruch wrote in the boke at the mouth of Ieremye, al the wordes of the Lorde, whiche he had spoken vnto him.
Jeremiah 36:5 And Ieremye commaunded Baruch, sayinge: I am in preson, so that I maye not come into the house of the Lorde:
Jeremiah 36:6 therfore go you thyther, and reade the boke, that thou hast written at my mouth: Namely, the wordes of the Lorde, and reade them in the Lordes house vpon the fastynge day: that the people, whole Iuda, and al they that come out of the cyties, maye heare.
Jeremiah 36:7 Peraduenture they will praye mekely before the face of the Lord, and turne euery one from his wicked waie. For greate is the wrath and displeasure, that the Lorde hath taken agaynst this people.
Jeremiah 36:8 So Baruch the sonne of Neriah dyd, accordynge vnto all that Ieremy the Prophete commaunded him, readynge the wordes of the Lorde oute of the boke in the Lordes house.
Jeremiah 36:9 And this was done in the fyfth yeare of Iehoakim, the sonne of Iosiah Kynge of Iuda, in the .ix. moneth when it was commaunded that all the people of Ierusalem shoulde fast before the Lorde, and they also that were come from the cytyes of Iuda vnto Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 36:10 Then read Baruch the wordes of Ieremye oute of the boke within the house of the lorde, out of the treasury of Gamariah the sonne of Saphan the Scrybe, whiche is besyde the hyer lofte of the new dore of the lordes house: that al the people myght heare.
Jeremiah 36:11 Nowe when Micheah the sonne of Gamariah the sonne of Saphan had hearde all the wordes of the Lorde out of the boke,
Jeremiah 36:12 he wente doune to the Kinges palace into the Scrybes chambre, for there al the Prynces were set: Elisama the Scrybe, Dalaiah the sonne of Semei, Eluathan the sonne of Acabor, Gamariah the sonne of Saphan, Zedekiah the sonne of Hananiah, wyth all the Princes.
Jeremiah 36:13 And Micheah tolde them all the wordes, that he hearde Baruch reade out of the boke before the people.
Jeremiah 36:14 Then all the Prynces sent Iehudi the sonne of Nathaniah, the sonne of Selamiah, the sonne of Chusi, vnto Baruch, sayinge: Take in thyne hande the boke, wherout thou haste read before all the people, and come. So Baruch the sonne of Neriah toke the boke in his hande, & came vnto them.
Jeremiah 36:15 And they sayde vnto him: Syt doune, and read the boke that we may heare also. So Baruch reade, that they might heare.
Jeremiah 36:16 Now when they had heard all the wordes, they were abashed one vpon another, and sayde vnto Baruch: we wyl certifie the kynge of all these wordes.
Jeremiah 36:17 And they examyned Baruch, saying: tell vs, howe diddest thou wrytte all these wordes out of hys mouth.
Jeremiah 36:18 Then Baruch answered them: He spake all these wordes vnto me wt hys mouth and I alone was with him, and wrote them in the boke.
Jeremiah 36:19 Then sayde the Princes vnto Baruch: Go thy waye, and hyd the with Ieremye, so that no man knowe where ye be.
Jeremiah 36:20 And they went in to the Kinge to the courte. But they kepte the boke in the chambre of Elisama the scribe and tolde the Kynge all the wordes that he myghte heare.
Jeremiah 36:21 So the Kynge sent Iehudi to fetch hym the boke, whiche he brought out of Elisama the Scribes chambre. And Iehudi read it, that the King & al the Princes, whiche were about hym, might heare.
Jeremiah 36:22 Now the king sat in the winter house, for it was in the ninth Moneth, and there was a good fyre before him.
Jeremiah 36:23 And when Iehudi had read thre or foure leaues thereof, he cut the boke in peces with a penne knyfe, and cast it into the fyre vpon the herth, vntill the boke was al brente in the fyre vpon the herth.
Jeremiah 36:24 Yet no man was abashed thereof, or rente his clothes: neyther the kinge him selfe, nor his seruauntes, though they hearde all these wordes.
Jeremiah 36:25 Neuerthelesse Elnathan, Dalaiah, and Gamariah besought the Kynge, that he woulde not burne the boke: notwithstanding the kinge woulde not heare them,
Jeremiah 36:26 but commaunded Ierahmeel the sonne of Amalech, Saraiah the sonne of Ezriel and Selamiah the sonne of Abdiel, to laye handes vpon Baruch the Scrybe, and vpon Ieremy the Prophete: but the lord kepte them out of the sight.
Jeremiah 36:27 After now that the Kyng hath brent the boke and the sermons whiche Baruch wrote at the mouthe of Ieremye: The worde of the Lord came vnto Ieremye, sayinge:
Jeremiah 36:28 Take another boke, and wryte in it al the forsayde sermons, that were wrytten in the fyrste boke, whiche Iehoakim the kinge of Iuda hath brente.
Jeremiah 36:29 And tell Iehoakim the kinge of Iuda: thus sayeth the Lorde: thou hast brente the boke, and thoughtest within thy selfe: Why haste thou written therin, that the kynge of Babilon shall come, and make this land waste, so that he shall make bothe people and catell to be oute of it.
Jeremiah 36:30 Therfore thus the Lord sayeth of Iehoakim the king of Iuda. There shal none of hys generacyon syt vpon the throne of Dauid. His dead corse shalbe cast oute, that the heate of the daye, and the frost of the nyghte may come vpon him.
Jeremiah 36:31 And I wil vyset the wickednes of him, of his sede, and of his seruauntes. Moreouer all the euyll that I haue promysed them (thoughe they hearde me not) wil I bringe vpon them, vpon the inhabytoures of Ierusalem, and vpon al Iuda.
Jeremiah 36:32 Then toke Ieremye another boke, and gaue it Baruch the Scrybe, the sonne of Neriah, which wrote therin out of the mouth of Ieremy: all the sermons that were in the fyrst boke, whiche Iehoakim the kynge of Iuda dyd burne. And there were added vnto them many mo sermons, then before.

CHAPTER: 37

Jeremiah 37:1 Zedekiah the sonne of Iosiah, whiche was made kyng thorow Nabuchodonozor kinge of Babylon, reygned in the lande of Iuda in the head of Cononiah the sonne of Iehoakim.
Jeremiah 37:2 But neyther he, nor hys seruauntes, nor the people in the lande woulde obeye the wordes of the Lord, which he spake by the Prophet Ieremye.
Jeremiah 37:3 Neuerthelesse Zedekiah the Kynge sent Iehucal the sonne of Selemiah and Sophoniah the sonne of Maasiah the pryeste to the Prophet Ieremy, sayinge: O praye thou vnto the lord oure God for vs.
Jeremiah 37:4 Now Ieremy walked fre among the people at that tyme, and was not put in preson as yet.
Jeremiah 37:5 Pharaos Hoste also was come out of Egypte, which when the Caldees that beseged Ierusalem perceyued, they departed from thence.
Jeremiah 37:6 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremy the Prophet, sayinge.
Jeremiah 37:7 Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israel, thys answere shall ye geue to the kinge of Iuda, that sent you vnto me for councell: Beholde, Pharaos host whyche is come forthe to helpe you, shall returne to Egypte into hys owne lande:
Jeremiah 37:8 but the Caldees shall come agayne, and fyght agaynst this cytye, wynne it, and set fyre vpon it.
Jeremiah 37:9 For thus sayeth the Lord dysceyue not your owne myndes, thinckinge on thys maner: tush, the Caldees go now their waye from vs: No, they shall not go their waye.
Jeremiah 37:10 For though ye had slayne the whole hoste of the Caldees, that besege you, and euery one of the slayne laye in his tente, yet should they stande vp, and set fyre vpon this cytie.
Jeremiah 37:11 Nowe when the Hoste of the Caldees was broken vp from Ierusalem, for feare of the Egypcians armye,
Jeremiah 37:12 Ieremy went out of Ierusalem, towarde the lande of BenIamin to do certayne busines there amonge the people.
Jeremiah 37:13 And when he came vnder BenIamins porte, there was a porter, called Ieriah, the sonne of Selemiah the sonne of Hananiah, whiche fell vpon him, and toke hym sayinge: thy mynde is to runne to the Caldees.
Jeremiah 37:14 Then sayde Ieremy: It is not so, I go not to the Caldees. Neuertheles Ieriah woulde not beleue him, but brought Ieremy bounde before the Prynces.
Jeremiah 37:15 Wherfore the Prynces were angrye wyth Ieremye, causinge him to beaten, and to be layed in preson in the house of Ionathas the scribe. For he was the ruler of the prison.
Jeremiah 37:16 Thus was Ieremy put into the dongeon and preson, and so laye there a longe tyme.
Jeremiah 37:17 Then Zedekiah the kinge sent for him, and called him, and asked hym quyetly in hys owne house, sayinge: thynkest thou this busynes (that now is in hande) commeth of the Lorde? Ieremye answered: yea that it doth: and thou (said he) shalt be delyuered in to the kinge of Babylons power.
Jeremiah 37:18 Moreouer, Ieremy sayde vnto kynge Zedekiah. What haue I offended agaynst the, agaynste thy seruauntes, or agaynst this people, that ye haue caused me to be put in preson?
Jeremiah 37:19 Where are youre prophetes whych haue prophecied vnto you, and sayd, that the kinge of Babilon should not come against you & this lande?
Jeremiah 37:20 And therfore heare now, O my Lord the Kinge: let my prayer be accepte before the and sende me no more into the house of Ionathas the Scrybe, that I dye not there.
Jeremiah 37:21 Then Zedekiah the kinge commaunded to put Ieremye in the fore entrye of the preson, and dayly to be geuen him a cake of breade, & els no dighte meate, vntil al the breade in the cytie was eaten vp. Thus Ieremy remaineth in the fore entre of the preson.

CHAPTER: 38

Jeremiah 38:1 Saphatiah the sonne of Mathau, Godoliah the sonne of Phashur, Iucal the sonne of Selemiah, & Phashur the sonne of Melchiah perceyued the wordes, that Ieremy had spoken vnto all the people, namely on this maner:
Jeremiah 38:2 Thus sayeth the Lorde: Who so remayneth in this citie, shall perishe, eyther with the sweard, with honger or with the pestilence. But who so falleth vnto the Caldees shal escape, winninge his soule for a praye, and shall lyue.
Jeremiah 38:3 For thus sayeth the Lord: this cytie (no doute) must be deliuered into the power of the kinge of Babilon, and he also shal winne it.
Jeremiah 38:4 Then sayd the princes vnto the king: Syr, we beseche you, let this man to be put to death: For thus he discoraged the handes of the soudyars that be in this cytie, & the handes of al the people, when he speaketh such wordes vnto them. This man verely laboureth not for peace of the people, but mischefe.
Jeremiah 38:5 Zedekiah the kinge answered & sayde: lo he is in youre handes, for the king may denye you nothing.
Jeremiah 38:6 Then toke they Ieremie, and cast him into the dongeon of Melchiah the sonne of Hamelech, that dwelt in the fore entre of the preson. And they let doune Ieremye wyth coardes into a dongeon, where there was no water, but myre.
Jeremiah 38:7 So Ieremy stack fast in the myre. Now when Abedmelech the Morian beinge a chamberlayne in the kinges courte, vnderstode, that they had cast Ieremy into the dongeon:
Jeremiah 38:8 he went out of the kinges house, & spake to the king (which then sat vnder the porte of Beniamin) these wordes:
Jeremiah 38:9 My Lorde the king where as these men medle with Ieremye the prophet, they do him wrong. Namely, in that they haue put him in preson, there to dye of honger, for there is nomore bread in the city.
Jeremiah 38:10 Then the kynge commaundeth Abedmelech the Morian and sayde: Take from hence .xxx. men whom thou wilt, & drawe vp Ieremy the prophet oute of the dongeon, before he dye.
Jeremiah 38:11 So Abedmelech toke the men with him, & went to the house of Amalech, and there vnder an almery he gat olde ragges & worne cloutes, and let them doune by a coarde, into the dongeon to Ieremy.
Jeremiah 38:12 And Abedmelech the Morian sayde vnto the prophet Ieremy: O put these ragges and cloutes vnder thine arme holes, betwyxte them and the coardes, & Ieremy dyd so.
Jeremiah 38:13 So they drew vp Ieremy wyth coardes and toke him out of the dongeon, & he remayned in the fore entry of the preson.
Jeremiah 38:14 Then Zedekiah the king sent & caused Ieremy the Prophete be called vnto him, into the thirde entrye, that was by the house of the Lorde. And the kinge sayde vnto Ieremy: I wyll aske the some what, but hyde nothinge from me.
Jeremiah 38:15 Then Ieremye answerde Zedekiah: Yf I be playne vnto the thou wilt cause me suffre death: yf I geue the councel, thou wylt not folow me.
Jeremiah 38:16 So the king swore an oth secretly vnto Ieremye, sayinge: As truely as the Lorde lyueth, that made vs these soules, I wil not slay the, nor geue the into the handes of them that seke after thy lyfe.
Jeremiah 38:17 Then sayde Ieremye vnto Zedekiah: Thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes the God of Israel: Yf case be, that thou wylt go forth vnto the kynge of Babilons Princes, thou shalt saue thy lyfe, and thys cyty shall not be brent, yea both thou and thy housholde shal escape wyth youre lyues.
Jeremiah 38:18 But yf thou wylt not go forth to the kynge of Babylons prynces, then shall this cytye be delyuered into the handes of the Caldees whiche shal set fyre vpon it, & thou shalt not be able to escape them.
Jeremiah 38:19 And Zedekiah sayde vnto Ieremy: I am afrayde for the Iewes, that are fled vnto the Caldees, lest I come in their handes, & so they to haue me in derysyon.
Jeremiah 38:20 But Ieremye answerde: No, they shall not betraye the. O herken vnto the voyce of the Lord (I beseche the) whyche I speake vnto the, so shalt thou be wel, and saue thy lyfe.
Jeremiah 38:21 But yf thou wylt not go forth, the Lord hath told me this planely.
Jeremiah 38:22 Beholde al the wemen that are left in the kynge of Iudaes house, shall go out to the kyng of Babylons princes. For they thincke, that thou art disceyued: and that men in whome thou diddest put thy truste, haue gotten the vnder, & set thy fete fast in the mire, and gone their waye from the.
Jeremiah 38:23 Therefore al thy wyues with their children shall fle vnto the Caldees, and thou shalte not escape their handes, but shalt be the kinge of Babylons presoner, and this cytie shalbe brente.
Jeremiah 38:24 Then sayd Zedekiah vnto Ieremy: loke that no body knowe of these wordes, & thou shalt not dye.
Jeremiah 38:25 But yf the princes perceyue, that I haue talked with the, & come vnto the, saying: O speake, what saide the kinge to the? hyde it not from vs, and we wil not put the to death. Tel vs (we pray the) what saide the kinge to the?
Jeremiah 38:26 Se thou geue them this answere: I haue humbly besought the kinge, that he will let me lye no more in Iehonathans house, that I dye not there?
Jeremiah 38:27 Then came all the princes vnto Ieremy, and asked him. And he tolde them, after the maner as the kinge bad him. Then they helde their peace, for they perceiued nothinge.
Jeremiah 38:28 So Ieremye abode still in the fore entrie of the preson, vntil the daye that Ierusalem was wonne.

CHAPTER: 39

Jeremiah 39:1 Now when the citie of Ierusalem was taken (for in the .ix. year of Zedekiah kinge of Iuda in the tenth Moneth, came Nabuchodonozor the Kinge of Babilon, and all his Hoste, and beseged Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 39:2 And in the .xi. year of Zedekiah, in the fourth Moneth, the .ix. day of the Moneth, he brake into the citie).
Jeremiah 39:3 Then al the Princes of the king of Babilon came in, and sat them doune vnder the porte: Neregel, Sarezer, Samegarnabo, Sarsachim, Rabsaris, Neregel, Sarezer, Rabmah, with all the other princes of the king of Babilon.
Jeremiah 39:4 And when Zedekiah the king of Iuda wt his soudiars saw them, they fled, and departed out of the citie by night thorow the kinges garden, & thorow the porte that is betwene the two walles, and so they went towarde the wildernesse.
Jeremiah 39:5 But the Caldees Hoste folowed faste after them, and toke Zedekiah in the felde of Iericho, and brought him presoner to Nabuchodonozor the kinge of Babilon vnto Reblath, that lyeth in the lande of Hemath, where he gaue iudgement vpon him.
Jeremiah 39:6 So the king of Babilon caused the children of Zedekiah and all the nobles of Iuda be slayne, before hys face at Reblath.
Jeremiah 39:7 And made Zedekiahs eyes to be put out, and bounde him with chaynes and sent him to Babilon.
Jeremiah 39:8 Moreouer, the Caldees brent vp the kinges palace, with the other houses of the people, and brake doune the walles of Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 39:9 As for the remnaunt of the people that were in the citie, and suche as were come to helpe them (whatsoeuer was left of the comen sort) Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne caried them to Babilon.
Jeremiah 39:10 But Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne, let the rascal people (and those that had nothinge) dwel still in the lande of Iuda, and gaue them vineyardes and corne feldes at the same tym
Jeremiah 39:11 Nabuchodonosor also the king of Babilon gaue Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne a charge, concernyng Ieremy, saying:
Jeremiah 39:12 take & cherysh him, and make muche of him: se thou do him no harme, but intreate him after his owne desyre.
Jeremiah 39:13 So Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne, Nabusasban the chefe chamberlayne, Nergalsarezer the treasurer, and all the kinge of Babilons Lordes, sent for Ieremy,
Jeremiah 39:14 and caused him be set out of the fore entrye of the preson, and committed him vnto Godoliah the sonne of Ahikam the sonne of Saphan: that he should carie him home, & so he dwelt among the people.
Jeremiah 39:15 Nowe whyle Ieremy laye yet bounde in the fore entrie of the preson, the worde of the Lord came vnto him, sayinge:
Jeremiah 39:16 Go and tell Abedmelech the Morian: Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the, God of Israel: Beholde the cruell and sharpe plage that I haue deuysed for this citie, will I brynge vpon them, that thou shalt se it:
Jeremiah 39:17 but I will delyuer the, (sayeth the Lorde) and thou shalt not come in the handes of those men, whom thou fearest.
Jeremiah 39:18 For doutles I wyl saue the, so that thou shalte not peryshe with the swerde, but thy lyfe shalbe saued, and that because thou haste put thy trust in me, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 40

Jeremiah 40:1 This is the maner how the lord intreated Ieremy, when Nabuzaradan the chefe captaine had let him go fre from Ramah, whither he had led him bounde amonge all the presonners, that were caried from Ierusalem & Iuda vnto Babilon.
Jeremiah 40:2 The chefe captayn called for Ieremy, & said vnto him: The Lorde thy God spake myghtely before of the misery vpon this place.
Jeremiah 40:3 Now the Lorde hath sent it, & perfourmed it as he had promised: For ye haue sinned agaynst the Lorde, & haue not bene obedient vnto hys voyce, therefore commeth this plage vpon you.
Jeremiah 40:4 Beholde, I louse the boundes from thy handes this daye: yf thou wilt now go with me vnto Babilon, vp then: for I wyll se to the, and prouyde for the. But yf thou wilt not go wyth me to Babilon, then remayne here. Beholde all the lande is at thy wil, loke where thou thinkest conuenient and good for the to abyde, there dwell.
Jeremiah 40:5 Yf thou canst not be contente to dwell alone, then remayne with Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam, the sonne of Saphan: whom the king of Babilon hath made gouernoure ouer the cities of Iuda, & dwell with him among the people, or remayne wheresoeuer it pleaseth the. So the chefe captayne gaue him his expenses with a rewarde, and let him go.
Jeremiah 40:6 Then went Ieremy vnto Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam to Mazphah, & dwelt there with him among the people that were left in the lande.
Jeremiah 40:7 Now when the Captaynes of the hoste of Iuda (which with their felowes were scatred abroad on euery side in the lande) vnderstode that the king of Babilon had made Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam gouernoure in the land, & that man, wyfe & childe, yea & the pore men in the lande (that were not led captyue to Babilon) should be vnder his iurisdiccion.
Jeremiah 40:8 They came to Godoliah vnto Mazphah: Namely, Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, Iohanan, & Ionathah the sonnes of Kareah, Sareah the sonne of Thanhometh, the sonnes of Ophai the Netophatite, Iesaniah the sonne of Maachati with their companions.
Jeremiah 40:9 And Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam, the sonne of Saphan, swore vnto them, and their felowes on thys maner: Be not afraied to serue the Caldees, dwell in the lande, and do the kinge of Babilon seruice, so shall ye prospere.
Jeremiah 40:10 Beholde, I dwell at Mazphah to be an officer in the Caldees behalfe, & to satisfye such as come to vs. Therfore gather you wine, corne and oyle, & kepe them in youre ware houses, & dwell in youre cities that ye haue in kepynge.
Jeremiah 40:11 Yea, al the Iewes also that dwelt in Moab vnder the Ammonites, in Idumea, and in all the countreyes, when they hearde, that the Kynge of Babilon had made Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam the sonne of Saphan, gouernoure vpon them that were left in Iuda.
Jeremiah 40:12 All the Iewes (I say) returned out of al places where they fled vnto: and came into the lande of Iuda to Godoliah vnto Mazphah, and gathered wine & other frutes, and that very much.
Jeremiah 40:13 Moreouer Iohanan the sonne of Careah and al the captaynes of the Hoste, that were scatred on euery side in the lande, came to Godoliah in Mazphah, & sayde vnto him:
Jeremiah 40:14 knowest thou not that Baalis kynge of the Ammonites hath sent Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, to slaye the? But Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam beleued them not.
Jeremiah 40:15 Then sayd Iohanan the sonne of Careah vnto Godoliah in Mazphah these wordes secretely: Let me go, I pray the, and I wil slaye Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, so that no bodye shall knowe the. Wherfore he will kyll the, that all the Iewes whiche resorte vnto the, myght be scatred, and the remnaunte in Iuda peryshe?
Jeremiah 40:16 Then sayde Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam to Iohanan the sonne of Careah: Thou shalt not do it, for they are but lyes, that men saye of Ismael.

CHAPTER: 41

Jeremiah 41:1 Bvt in the seuenth Moneth it happened, that Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah the sonne of Elisama (one of the kinges bloude) came wyth them that were greatest about the king and ten men that were sworne with him: vnto Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam to Mazphah, & ate there together.
Jeremiah 41:2 And Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah with those ten men that were sworne to him, starte vp, and smote Godoliah the sonne of Ahiram the sonne of Saphan with the swerde, and slewe hym, whome the kinge of Babylon had made gouernoure of the lande.
Jeremiah 41:3 Ismael also slewe al the Iewes, that were wtth Godoliah at Mazphah, & all the Caldees that he founde there waytynge vpon him.
Jeremiah 41:4 The next daye after that he had slaine Godoliah (the matter was yet vnknowne)
Jeremiah 41:5 there came certayne men from Sichem, from Siloh and Samaria, to the nombre of .lxxx. whiche had shauen their beardes, rent their clothes, and were al heauy, bringyng meatofferynges, and incense in their handes, to offre it in the house of the Lord.
Jeremiah 41:6 And Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah went forth of Mazphah wepynge, to mete them. Nowe when he met them, he sayde: Go youre waye to Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam.
Jeremiah 41:7 And when they came in the middest of the city, Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah (with them that were sworne vnto him) slewe them, euen at the myddest of the pyt.
Jeremiah 41:8 Amonge these .lxxx. men there were ten, that sayde vnto Ismael: Oh slay vs not, for we haue yet a great treasure in the feld, of wheat barleye, oyle, and honye. So he spared them, and slewe them not with their brethren.
Jeremiah 41:9 Now the pit, wherin Ismael dyd cast the dead bodies of the men (whome he slewe because of Godoliah) had Kynge Asa caused to be made, for feare of Baasa the Kynge of Israell, and the same pyt did Ismaell fyll wyth slayne men.
Jeremiah 41:10 As for the remnaunte of the people the kynges doughters and all the people that were yet let at Mazphah, vpon whom Nabuzaradan the chefe Captayne had made Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam gouernoure. Ismaell the sonne of Nathaniah caryed them awaye presoners toward the Ammonites.
Jeremiah 41:11 But when Iohanan the sonne of Careah and all they whyche had bene captaynes ouer the kynges Hoste wyth him, hearde of all the wickednes that Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah had done,
Jeremiah 41:12 they toke their companions, and wente oute for to fyght wyth Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah, and founde hym by the waters of Rabim in Gabaon.
Jeremiah 41:13 Now when all the people, whowe Ismael led captyue, sawe Iohanan the sonne of Careah, and al the other captaynes of the Hoste, they were glad.
Jeremiah 41:14 So all the people of that Ismael had caryed away from Mazphah, were broughte agayne. And when they returned, they came to Iohanan the sonne of Careah.
Jeremiah 41:15 But Ismaell the sonne of Nathaniah fled from Iohanan with eyght of hys sworne companyons, and went to the Ammonites.
Jeremiah 41:16 Then Iohanan the sonne of Careah & al the captaynes of the Host that were wt hym, toke the remnaunt of the people whome Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah had led awaye (When he had slayne Godoliah the sonne of Ahicam) whome they also had rescued from him: fighting men, wemen and children, and gelded men, whom they brought agayn from Gabaon:
Jeremiah 41:17 & wente from thence, & sat them doune at Geruth Camain, whyche lieth beside Bethlehem, that they might go into Egipte, for feare of the Caldees,
Jeremiah 41:18 of whome they were afrayed, because that Ismael the sonne of Nathaniah had slaine Godoliah Ahikams sonne, whom the king of Babilon had made gouernoure in the lande.

CHAPTER: 42

Jeremiah 42:1 So al the rulers, and Iohanan the sonne of Kareah, Iezaniah the sonne of Osaiah came wyth all the people from the least vnto the most,
Jeremiah 42:2 and sayde vnto Ieremye the Prophet: O heare our peticion, that thou mayest pray for vs vnto the Lord thy God, and for the remnaunt, whereof there be very few left of manye, as thou seyst vs,
Jeremiah 42:3 that the Lorde thy God may shew vs a way to go in & tell vs, what we shoulde do.
Jeremiah 42:4 Then Ieremy the prophete said vnto them: I haue heard you. Behold, I wil pray vnto God your lorde, as ye haue required me: & loke what answere the lord geueth you, I shal certifye you thereof, & kepe nothing back from you.
Jeremiah 42:5 And they sayd vnto Ieremy: The lord of trueth & faythfulnes be our recorde, that we will do all, that the Lorde thy God commaundeth vs,
Jeremiah 42:6 whether it be good or euill. We will herken vnto the voyce of oure Lorde God to whom we sende the, that we may prospere, when we haue folowed the voice of the Lorde oure God.
Jeremiah 42:7 And after ten dayes came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ieremy.
Jeremiah 42:8 Then called he Iehonan the sonne of Kareah, & al the captaynes of the people that were wyth hym: yea, and all the people from the least to the moost,
Jeremiah 42:9 and sayde vnto them: Thus sayeth the Lord God of Israel, vnto whom ye sent me, to lay forth your prayers before him.
Jeremiah 42:10 Yf ye will dwell in this lande, I shall buylde you vp, and not breake you doune: I shall plante you, and not rote you out: for I am pacified, as concernynge the trouble that I haue done to you.
Jeremiah 42:11 Feare not the kinge of Babilon, of whome ye stand in awe. O be not afrayed of hym, sayeth the Lorde: For I wilbe with you, to helpe you, and deliuer you from his hande.
Jeremiah 42:12 I wil pardon you, I will haue mercy vpon you, and bryng you agayne into youre owne lande.
Jeremiah 42:13 Neuertheles, yf ye purpose not to dwell in this lande, nor to folowe the voyce of the Lorde youre God,
Jeremiah 42:14 but will saye thus, we wil not dwell here, but go into Egypte: where we shall neyther se warre, heare the noyse of batel, nor suffre honger, there wil we dwel.
Jeremiah 42:15 Wherfore heare now the worde of the Lord O ye remnaunt of Iuda. Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: Yf ye be wholy purposed to go into Egipte, and to be there as straungers,
Jeremiah 42:16 the swerde that ye feare, shall ouertake you in Egipte: and the honger wherof ye be here afrayed shall hange vpon you into Egipte, and there ye shall dye.
Jeremiah 42:17 For al they, that of set purpose vndertake to go into Egipte, there to ease them selues of their mysery, shal peryshe with the swerde, wyth honger and pestilence, not one of them shall remayne, there shall none escape the plage, that I will brynge vpon them.
Jeremiah 42:18 For thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: lyke as my wrath and indignacion is come vpon the enhabytoures of Ierusalem, so shall my displeasure go forth vpon you also, yf ye go into Egipte: For there ye shalbe reuyled, abhorred, brought to shame and confusyon: and as for this place, ye shall neuer she it more.
Jeremiah 42:19 The Lorde forbiddeth you (O ye remnaunt of Iuda) that ye shal not go into Egipte. And forget not that I haue warned you earnestly this day,
Jeremiah 42:20 els shall ye begyle youre selues. For ye sent me vnto the Lorde oure God, and sayde: O praye thou the lord oure God for vs: and loke what answere the lorde oure God geueth the, that brynge vs againe & we shall do therafter.
Jeremiah 42:21 Now haue I shewed and declared vnto you the voyce of the Lorde youre God, for the whiche cause he hath sent me to you.
Jeremiah 42:22 Yf ye wyll not folowe it, be sure, that ye shall peryshe with the swearde, wyth honger & pestilence, euen in the same place, where youre lust was to go, and dwell.

CHAPTER: 43

Jeremiah 43:1 Now when Ieremye had ended all the wordes of the Lord God vnto the people (for their sakes to whome God had sent hym)
Jeremiah 43:2 Azariah the sonne of Osaiah, & Iohanan the sonne of Kareah with al the proud personnes, sayde vnto Ieremy: Thou lyest, the Lord our God hath not sent the to speake vnto vs, that we shoulde not go into Egypt, and dwel there.
Jeremiah 43:3 But Baruch the sonne of Neriah prouoketh the agaynst vs, that he might brynge vs into the captiuite of the Caldees: that they myght slay vs, and carye vs away presoners vnto Babylon.
Jeremiah 43:4 So Iohanan the sonne of Kareah, & al the captaynes of the Hoste, and al the people folowed not the commaundement of the Lord. Namely, to dwell in the lande of Iuda:
Jeremiah 43:5 But Iohanan the sonne of Kareah, and all the captaynes of the Hoste, caryed awaye al the remnaunte in Iuda, that were come together agayne from the Heathen (amonge whome they had bene scatred) to dwell in the land of Iuda.
Jeremiah 43:6 Men, wemen, chyldren, the kynges doughters, all those that Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne had left with Godoliah the sonne of Ahikam. They caryed awaye also the prophet Ieremy, Baruch the sonne of Neriah,
Jeremiah 43:7 & so came into Egipte: for they were not obeyent vnto the commaundement of God. Thus came they to Thaphnis.
Jeremiah 43:8 And in Thaphnis the word of the Lorde happened vnto Ieremy, sayinge:
Jeremiah 43:9 Take great stones in thyne hande, and hide them in the bryckwall, vnder the dore of Pharaos house in Thaphnis that all the men of Iuda maye se,
Jeremiah 43:10 and saye vnto them. Thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes the God of Israell: Beholde I wil sende and cal for Nabuchodonozor the kinge of Babilon my seruaunt, and wyll set hys seate vpon these stones that I haue hyd, and he shall sprede hys tente ouer them.
Jeremiah 43:11 And when he commeth, he shall smyte the lande of Egipte with slaughter, with presonment, and with the swerde.
Jeremiah 43:12 He shal set fyre vpon the tempels of the Egipcians Goddes, and burne them vp, & take them selues presoners. Moreouer he shall araye him selfe with the lande of Egipte, lyke as a sheperde putteth on his cote, and shal departe his waye from thence in peace.
Jeremiah 43:13 The pylers also of the temple of the sunne that is in Egipte: shall he breake in peaces, and burne the tempels of the Egypcians Goddes.

CHAPTER: 44

Jeremiah 44:1 This is the worde that was shewed to Ieremy concerninge all the Iewes, whyche dwelt in Egipte, at Magdall, at Thaphnis, at Memphis & in the lande of Patures.
Jeremiah 44:2 Thus saieth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: ye haue sene al the mysery that I haue brought vpon Ierusalem, and vpon al the cities of Iuda, so that this day they are desolate, & no man dwellinge therin:
Jeremiah 44:3 and that because of the great blasphemyes, which they committed, to prouoke me vnto anger. In that they wente backe to do sacrifyce, and worshippe vnto straunge Goddes: whome neyther they, nor ye, nor youre fathers haue knowne.
Jeremiah 44:4 How be it, I sent vnto them my seruauntes al the prophetes: I rose vp earlye, I sent vnto them, and gaue them warninge: O do no such abhominable thinges, & thinges that I hate.
Jeremiah 44:5 But they woulde not folow nor herken, to turne from their wyckednes, and to do no more sacrifice vnto straung Goddes.
Jeremiah 44:6 Wherfore myne indignacion and wrathe was kyndled, and it brente vp the cytyes of Iuda, the feldes with the stretes of Ierusalem, so that they were made waste and desolate as it is come to passe thys day.
Jeremiah 44:7 Now therfore thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel. How happeneth it, that ye do so great euyl vnto your owne soules, thus to destroy the men and wemen, children and babes of Iuda? so that none of you is left,
Jeremiah 44:8 because ye prouoke me vnto wrath wyth the worckes of your owne handes: when ye offre vnto straung Goddes in the lande of Egipte, where as ye be gone to dwel. That ye myght vtterly peryshe, and that ye myght be reuyled and shamefully intreated of all nacyons.
Jeremiah 44:9 Or haue ye nowe forgotten the wyckednes of your forfathers, the wickednes of the kinges of Iuda & their wyues, the wickednes that ye your selues and youre wyues haue done in the lande of Iuda, in the cytye and in the lande of Ierusalem?
Jeremiah 44:10 Yet are ye not sory this daye, ye feare not neyther walke ye in my lawe, and in my commaundementes, that I haue geuen vnto you and youre forefathers.
Jeremiah 44:11 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: I am stedfastlye aduysed and determed, to punysh you, and to rote out al Iuda.
Jeremiah 44:12 As for the remnaunt of Iuda that purposly wente into Egipte, there to ease them of their mysery I wyll take them, and they shall al be destroyed. In the lande of Egipte shall they peryshe beynge consumed with the swerde, and with honger. For from the least vnto the mooste, they shall peryshe with the swerd and with honger. Moreouer they shal be reuyled, abhorred, shamed, and confounded.
Jeremiah 44:13 For I will vpset them that dwel in Egypte, as I haue visited Ierusalem: with the swerde, wyth honger and wyth pestilence:
Jeremiah 44:14 So that none of the remnaunt of Iuda, which are gone to dwell in Egypte, shalbe left to come agayn into the lande of Iuda al though they thincke to come thither againe & to dwel there. For none shall come agayne, but suche as are fled awaye.
Jeremiah 44:15 Then all the men whiche knewe that their wyues haue offered vnto straunge Goddes, and a greate sorte of wyues, that stode there, yea and al the people that dwelt there in Egipte in the cytye of Patures, answerde Ieremy, & sayd:
Jeremiah 44:16 As for the wordes that thou hast spoken vnto vs in the name of the Lorde, we will in no wyse heare them:
Jeremiah 44:17 but whatsoeuer goeth oute of oure owne mouth, that wyl we do. We wyl do sacryfice, and offre oblacions vnto the Quene of Heauen: lyke as we & our forefathers, our kinges and oure heades haue done in the cities of Iuda, & in the stretes, & feldes of Ierusalem. For then had we plenteousnesse of vytayles, then were we in prosperytie, and no mysfortune came vpon vs.
Jeremiah 44:18 But sence we left, to offre, and to do sacrifice vnto the Quene of Heauen, we haue had scarcenes of all thynges, and peryshe wyth the swerde and honger.
Jeremiah 44:19 Last of all, when we wemen dyd sacryfyce and offred vnto the Quene of heauen, dyd we make her cakes and poure vnto her drynckedofferynges, to do her seruice wythoute oure husbandes wylles.
Jeremiah 44:20 Then sayde Ieremy vnto all the people, to the men, to the wemen and to all the folcke which had geuen hym that answere:
Jeremiah 44:21 Did not the Lorde remembre the sacryfyces, that ye youre forefathers, youre kynges and rulers (wyth all the people) haue offred in the cities of Iuda, in the stretes and land of Ierusalem? and hath he not consydred this in his mynde?
Jeremiah 44:22 In so muche, that the Lorde myght no longer suffre the wickednes of youre inuencyons, and the abhominable thinges whiche he dyd? Is not youre lande desolate and voyde, yea & abhorred, so that no man dwelleth therin any more, as it is come to passe this day?
Jeremiah 44:23 Dyd not al this happen vnto you, because ye made suche sacryfyce, and sinned agaynste the Lorde? Ye haue not folowed his voyce, to walcke in his lawe, in hys ordynaunces and statutes. Yea, this is the cause, that all mysfortune happened vnto you, as it is come to passe this daye.
Jeremiah 44:24 Moreouer, Ieremye spake vnto all the people, and to al the wemen: Heare the worde of the Lorde all Iuda, ye that be in the lande of Egipte:
Jeremiah 44:25 Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: Ye & your wyues haue spoken with your own mouth, the thing that ye haue fulfylled in dede. Yea thus haue ye saide: We wyl not fayle but do the thynge that pleaseth vs: we will do sacrifice and poure not drinckofferynges to the Quene of heauen. Purposlye haue ye set vp your owne good meaninges, & hastely haue ye fulfilled youre owne intente.
Jeremiah 44:26 And therefore: heare the worde of the Lorde al Iuda, ye that dwel in the lande of Egipte. Beholde, I haue sworne by my greate name, sayeth the Lorde, that my name shall not be rehearsed thorow any mans mouth of Iuda, in al the lande of Egipte: to saye: The lord God lyueth,
Jeremiah 44:27 for I wil watch, to plage them, and not for their wealth. And al the men of Iuda that be in the lande of Egipte, shal perysh with the swerde and with honger, vntil they be vtterly destroyed.
Jeremiah 44:28 Neuertheles, those that fled away for the swerde, shal come agayne into the land of Iuda, but there shalbe verye fewe of them. And all the remnaunte of Iuda, that are gone into Egypte, there to dwel, shal knowe whose wordes shalbe founde true: theirs or myne.
Jeremiah 44:29 Take this for a token, that I wyll vyset you in this place, sayeth the Lorde, and that ye maye knowe, howe that I (wythoute doute) will perfourme my purpose vpon you, to punishe you.
Jeremiah 44:30 Beholde, sayeth the Lorde, I wyll delyuer Pharao Hophrea kynge of Egipte into the handes of his enemies, that seke after his life: euen as I gaue Zedekiah the kinge of Iuda into the handes of Nabuchodonozor king of Babylon, whiche sought after his lyfe.

CHAPTER: 45

Jeremiah 45:1 These are the wordes that Ieremy the prophete spake vnto Baruch the sonne of Neriah, after that he had written these Sermons into a boke at the mouthe of Ieremy, In the fourth yeare of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah kinge of Iuda.
Jeremiah 45:2 Thus sayeth the Lorde God of Israell vnto the, O Baruch:
Jeremiah 45:3 In so muche as thou thoughtest thus (when thou wast wryttyng.) Wo is me, the Lorde hath geuen me payne for my trauaile: I haue weried my selfe with sighinghe, and shal I finde no rest?
Jeremiah 45:4 Therfore tell him, O Ieremye, that the Lorde sayeth thus: Beholde, the thing that I haue buylded wyll I breake doune agayne, and rote oute the thinge that I haue planted, yea thys whole lande.
Jeremiah 45:5 And sekest thou yet promocyon? Loke not for it, and desire it not. For I wyll bryng a miserable plage vpon all fleshe sayeth the Lord. But thy lyfe will I geue the for a pray wheresoeuer thou goest.

CHAPTER: 46

Jeremiah 46:1 Here folowe the wordes of the Lorde to the prophete Ieremy, whiche he spake vnto the Gentyles.
Jeremiah 46:2 These wordes folowing preached he to the Egipcians concerning the Hoste of Pharao Necho king of Egypte, when he was in Charcamis besyde the water of Euphrates: what tyme as Nabuchodonozor the kinge of Babilon slew him, in the fourth year of Iehoakim the sonne of Iosiah, kynge of Iuda.
Jeremiah 46:3 Ye make ready buckler and shylde, ye go forth to fyght.
Jeremiah 46:4 Ye harnesse youre horsses, and set your selues vpon them. Ye set your salettes fast on, ye bryng forth speares, ye scoure your swerdes, and put on youre brest plates.
Jeremiah 46:5 But alas, howe happeneth it, that I se you so afrayed? why shryncke ye backe? wherfore are youre worthyes slayne? Yea they runne so fast away, that none of them loketh behind hym. Fearfulnesse is fall vpon euerychone of them sayeth the Lord.
Jeremiah 46:6 The lyghtest of fote shall not fle awaye, and the worthies shall not escape. Towarde the North by the water of Euphrates, they shal stomble and fal.
Jeremiah 46:7 But what is he this, that swelleth vp, as it were a floud, roaring & raging like the streames of water?
Jeremiah 46:8 It is Egypte that ryseth vp lyke the floude, & casteth oute the waters wyth so greate noyse. For they saye: We wil go vp, & wyll couer the earth: we will destroy the cities, wyth them that dwel therin.
Jeremiah 46:9 Get you to horse backe, rol forth the Charrettes, come forth ye worthies: ye Morians, ye Libeans with your bucklers ye Lideans with youre bowes:
Jeremiah 46:10 So shall this daye be vnto the Lorde God of Hostes, a day of vengeaunce, that he maye avenge him of his enemies. The swearde shall deuoure, it shalbe satisfyed and bathed in their bloud For the Lorde God of Hostes shall haue a slayne offeringe towarde the North, by the water of Euphrates.
Jeremiah 46:11 Go vp (O Galaad) and bringe tryacle vnto the doughter of Egipte. But in vayne shalt thou go to surgery, for thy wounde shall not be stopped.
Jeremiah 46:12 The Heathen shall heare of thy shame, and the lande shalbe full of thy confusyon: for one stronge man shal stomble vpon another, howe then shoulde they not fall both together?
Jeremiah 46:13 These are the wordes that the Lorde spake to the Prophet Ieremy, concerninge the host of Nabuchodonozor the Kinge of Babilon, which was sent to destroy the land of Egipt:
Jeremiah 46:14 Preache out thorowe the lande of Egipt, and cause it be proclamed at Magdol, Memphys and Taphnis, and saie: Stande still, make the redye, for the swearde shall consume the rounde aboute.
Jeremiah 46:15 How happeneth it that thy mightie worthies are fallen? why stode they not fast? Euen because the Lord thrust them doune.
Jeremiah 46:16 The slaughter was greate, for one fell euer styll vpon another. One cryed vpon another: Vp let vs go againe to oure owne people, and to oure owne naturall countreye, from the swerd of oure enemye.
Jeremiah 46:17 Crye euen there: O Pharao kynge of Egipte, the tyme wyl bringe sedicion.
Jeremiah 46:18 As truely as I liue (sayeth the kynge, whose name is the Lorde of Hostes) it shal come as the mount of Thabor, and as Libanus yf it stond in the sea.
Jeremiah 46:19 O thou doughter of Egipte make ready thy geer to flyt. For Memphis shalbe voyde and desolate, so that no man shal dwel therin.
Jeremiah 46:20 The lande of Egipt is lyke a goodly fayre calfe, but one shal come out of the north to prick her forwarde.
Jeremiah 46:21 Her wagied soudiars that be with her, are like fat calues. They also shal fle away together, and not abide: for the daye of their slaughter and the tyme of their vysytacyon shall come vpon them.
Jeremiah 46:22 The crye of their enemies shall make a noise, as the blast of a trompet. For they shal entre in with their Hoste, and come with axes as it were hewers doune of wood.
Jeremiah 46:23 And they shal cut doune their wood, sayeth the Lord, wythoute any discrecion. For they shall be mo in nombre then the greshoppers, so that no man shalbe able to tel them.
Jeremiah 46:24 The doughter of Egipte shalbe confounded, when she shalbe delyuered into the handes of the people of the North.
Jeremiah 46:25 Moreouer thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes the God of Israel: Beholde I will vyset that restlesse people of Alexandria, Pharao, and Egipte, yea bothe their Goddes & their kinges, euen Pharao, and all them that put their trust in him.
Jeremiah 46:26 Yea I will delyuer them into the handes of those, that seke after their lyues. Namely, into the power of Nabuchodonozor the kynge of Babylon, and into the power of his seruauntes. And after all these thinges it shalbe inhabited as afore tyme, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 46:27 But be not thou afrayed (O my seruaunte Iacob) feare not thou, O Israell. For lo, I wyl helpe the from farre, and thy sede from the lande of thy captyuyte. Iacob also shall come agayn, & be in reste: he shal be rych, and no man shall do hym harme.
Jeremiah 46:28 Feare thou not (O Iacob my seruaunte) sayeth the Lord, for I am with the: and wyll destroye all nacions amonge whome I haue scatred the. Neuertheles, I wyll not consume the, but chasten the, and correcte the: yea and that wyth discrecyon: neyther wyll I spare the as one that were fautelesse.

CHAPTER: 47

Jeremiah 47:1 These are the wordes, that the Lorde spake vnto Ieremye the Prophete agaynste the Phylystines, before the Pharao smote the cytye of Azah.
Jeremiah 47:2 Thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde, there shall waters aryse oute of the Northe: & shall growe to a greate floude, runnynge ouer and coueryng the land, the cytyes, and them that dwell therein. And the men shall crye, and al they that dwel in the lande, shall mourn
Jeremiah 47:3 at the noyse & stampynge of theyr stronge barbed horses, at the shakynge of theyr charettes and at the romblynge of the wheles. The fathers shall not loke to theyr chyldren, so feable and wery shall theyr handes be:
Jeremiah 47:4 at the same tyme, when he shall be there, to destroye the whole lande of the Philistines. He shall make waste both Cirus, Sidon and all other that are sworne vnto them. For the Lorde wyll destroye all Palestina and the other Iles, that be deuyded from the countre.
Jeremiah 47:5 Baldnesse is come vpon Azah, Ascalon wyth her other valleys shall kepe her peace. Howe longe wylte thou slaye,
Jeremiah 47:6 O thou sweard of the Lord? Turne agayne into thy sheeth, reste, and leaue of.
Jeremiah 47:7 But howe can it ceasse, when the Lorde hym selfe hath geuen hym a charge agaynste Ascalon, and raysed it vp agaynste the cytyes of the seacoast?

CHAPTER: 48

Jeremiah 48:1 Thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes the God of Israel agaynste Moab: wo be to the cytie of Nabo, for it shal be layed waste, broughte to confusyon & taken. Yea thy stronge cytye of Kariathiarim shalbe brought to shame, and afrayd:
Jeremiah 48:2 Moab shall no more be had in honoure: Wycked councell shalbe taken vpon Hesebon. Come (shall they saye) let vs rote them oute, that they maye be no more amonge the nombre of the Gentyles, yea that they maye no more be thought vpon: Thus the swearde shall persecute the:
Jeremiah 48:3 A voyce shall crye from Horonaim: Wyth greate wastynge and destruccyon,
Jeremiah 48:4 is Moab made desolate. And this crye shalbe hearde in all her cytyes.
Jeremiah 48:5 At the goynge vp vnto Luithe there shall aryse a lamentacyon: & doune towarde Horonaim, there shall be hearde a cruell & a deadly crye:
Jeremiah 48:6 Get you away, saue youre lyues, and be lyke vnto the heath in the wyldernes.
Jeremiah 48:7 For because thou haste trusted in thy stronge holdes and treasure, thou shalte be taken Chamos wyth hys priestes and prynces shall go awaye into captiuite.
Jeremiah 48:8 The destroyer shall come vpon all cytyes, none shall escape. The valeys shalbe destroyed, and the feldes shall be layed waste: lyke as the Lorde hath determed.
Jeremiah 48:9 Make a token vnto Moab, that she get her awaye spedelye: for her cytyes shalbe made so desolate, that no man shall dwell there in.
Jeremiah 48:10 Cursed be he that doth the worcke of the Lorde negligentlye, and cursed be he that kepeth backe hys swearde from sheddynge of bloude.
Jeremiah 48:11 Moab hath euer bene ryche and carelesse from her youth vp, she hath sytten and taken her ease wyth her treasure. She was neuer yet put oute of one vessell into another (that is) she neuer wente awaye into captiuite, therfore her taste remayneth, and her sauoure is not yet chaunged.
Jeremiah 48:12 But lo, the tyme cometh, sayeth the Lorde that I shall sende her trussers to trusse her vp, to prepare & season her vessels: yea her tanckerdes rattell, and shake to and fro.
Jeremiah 48:13 And Moab shalbe ashamed of Chamos, lyke as Israel was ashamed of Bethell, wherein she put her truste.
Jeremiah 48:14 Wherfore do ye thincke thus: we are mightye, and stronge men of warre?
Jeremiah 48:15 Moab shall be destroyed, and her cities brente vp: her chosen yong men shall be slayne, sayeth the king, whose name is the Lorde of Hostes.
Jeremiah 48:16 The destruccyon of Moab commeth on a pace, and her fall is at hande.
Jeremiah 48:17 All her neyghbours shall mourne for her, and all they that knowe her name, shall saye: O howe happeneth it, that the stronge staf & the goodlye rode is thus broken?
Jeremiah 48:18 And thou doughter Dibon, come doune from thy glorye, and sit in pouerte. For he that destroyeth Moab, shall come vp to the also, & breake doune thy stronge holdes.
Jeremiah 48:19 And thou that dwelleste in Aroer, get the to the strete, and loke aboute the: aske them that are fled and escaped, and saye: what thinge is happened?
Jeremiah 48:20 O, Moab is confounded and ouercome. Mourne, and crye, tel it oute at Arnon, that Moab is destroyed.
Jeremiah 48:21 And myserye shall come vpon the playne lande: Namely, vpon Holon & Iahazah: vpon Mephaath
Jeremiah 48:22 and Dibon vpon Nabo & the house of Deblathaim,
Jeremiah 48:23 vpon Cariathiarim and Bethgamul, vpon Bethmaon
Jeremiah 48:24 & Carioth, vpon Bozrah and all the cytyes in the lande of Moab, whether they lye farre or neare.
Jeremiah 48:25 The horne of Moab shall be smitten doune and her arme broken, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 48:26 Make her droncken, for she magnified her self aboue the Lord, that men maye clappe theyr handes at her vomyte, and that she also maye be laughed to scorne.
Jeremiah 48:27 O Israel, shalt thou not laugh him to scorne, when he is taken amonge theues? Yea because of thy wordes that thou hast spoken agaynste him, thou shalt be dryuen awaye.
Jeremiah 48:28 Ye Moabites, shall leaue the cytyes, & dwell in rockes of stone, and become like doues, that make theyr nestes in holes.
Jeremiah 48:29 As for Moabs pryde, we haue hearde of it, she is verye hye mynded. I know her stoutnesse, her boastynge, her arrogancye and the pryde of her stomack, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 48:30 For her furyousnes maye neyther vpholde her wt strength nor dede.
Jeremiah 48:31 Therfore shall there mournynge be made for Moab, and euery man shal crye for Moabs sake: a lamentacion shalbe made to the men that stand vpon the wal.
Jeremiah 48:32 So wil I mourne for the also, O Iazer, and for the, O thou vyneyarde of Sabamah. Thy wyne braunches shall come ouer the sea, & the braunches of Iazer but vnto the sea: the destroyer shal breake into thy haruest and grape gatheringe:
Jeremiah 48:33 Myrth and cheare shalbe taken awaye from the tymbre feld, and from the whole lande of Moab. There shalbe no swete wyne in the presse, the treader shall haue no stomacke to crye, yea there shalbe none to crye vnto him:
Jeremiah 48:34 which afore time were hearde from Hesebon to Eleale & Iahaz, whiche lyfted vp theyr voyce from Zoar vnto Horonaim, that bullocke of thre yeare olde. The waters also of Memrim shal be dryed vp.
Jeremiah 48:35 Moreouer, I wyll make Moab ceasse (sayeth the Lorde) from the offerynges & censynge that the hath made vnto her Goddes in hye places.
Jeremiah 48:36 Wherfore my hert mourneth for Moab, lyke a croude playenge an heauy song: and for the mens sake of the brycht wall my herte mourneth also, euen as a pype that pypeth a dolefull songe: for they shalbe verye fewe, and destroyed.
Jeremiah 48:37 All heades shalbe shauen, and all beardes clypped of: all handes bounde, and all loynes gyrded aboute with sackclothe.
Jeremiah 48:38 Vpon all the house toppes and stretes of Moab, there shal be mournynge: For I wyll breake Moab lyke an vnprofytable vessell sayeth the Lord.
Jeremiah 48:39 O howe fearfull is she? O howe mourneth she? O howe doeth Moab hange doune her head, and is ashamed? Thus shall Moab be a laughynge stocke, and had in derisyon of all them, that be rounde aboute her.
Jeremiah 48:40 For thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde, the enemye shall come flyenge as an Aegle, and sprede his winges vpon Moab.
Jeremiah 48:41 They shall clymme ouer the walles, and winne the strong holdes. Then the mighty mens hertes in Moab shalbe lyke the herte of a woman trauaylinge wyth chylde.
Jeremiah 48:42 And Moab shall be made so desolate, that she shall no more be a people, because she hath set vp her selfe agaynste the Lorde.
Jeremiah 48:43 Feare, pyt, and snare shall come vpon the (O Moab) sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 48:44 Who so escapeth the feare, shall fall in the pytte, and whoso getteth oute of the pyt, shalbe taken in the snare. For I wyll bringe a yeare of vysytacyon vpon Moab, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 48:45 They that are able to flye, shal stande vnder the shadow of Hesebon. For there shall go a fyre oute of Hesebon, and a flamme from Sion, and shal burne vp that proude people of Moab, bothe before and behynde.
Jeremiah 48:46 Wo be vnto the (O Moab) for thou people of Chamos shalte perysh: Yea thy sonnes and doughters shall be led awaye captyue.
Jeremiah 48:47 Yet at the laste wyll I brynge Moab oute of captiuite agayne, sayth the Lord. Thus farre of the plage of Moab.

CHAPTER: 49

Jeremiah 49:1 As concernynge the Ammonites thus the Lorde sayeth: Hath Israell no chyldren, or is he withoute an heyre? Why hath your kynge then taken Gad in? wherfore both hys people dwel in hys cities?
Jeremiah 49:2 Beholde therfore, the tyme commeth (sayeth the Lorde) that I wyll brynge a noyse of warre into Rabah of the Ammonites. Lahell shalbe desolate, and her cytyes brente vp: and the Israelytes shall be Lordes ouer those that had them in possession afore, sayeth the Lord.
Jeremiah 49:3 Hesebon shall mourne, for it shall be roted out of the grounde, sayeth the Lorde. The cytyes of Rabah shall crye oute, and gyrde them selues wyth sacke clothe: they shall mourne, and runne aboute the walles: for theyr kynge shal be led awaye presonner: yea hys priestes and princes wyth hym.
Jeremiah 49:4 Wherfore trustest thou in the water streames that flowe to and fro, O thou fearre doughter: and thinckest thou arte so safe (by reason of thy treasure) that no man shal come to the?
Jeremiah 49:5 Beholde, I wyll bring a feare vpon the, sayeth the Lord God of Hostes, from al those that be aboute the: so that ye shall be scatered euerye man from another, and no man shall gather them together agayne that be fled.
Jeremiah 49:6 But after that, I wyll brynge the Ammonytes also oute of captyuite agayne.
Jeremiah 49:7 Vpon the Edomytes hath the Lorde of hostes spoken on thys maner: Is there no more wysdome in Theman? Is there no more good councell amonge hys people? Is theyr wysdome then turned clene to naughte?
Jeremiah 49:8 Get you hence, turne youre backes, crepe doune into the depe, O ye cytesens of Dedan. For I wyll brynge destruccyon vpon Esau yea and the daye of hys visitacion.
Jeremiah 49:9 If the grape gatherers came vpon the, shuld they not leaue some grapes? If the nyghte robbers came vpon the, shulde they not take so muche as they thoughte were ynough?
Jeremiah 49:10 But I wyll make Esau bare, and discouer hys secretes, so that he shall not be able to hyde them. Hys sede shalbe wasted awaye, yea hys brethren and his neyghbours, and he him selfe shall not be lefte behynde.
Jeremiah 49:11 Thou shalte leaue thy fatherlesse chyldren behynde the, and I wyll kepe them and thy wydowes shall take theyr comforte in me.
Jeremiah 49:12 For thus hath the Lorde spoken: Beholde, they that men thought were vnmete to drinke of the cuppe, haue dronken with the firste: and thynkest thou then to be fre? No, no: thou shalt neyther be quyte nor fre but thou muste drincke also:
Jeremiah 49:13 For why, I haue sworne by my selfe (sayeth the Lord) that Bozrah shal become a wyldernes, an open shame a laughynge stocke and cursynge: and her cytyes shalbe a continuall deserte.
Jeremiah 49:14 For I am perfectly infourmed of the Lord, that he hath sente a message all readye vnto the Heathen. Gather you together, and go forthe agaynste them: make you readye to the battayle:
Jeremiah 49:15 for lo, I wyll make the but smal among the Heathen, and lytle regarded among men.
Jeremiah 49:16 Thy hye stomack & the pryde of thy herte haue disceyued the, because thou wylte dwell in the holes of stony rockes, and haue the hye mountaines in possessyon. Neuertheles though thy neste were as hye as the Aegles, yet will I caste the doune, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 49:17 Moreouer Idumea shall be a wyldernesse: who so goeth by it, shalbe abashed, & wodre at all her myserable plages.
Jeremiah 49:18 Lyke as Sodome Gomor, and the cytyes that laye there about, were turned vp syde doune (sayeth the Lorde) so shall no bodye dwell in Idumea, & no man shall haue hys habytacyon there.
Jeremiah 49:19 Beholde, lyke as the Lyon commeth vp from the pleasaunt medowes of Iordane vnto the grene pastures of Etham, so wyll I dryue hym, and make hym runne agaynste her. But who is the yongeman that I wyll ordeyne thereto? Who is lyke vnto me? What is he that wyll stryue wyth me? What shepherde may stande in my handes?
Jeremiah 49:20 Therfore heare the councell of the Lorde, that he hathe taken vpon Idumea: and hys purpose that he hath deuised vpon the cytesyns of Theman: The least of the flocke shall teare them in peces, and loke what faire thing they haue, they shall make it waste, & them selues also.
Jeremiah 49:21 At the noyse of their fall the earthe shall quake, the crie of their voyce shalbe hearde vnto the red sea.
Jeremiah 49:22 Beholde, the enemye shall come & fle vp hyther, lyke as it were an Aegle, and sprede his winges vpon Bozrah. Then shall the hertes of the worthyes in Edom be as the herte of a woman trauailinge of childe.
Jeremiah 49:23 Vpon Damascus, Hemath and Arphad shall come confusion, for they shall heare euill tydinges: they shall be tossed to and fro lyke the sea that can not stande styll.
Jeremiah 49:24 Damascus shalbe sore afrayed, and shall fle, tremblynge shall come vpon her. Sorowe and payne shall ouertake her as a woman trauaylynge of chylde.
Jeremiah 49:25 But howe shulde so worshipful and gloryous a citie be forsaken?
Jeremiah 49:26 Heare therfore: her yonge men shall fall in the stretes, & all her men of warre shall be taken awaye in that tyme, sayeth the Lorde of Hostes:
Jeremiah 49:27 I wyll kyndle a fyre in the walles of Damascus, whiche shall consume the palace of Benhadad.
Jeremiah 49:28 As for Cedar and the kyngdom of Hazor, whome Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon smote doune, the Lorde hath spoken thus vpon them: Aryse, and get you vp vnto Cedar, and destroye the people towarde the easte.
Jeremiah 49:29 Theyr tentes and theyr flockes shal they take awaye, yea theyr hanginges and theyr vessel. Theyr Camels also shall they carye awaye with them. They shall come aboute them on euerye syde with a fearfull crye.
Jeremiah 49:30 Fle, get you sone awaye, crepe into caues, that ye maye dwell there: O ye inhabytours of Hazor, sayeth the Lorde: for Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon hath holden a councell concerning you, and concluded his deuyce agaynst you.
Jeremiah 49:31 Aryse, and get you vp agaynste yonder ryche and carelesse people (sayeth the Lorde) whiche haue neyther gates nor dore barres, and that dwell not together.
Jeremiah 49:32 Theyr camels shalbe stolen, and the droues of theyr catell dryuen awaye. Moreouer, these that be shauen wil I scatre towarde all the wyndes, and bryng them to destruccyon: yea and that thorowe theyr owne famylyers, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 49:33 Hazor also shall be a dwellynge for Dragons, and an euerlastynge wyldernesse: so that no bodye shall dwell there, and no man shal haue there hys habytacion.
Jeremiah 49:34 These are the wordes, that the Lord spake to the Prophet Ieremye concernynge Elam, in the beginninge of the raygne of Zedekiah kynge of Iuda.
Jeremiah 49:35 Thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes: Beholde, I wyll breake the bowe of Elam, and take awaye theyr strength:
Jeremiah 49:36 and vpon Elam I wyll brynge the foure wyndes from the foure quarters of heauen, and wyll scatre them agaynste the same foure wyndes. And there shalbe no people, but some of Elam shall fle vnto them.
Jeremiah 49:37 For I wyll cause Elam to be afrayed of theyr enemyes, and of them that seke theyr lyues, and wyll brynge vpon them the indignacyon of my wrathe, sayeth the Lorde. And I wyll persecute them with the swearde so longe tyll I haue broughte them to naughte.
Jeremiah 49:38 I wyll set my stole in Elam, I wyl destroye bothe the kyng and the princes from thence, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 49:39 But in processe of the, I wil bringe Elam oute of captyuyte agayne, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 50

Jeremiah 50:1 The wordes that the Lord spake vnto the Prophet Ieremy, concerninge Babylon, & the lande of the Caldees:
Jeremiah 50:2 preache amonge the Gentiles, let youre voyce be hearde, make a token: crye oute, kepe no sylence but saye: Babylon shall be wonne, Bel shalbe confounded, & Merodach shalbe ouercome. Yea their Goddes shalbe brought to shame, and theyr ymages shall stande in feare.
Jeremiah 50:3 For oute of the northe there shall come a people against her, whiche shal make her lande so wast, that no body shall dwell therin: neyther man nor beast, for they shall flye and departe from thence.
Jeremiah 50:4 In those dayes & at that time sayeth the Lorde, the children of Israell shall come, they and the children of Iuda, wepyng & makinge haste, and shall seke the Lord their God.
Jeremiah 50:5 They shall aske the waye to Sion, thyther shall they turne theyr faces, & come and hange vpon the, in a couenaunte that neuer shall be broken.
Jeremiah 50:6 My people hath bene a lost flocke, my shepherdes haue disceyued them, and haue made them go astraye vpon the hylles. They haue gone from the mountayne to the litle hyl, and forgotten their folde.
Jeremiah 50:7 All they that came vpon them, haue deuoured them: & theyr enemyes sayde: We haue made no faute agaynst them for they haue displeased the Lorde, yea euen the Lorde whiche is the bewtie of theyr ryghtuousnes, & that defended theyr fathers.
Jeremiah 50:8 Yet shall ye fle from Babilon, & depart out of the lande of the Caldees, and ye shall be as the rammes that go before the flocke.
Jeremiah 50:9 For lo, I wyll wake vp an hoost of people from the northren lande, and brynge them vpon Babylon: these shall laye sege to it, and winne it: Theyr arowes shall not mysse, like as a connyng archer shuteth not wronge.
Jeremiah 50:10 And the Caldees shalbe spoyled, and all they that spoyle them, shalbe satisfyed, sayeth the Lorde:
Jeremiah 50:11 because ye were so chearfull and glad, to treade doune myne heritage, and fulfylled youre pleasures, as the calues in the grasse: and triumphed ouer them lyke the bulles, when ye had gotten the victory.
Jeremiah 50:12 Youre mothers shalbe sore confounded, and they that bare you, shall come to shame. She shall be the leaste set by amonge the nacions, voyde, waste, and dryed vp.
Jeremiah 50:13 No man shall be able to dwell there, for the feare of the Lorde, but she shall be whole desolate. All they that go by Babylon, shall stande styll, & be abashed, and shall wondre at all her plages.
Jeremiah 50:14 Go forth in your araye againste Babylon rounde aboute, all ye that can handle bowes: shute at her, spare no arowes, for she hath synned agaynst the Lorde.
Jeremiah 50:15 Crye oute: vpon her, vpon her, agaynste her round about: she shall yelde her selfe, her foundacyons shal fall, and her walles shall come doune, for it shalbe the vengeaunce of the Lorde. Yea vengeaunce shalbe taken of her, and as she hath done, so shall she be dealte with al.
Jeremiah 50:16 They shal rote out the sower from Babylon, & hym that handleth the syckle in haruest. For feare of the swearde of the enemye, euery man shal get hym to his owne people, and euery man shall flye to hys owne lande.
Jeremiah 50:17 Israel is a scatred flocke, the Lyons haue dispersed them. Fyrste the kynge of the Assyryans deuoured them, last of all thys Nabuchodonosor Kyng of Babylon hath brosed all theyr bones.
Jeremiah 50:18 Therfore thus saith the Lorde of hostes the God of Israell: Beholde, I wyll vyset the Kynge of Babylon and hys kyngdome, as I haue vysited the kynge of the Assyryans:
Jeremiah 50:19 and wil bringe Israel agayne to hys pleasaunte pasture, that he maye fede vpon Charmel and Basan, and be satisfyed vpon the mounte of Ephraim & Galaad.
Jeremiah 50:20 In those dayes & at the same tyme (sayeth the Lorde) yf the offence of Israel be soughte for, there shal none be found: Yf men enquere for the sinne of Iuda, there shalbe none: for I wyll be mercyfull vnto them whome I suffre to remayne ouer.
Jeremiah 50:21 Go doune (O thou auenger) into the enemyes lande, and vyset them that dwel therin: doune with them, and smyte them vpon the backes, sayeth the Lorde: do accordyng to all, that I haue commaunded the.
Jeremiah 50:22 There is gone aboute the lande a crye of a slaughter & great murther, namelye on thys maner:
Jeremiah 50:23 How happeneth it, that the hammer of the whole world is thus broken and brosed in sonder? Howe chaunceth it, that Babylon is become a wyldernes amonge the Heathen on this maner?
Jeremiah 50:24 I my selfe haue layed wayte for the, and thou arte taken: vnawarres arte thou trapped and snared: for why, thou haste prouoked the Lorde vnto anger:
Jeremiah 50:25 The Lorde hath opened his house of ordynaunce, and broughte forthe the weapens of his wrath. For the thing that is done in the lande of the Caldees, it is the Lorde of hostes worcke.
Jeremiah 50:26 These thinges shal come vpon her at the last, they shal breake into her preuye chambres, they shall leaue her as bare as stones, that be layed together vpon heapes. They shal so destroye her, that nothynge shall be lefte.
Jeremiah 50:27 They shall slaye all their mightye soudyars, and put them to death. Wo be vnto them, for the daye & tyme of their visitacion is at hande.
Jeremiah 50:28 Me thinke I heare all readye a crye, of them that be fled & escaped oute of the lande of Babylon, which shewe in Syon the vengeaunce of the Lorde oure God the vengeaunce of his temple, yea a voyce of them, that crye against Babylon:
Jeremiah 50:29 Call vp all the archers agaynste Babylon, pytche youre tentes rounde aboute her, that none escape. Recompence her, as she hath deserued: and accordinge as she hath done, so deale wyth her agayne: for she hath set vp her selfe agaynste the Lorde, agaynste the holy one of Israel.
Jeremiah 50:30 Therfore shall her yonge men fal doune in the stretes, and all her men of warre shalbe roted oute in that daye, saith the Lorde.
Jeremiah 50:31 Behold, I speake vnto the (O thou proude) sayeth the Lorde God of hostes: for thy daye shall come, euen the tyme of thy vysitacion.
Jeremiah 50:32 And the proude shall stomble & fall, & no man shall helpe hym vp. I wyl burne vp his cities wyth fyre, and it shal consume al that is rounde aboute hym.
Jeremiah 50:33 Thus sayth the Lorde of hostes: The chyldren of Israell & Iuda suffre violence together. Al they that haue them in captyuyte, kepe them faste, and wyll not let them go:
Jeremiah 50:34 but theyr auenger & redemer is myghtye, whose name is the Lorde of hostes: he shal maintayne theyr cause, he shall make the lande shake, and iudge them that dwell therein, one wyth another.
Jeremiah 50:35 The swearde shall come vpon the Caldees, sayeth the Lorde, vpon them that dwell in Babylon, vpon their princes, & vpon theyr wise men:
Jeremiah 50:36 The swearde vpon theyr soth sayers, as for those (they shal become fooles.) The swearde vpon they: worthies, so that they shall stande in feare:
Jeremiah 50:37 The swearde vpon theyr horsmen and charettes, and vpon al the comon people that dwell vnder them: so that they shall all become lyke wemen: The swearde vpon their treasure, so that it shall be stolen awaye.
Jeremiah 50:38 The swearde vpon theyr waters, so that they shalbe dryed vp. For the lande worshippeth ymages, & delyteth in straunge wondrefull thynges.
Jeremiah 50:39 Therfore shall wylde beastes, Apes, and Estriches dwell therin: for there shall neuer man dwell there, neyther shal any man haue his habitacion there for euermore.
Jeremiah 50:40 Lyke as God destroyed Sodome and Gomorre, with the cities that laye there aboute, sayeth the Lord: So shall no man dwell there also, nether shall any man haue there hys habitacyon.
Jeremiah 50:41 Beholde, there shall come a people from the North, with a greate bounde of men and many Kynges shall stande vp from the endes of the earth:
Jeremiah 50:42 They beare bowes & buclers, cruel are they and vnmercyfull. Their voyce roareth lyke the ragyng sea, they ryde vpon horses, & come weapened to fyght agaynst the O Babylon.
Jeremiah 50:43 As sone as the kyng of Babylon heareth tell of them, hys handes shall waxe feable: Sorowe and heuynes shal come vpon him, as a woman trauelynge wyth chylde.
Jeremiah 50:44 Beholde, lyke as the Lyon commeth vp from the pleasaunt medowes of Iordane vnto the grene pastures of Ethan, so wyll I dryue them forth, & make them runne agaynst her. But whom shall I chose out, & ordene to such a thyng? For who is lyke me, or who wyl stryue wt me? or what shepherde maye stande against me?
Jeremiah 50:45 Therfore heare the councel that the Lord hath geuen vpon Babylon, and the deuyce that he hath taken vpon the lande of the Caldees. The leaste amonge the people shall teare them in peces, & loke what pleasaunte thinge they haue: they shall laye it waste.
Jeremiah 50:46 The noyse at the wynning of Babylon shall moue the earthe, & the crye shalbe hearde amonge the Gentyles.

CHAPTER: 51

Jeremiah 51:1 Thus hath the Lorde sayd: behold I wyll rayse vp a perlous wind agaynst Babylon & her citezens that beare euyll wyll agaynste me.
Jeremiah 51:2 I wyl sende also into Babylon fanners to fanne her oute, & to destroy lande: for in the daye of her trouble they shalbe aboute her on euery syde:
Jeremiah 51:3 Moreouer, the Lorde hath sayde vnto the bowe men, and to them that clymme ouer the walles in brest plates: He shall not spare her yong men, kil doune all her hoste.
Jeremiah 51:4 Thus the slayne shall fall doune in the lande of the Caldees, & the wounded in the stretes.
Jeremiah 51:5 As for Israel and Iuda, they shal not be forsaken of theyr God, of the Lorde of Hostes, of the holy one of Israel: no, thoughe they haue fylled all theyr lande full of synne.
Jeremiah 51:6 Flye awaye from Babylon, euery man saue hys lyfe. Let no man holde hys tonge to her wyckednes, for the tyme of the Lordes vengeaunce is come, yea he shall rewarde her agayne.
Jeremiah 51:7 Babylon hath bene in the Lordes hande a golden cuppe, that maketh all landes droncken. Of her wyne haue all people droncken, therfore are they oute of theyr wyttes.
Jeremiah 51:8 But sodenly is Babylon fallen, & destroyed. Mourne for her, bryng plasters for her woundes, yf she may peraduenture be healed agayne.
Jeremiah 51:9 We wolde haue made Babylon whole (saye they) but she is not recouered. Therfore wyll we let her alone, & go euery man into hys owne countre. For her iudgemente is come into heauen, and is gone vp to the cloudes.
Jeremiah 51:10 And therfore come on, we wyll shewe Syon the worke of the Lorde oure God.
Jeremiah 51:11 Make sharpe the arowes, and fyll the quyuers: for the Lorde shall rayse vp the sprete of the kynge of the Meedes, which hath already a desyre to destroye Babylon. This shalbe the vengeaunce of the Lordes, and the vengeaunce of hys temple.
Jeremiah 51:12 Set vp tokens vpon the walles of Babylon, make youre watche stronge, set youre watche men in araye, yea holde preuye watches, & yet for all that shall the Lorde go forth with the deuyce, whiche he hath taken vpon them that dwell in Babylon.
Jeremiah 51:13 O thou that dwellest by the greate waters O thou that hast so greate treasure & ryches, thyne ende is come: and the rekenynge of thy winninges.
Jeremiah 51:14 The Lord of hostes hath sworne by him selfe, that he wyll ouer whelme the wt men lyke greshoppers in nombre, which with a corage shall crye Alatum Alarum agaynst the.
Jeremiah 51:15 Yea euen the Lorde of hostes, that wyth his power made the earthe, with hys wysedome prepared the rounde worlde, and with his discrecyon spred oute the heauens.
Jeremiah 51:16 As soone as he letteth hys voyce be hearde, the waters in the ayre waxe fearce: He draweth vp the cloudes from the endes of the earthe. He turneth the lyghtenynges to rayne, he bryngeth the wyndes oute of theyr secrete places.
Jeremiah 51:17 By the reason of wysdome, all men are become fooles. Confounded be all the casters of ymages for the thynge that they make is but disceyte, and hath no breath.
Jeremiah 51:18 Vayne is it and worthye to be laughed at: and in the tyme of vysitacion it shall peryshe.
Jeremiah 51:19 Neuertheles, the porcyon of Iacob is none soch: but he that made al thinges, whose name is the Lorde of hostes, he is the rode of hys enherytaunce.
Jeremiah 51:20 Thou breakest my weapens of warre, and yet thorowe the I haue scatered the nacyons & kyngdomes:
Jeremiah 51:21 Thorow the haue I scatred horse and horse man: yea the charettes, and suche as sat vpon them:
Jeremiah 51:22 Thorowe the I haue scatred man and woman, olde & yong, bacheler and mayden.
Jeremiah 51:23 Thorowe the I haue scatred the shepherde and hys flocke, the husbandeman and hys cattell, the prynces and the rulers.
Jeremiah 51:24 Therfore wyl I rewarde the citie of Babylon and all her cytesens the Caldees with all the euyll whiche they haue done vnto Syon: yea that ye youre selues shall se it, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 51:25 Beholde, I come vpon the (thou noysome hyll) sayeth the Lorde, thou that destroyest all landes. I wyll stretche out my hande ouer the, and caste the doune from the stony rockes: and wyll make the a brente hyll,
Jeremiah 51:26 so that neyther corner stones, nor pynnacles, nor foundacyon stones shalbe taken anye more oute of the, but waste and desolate shalt thou lye for euer more, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 51:27 Set vp a token in the lande: blow the trompettes amonge the Heythen, prouoke the nacyons agaynst her, call the kyngedomes of Ararat, Memni, and Ascanes agaynste her: nombre oute Taphsar agaynst her, bryng as greate a sorte of horses against her, as yf they were greshoppers.
Jeremiah 51:28 Prepare agaynste them the people of the Meedes wyth theyr kynges prynces, and al theyr chefe rulers, yea and the whole lande that is vnder them.
Jeremiah 51:29 The lande also shall shake & be afrayed, when the deuyce of the Lorde shal come forth agaynste Babylon: to make the lande of Babylon so waste, that no man shall dwell anye more therein.
Jeremiah 51:30 The worthyes of Babylon shal leaue the battell, & kepe them selues in stronge holdes, theyr strength hath fayled them, they shalbe lyke wemen. Theyr dwellynge places shal be brente vp, theyr barres shalbe broken.
Jeremiah 51:31 One purseuaunte shal mete another, yea one poste shall come by another, to bring the king of Babylon tydynges: that his citie is taken in on euerye syde,
Jeremiah 51:32 the foordes occupyed, the fennes brente vp, and the soudyares sore afrayed.
Jeremiah 51:33 For thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes the God of Israell: the doughter of Babylon hath bene in her tyme lyke as a threshynge floure, but shortly shal her haruest come.
Jeremiah 51:34 Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon hath deuoured & destroyed me, he hath made me an emptye vessell. He swalowed me vp lyke a dragon, and filled his bely with my delycates: he hath cast me oute,
Jeremiah 51:35 he hath taken my substaunce awaye and the thynge that was lefte me, hath he caryed vnto Babylon, sayeth the doughter that dwelleth in Syon: yea and my bloude also vnto the Caldees, sayeth Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 51:36 Therfore thus sayth the Lorde: Beholde, I wyll defende thy cause, and auenge the: I wil dryncke vp her sea, and drye vp her water springes.
Jeremiah 51:37 Babilon shalt become an heape of stones a dwellinge place for dragons, a fearfulnes and wondrynge, because no man dwelleth there.
Jeremiah 51:38 They shall roare together lyke lyons, and as the yonge lyons when they be angrie, so shall they bende them selues.
Jeremiah 51:39 In their heate I shall sett drinke before them, & they shalbe droncken for ioye: Then shall they slepe an euerlastinge slepe, and neuer wake, sayeth the Lord
Jeremiah 51:40 I shall carie them downe to be slayne like shepe, like wethers and gootes.
Jeremiah 51:41 O, how was Sesach wonne? O, how was the glorye of the whole lande taken? how happeneth it, that Babilon is so wondred at amonge the Heathen?
Jeremiah 51:42 The see is risen ouer Babilon, and hath couered her with his greate waues.
Jeremiah 51:43 Her cytyes are layed waste, the lande lyeth vnbuylded and voyde: it is a lande where no man dwelleth, and where no man traueleth thorow.
Jeremiah 51:44 Moreouer, I wyll vyset Bell at Babylon: and the thynge that he hath swalowed vp, that same shall I plucke out of hys mouth. The Gentyles also shall runne nomore vnto hym, yee and the walles of Babylon shall fall.
Jeremiah 51:45 O my people, come out of Babylon, that euery man maye saue his lyfe, from the fearfull wrath of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 51:46 Be not faynte herted, and feare not at euery rumoure that shalbe herde in the lande: for euery yeare bringeth new tydinges, yee straunge wyckednes and lordshyppe.
Jeremiah 51:47 And lo, the tyme commeth that I wyll vyset the ymages of Babylon, and the whole lande shalde confounded, yee and her slayne shall lye in the myddest of her.
Jeremiah 51:48 Heauen and earth with all that is therin, shall reioyce ouer Babylon, when the destroyers shall come vpon her from the North, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 51:49 Like as Babylon hath beaten downe and slayne many out of Israell, so shall there fall many, and be slayne in all her kyngdome.
Jeremiah 51:50 Ye that haue escaped the swearde, haste you, stande not styll, remembre the Lorde afarre of: and thincke vpon Ierusalem,
Jeremiah 51:51 for we were ashamed to heare the blasphemyes: oure faces were couered with shame, because the straung aleauntes came into the Sanctuarye of the Lorde.
Jeremiah 51:52 Wherfore beholde (sayeth the Lorde) the tyme commeth, that I will vyset the ymages of Babylon, and thorow the whole lande they shall mourne and fall.
Jeremiah 51:53 Though Babylon clymmed vp into heauen, & kepte her power an hye: yet shal I sende her destroyers, sayeth the Lorde.
Jeremiah 51:54 A pyteous crye shall be hearde from Babylon, and a greate misery from the lande of the Caldees:
Jeremiah 51:55 when the Lorde destroyeth them, and when he dryueth out the hye stomacke & proude boastyng, wherwith they haue bene as furyous as the waues of greate water floudes, and made greate crakes with their wordes.
Jeremiah 51:56 For the destroyers shall come vpon her (euen vpon Babylon) whyche shall take her worthyes, & breake their bowes: for God is dysposed to auenge hym selfe vpon them, and suffycyentlye to recompence them.
Jeremiah 51:57 Yee (sayeth the Lorde) I will make their Princes their wyse men, their chefe rulers & all their worthyes, droncken: so that they shall slepe an euerlastynge slepe, and neuer wake: Thus sayeth the Kynge, whose name is the Lorde of hostes.
Jeremiah 51:58 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: The thycke wall of Babylon shalbe broken, & her proude gates shalbe brent vp. And the thynge that the Gentyles and the people haue wrought with greate trauayle and laboure, shal come to naught and be consumed in the fyre.
Jeremiah 51:59 Thys is the charge that Ieremy gaue vnto Saraiah the sonne of Neriah, the sonne of Maasiah, when he went towarde Babylon with Zedekiah the kynge of Iuda, in the .iiij. yeare of his raigne. Now this Saraiah was a peaceable Prince.
Jeremiah 51:60 Ieremye wrote in a boke all the mysery that shulde come vpon Babylon, yee and all these sermons that be wrytten agaynst Babylon,
Jeremiah 51:61 and gaue Saraiah thys charge: When thou commest vnto Babylon se that thou reade all these wordes,
Jeremiah 51:62 and saye: O Lorde, thou art determed to rote out thys place, so that nether people ner catell shall dwell there eny more but to lie waste for eu
Jeremiah 51:63 and when thou hast redde out the boke, bynde a stone to it, and cast it in the myddest of Euphrates,
Jeremiah 51:64 and saye: Euen thus shall Babylon syncke, & be thrust downe with the burthen of trouble, that I will bringe vpon her: so that she shall neuer come vp agayne. Thus farre are the preachinges of Ieremy.

CHAPTER: 52

Jeremiah 52:1 Zedekiah was .xxi. yeare olde, when he was made kynge, & he raigned .xi. yeare in Ierusalem. His mothers name was Hamistal, Ieremies daughter of Lobnah.
Jeremiah 52:2 He liued wickedly before the Lorde euen as Iehoakim dyd.
Jeremiah 52:3 Wherfore the Lorde was angrie at Ierusalem and Iuda, so longe tyll he had cast them out of his presence. And Zedekiah fell from the kynge of Babylon.
Jeremiah 52:4 But in the .ix. yeare of his raygne, In the tenth Moneth, the tenth daye of the Moneth it happened, that Nabuchodonozor the Kynge of Babylon wyth all hys Hoste came before Ierusalem, and beseged it, and made them bulworckes rounde aboute it.
Jeremiah 52:5 And this beseging of the cytye endured vnto the .xi. yeare of kyng Zedekiah.
Jeremiah 52:6 And in the fourth Moneth, the .ix. daye of the Moneth, there was so greate honger in the cytye, that there were no more vytayles for the people of the lande.
Jeremiah 52:7 So all the soudyers brake awaye, & fled out of the cytie by myght thorow the waye of the porte betwene the two walles by the kynges garden. Now the Caldees had compassed the cytie rounde aboute, yet wente these men their waye to warde the wyldernesse.
Jeremiah 52:8 And so the Caldees folowed vpon them, & toke Zedekiah the kynge in the felde of Ierycho, when his hoost was runne from him.
Jeremiah 52:9 So they caryed the kynge awaye presoner to Reblath, vnto the kynge of Babylon in the lande of Hemath, where he gaue iudgement vpon hym.
Jeremiah 52:10 The kynge of Babylon also caused Zedekiahs sonnes to be slayne before his face, yee & put all the princes of Iuda to death at Reblath.
Jeremiah 52:11 Moreouer he put out the eyes of Zedekiah, caused hym to be bounde with chynes, to be caried vnto Babylon: and lett hym lye in preson, tyll he dyed.
Jeremiah 52:12 Now the tenth daye of the fyfth Moneth in the .ix. yeare of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon, Nabusaradan the chefe captayne & the kynge of Babylons seruantes came vnto Ierusalem,
Jeremiah 52:13 & brent vp the house of the Lorde. He brent vp also the kynges palaces, all the houses & all the gorgeous buildinges in Ierusalem.
Jeremiah 52:14 And the whole Hoost of the Caldees that were with the chefe Captayne, brake downe all the walles of Ierusalem rounde aboute.
Jeremiah 52:15 As for the poore people and soch folcke as yet was left in the cytie, which also were fallen to the Kynge of Babylon, yee and what people as yet remayned: Nabuzaradan the chefe Captayne caryed them awaye presoners.
Jeremiah 52:16 But the poore people of the countre, dyd Nabuzaradan the chefe Captayne leaue in the lande, to occupye the vyneyardes & feldes.
Jeremiah 52:17 The Caldees also brake the brasen pylers that were in the house of the Lorde, yee the seate & the brasen lauer that was in the house of the Lorde and caryed all the metall of them vnto Babylon.
Jeremiah 52:18 They toke awaye also the Cauldrons, shouels, fleshe hokes, sprynklers, spones, and all the brasen vessell that was occupyed in the seruyce:
Jeremiah 52:19 with the basens, colepannes, sprynklers, pottes, candelstyckes, spones and cuppes: wherof some were of golde, and some of syluer.
Jeremiah 52:20 The chefe Captaynes toke also the two pylers, the lauer the .xij. brasen bullockes that stode vnder the seate, which Kyng Salomon made in the house of the Lord: & all the vessel conteyned so moch metall, that it myght not be weyed.
Jeremiah 52:21 For euery piler was .xviij. cubytes hye, & the rope that wente aboute it, was .xij. cubytes, and foure fyngers thycke & rounde:
Jeremiah 52:22 Now vpon the rope were brasen knoppes, & euerye knoppe was fyue cubytes hye: & vpon the knoppes weere whopes, & pomgranates rounde about of cleane brasse.
Jeremiah 52:23 After thys maner were both the pylers fashyoned wyth the pomgranates, wherof there were an hundreth & .xcvi. which hanged vpon the whoopes rounde aboute.
Jeremiah 52:24 The chefe Captayne also toke Sariah the hye preste, & Sophoniah that was chefe next hym, & the thre kepers of the treasury.
Jeremiah 52:25 He toke out the cytie a chamberlayne whyche was a captayne of the souldyers, and seuen men that were the kynges seruauntes, whiche were founde in the cytie: and Sepher a captayne that vsed to muster the men of warre: with .lx. men of the countre that were taken in the cytie.
Jeremiah 52:26 These Nabuzaradan the chefe captayne toke, and caried them to the kyng of Babylon vnto Reblath:
Jeremiah 52:27 and the Kynge of Babylon caused them to be put to death at Reblath in the lande of Hemath. And thus Iuda was ledde awaye captyue, out of hys owne lande.
Jeremiah 52:28 Thys is the summe of the people, whom Nabuchodonosor ledde awaye captyue. In the seuenth yeare of hys reygne, he caried awaye of the Iewes, thre thousand and thre and twenty.
Jeremiah 52:29 In the .xviij. yeare. Nabuchodonosor caryed awaye from Ierusalem eight hundreth and .xxxij. personnes.
Jeremiah 52:30 In the .xxiij. yeare of Nabuchodonosor Nabuzaradan the chefe Captayne, toke awaye seuen hundreth .xlv. Iewes presoners. The whole summe of all the presoners, is foure thousand and syxe hundreth.
Jeremiah 52:31 In the .xxxvij. yeare after that Iehoacin the kynge of Iuda was caryed awaye in the .xxv. daye of the .xij. Moneth, Euilmerodach Kynge of Babylon (the same yeare that he reigned) gaue Iehoacin the kyng of Iuda his pardon, and let him out of preson,
Jeremiah 52:32 and spake louyngly to hym. And set his trone aboue the trones of the other Kynges that were wyth hym in Babylon.
Jeremiah 52:33 He chaunged also the clothes of his preson, yee and he ate with him al hys lyfe longe.
Jeremiah 52:34 And he had a contynuall lyuynge geuen hym of the Kynge of Babylon, euery daye a certayne thynge alowed hym all the dayes of hys lyfe, vntyll he dyed.

BOOK: Lamentations

CHAPTER: 1

Lamentations 1:1 Aleph. Alas, how sytteth the citie so desolate, that some tyme was full of people? How is she become lyke a wedowe, whiche was the ladye of all nacyons? How is she brought vnder trybute, that ruled all landes.
Lamentations 1:2 Beth. She wepeth sore in the nyght, so that the teares runne downe her chekes: for amonge all her louers, there is none that geueth her eny comforte: ye her nexte frendes abhorre her, and are become her enemyes.
Lamentations 1:3 Gymel. Iuda is taken presoner, because she was defiled: and for seruynge so manye straunge goddes, she dwelleth now amonge the Heythen. She fyndeth no rest, all they that persecuted her, toke her, & so she dwelleth amonge her enemyes.
Lamentations 1:4 Daleth. The streates of Sion mourne, because no man commeth more to the solempne feastes. All her gates are desolate, her prestes make lamentacyon, her maydens are carefulll, and she her selfe is in greate heuynesse.
Lamentations 1:5 He. Her enemyes are fallen vpon her head, & haue put her to shame: because the Lord hath chastened her for her greate wickednes: her children are ledde awaye captiue before their enemye.
Lamentations 1:6 Vau. All the bewtie of the daughter of Syon is awaye, her princes are become like wethers that fynd no pastur. They are driuen away befor their enemye, so that they haue no more power.
Lamentations 1:7 Zain. Now doth Ierusalem remembre the tyme of her misery & dysobedience, yee the ioye and pleasure that she hath had in tymes past: seynge her people is brought downe thorow the power of their enemie, & there is no man for to helpe her: her enemies stande lokinge at her & laugh her Sabbath dayes to scorne.
Lamentations 1:8 Heth. Ierusalem synned euer more & more, therfore is she come in decaye. All they that had her in honour, despyse her: for they haue sene her fylthynesse. Yee she sygheth, and is a shamed of her selfe.
Lamentations 1:9 Teth. Her skyrtes are defyled, she remembred not what wolde folowe: therfore is her fall so greate, and there is no man to comforte her. O Lord, consydre my trouble, for myne enemye hath the vpperhande.
Lamentations 1:10 Iod. The enemye hath put his hande to all the precious thynges that she had, yee euen before her eyes came the Heathen in & out of the Sanctuarye: whom thou (neuertheles) hast forbydden to come within thy congregacyon.
Lamentations 1:11 Caph. All her people seke their bred wyth heuynes, & loke what precyous thynge euery man hath, that geueth he for meate, to saue his lyfe. Consydre, O Lorde, and se, how vyle I am become.
Lamentations 1:12 Lamed. O ye all that go fore by, beholde and se, yf there be eny sorow like vnto myne, wherwith the Lord hath troubled me, in the daye of his fearefull wrath.
Lamentations 1:13 Mem. From aboute hath he sent downe a fyre into my bones and chastened me: he hath layed a net for my fete, and throwen me wyde open: he hath made me desolate, so that I must euer be mournynge.
Lamentations 1:14 Nun. The yocke of my transgressyon is come at the last, with his hande hath he taken it vp, & put it aboute my neck. My strength is gone: the Lorde hath delyuered me in to those handes, wherout I can not quyte my selfe.
Lamentations 1:15 Samech. The Lorde hath destroyed all the mightie men, that were in me. He hath proclamed a feast, to slaughter all my best men. The Lord hath troden downe the daughter of Iuda, like as it were in wyne presse.
Lamentations 1:16 Ain. Therfore do I wepe, & myne eyes gusshe oute of water: for the comforter that shulde quycken me, is farre fro me. My chyldren are dryuen awaye, for why? the enemie hath gotten the ouer hande.
Lamentations 1:17 Phe. Sion casteth out her handes, and there is no man to conforte her. The Lord hath layed the enemyes rounde aboute Iacob, and Ierusalem is as it were a menstruous woman, in the myddest of them.
Lamentations 1:18 Zade. The Lorde is ryghtuous, for I haue prouoked his contenaunce vnto anger. O take hede all ye people, and consydre my heuynes: My maydens and my younge men are led awaye into captyuytye.
Lamentations 1:19 Koph. I called for my louers (but they begyled me) for my Prestes and councelers, but they peryshed: euen whyle they sought for meate, to saue their lyues.
Lamentations 1:20 Res. Consydre (O Lorde) how I am troubled, my wombe is dysquyeted, my herte turneth about in me, and I am full of heuynes. The swearde hurteth me without, and within I am lyke vnto death.
Lamentations 1:21 Sin. They heare my mournynge, but there is none that wyll comforte me. All myne enemyes haue hearde of my trouble, & are glad therof, because thou hast done it. But thou shalt brynge forth the tyme, when they also shalbe lyke vnto me.
Lamentations 1:22 Thau. From the shall come all their aduersytye: thou shalt plucke them awaye euen as thou hast plucked me, because of all my wyckednes. For my sorowe is very greate, and my herte is heuy.

CHAPTER: 2

Lamentations 2:1 Aleph. Alas, how hath the Lorde darkened the daughter of Syon so sore in hys wrath? As for the honour of Israel, he hath casten it downe from heauen: How happeneth it, that he remembred not hys owne fote stole when he was angrye?
Lamentations 2:2 Beth. The Lorde hath cast downe all the glorye of Iacob without any fauoure: all the stronge places of the daughter Iuda hath he broken in his wrath, and thorowen them downe to the grounde: her kyngdome & her Princes hath he suspended.
Lamentations 2:3 Gymel. In the wrath of his indygnacyon he hath broken all the horne of Israel: he hath withdrawen his ryght hande from the enemye: yee a flame of fyre is kyndled in Iacob, and hath consumed vp all rounde aboute.
Lamentations 2:4 Daleth. Ie hath bent hys bowe lyke an enemye, he hath fastened his ryght hande as an aduersarye: and euerye thynge that was pleasaunt to se, he hath smyten it downe. He hath poured out hys wrath lyke a fyre, into the tabernacle of the daughter of Syon.
Lamentations 2:5 He. The Lorde is become lyke as it were an enemye, he hath cast downe Israell & all hys places: yee all his stronge holdes hath he destroyed, & fylled the daughter of Iuda wyth moch sorow and heuynesse.
Lamentations 2:6 Vau. Her tabernacle (which was lyke a garden of pleasure) hath he destroyed: her hye solempne feastes hath he put downe. The Lorde hath brought it so to passe, that the hye solempne feastes & Sabbathes in Sion, are cleane forgotten. In his heuy displeasure hath he made the kynge and prestes to be despysed.
Lamentations 2:7 Zain. The Lorde hath forsaken hys owne aulter, and is wroth with his owne Sanctuary, and hath geuen the walles of their towres in to the handes of the enemye. Their enemyes made a noyse in the house of the Lorde, as it had bene in a solempne feast daye.
Lamentations 2:8 Heth. The Lorde thought to breake downe the walles of the daughter Sion, he spred out his lyne, & drewe not in his hande, tyll he had destroyed them. Therfore mourne the turrettes and the broken walles together.
Lamentations 2:9 Teth. Her portes are casten downe to the grounde, her barres are broken and smytten in sonder: her kynge & prynces are caried awaye to the Gentyles. They haue nether lawe ner Prophetes, ner yet eny visyon from the Lorde.
Lamentations 2:10 Iod. The Senatours of the daughter Syon syt vpon the grounde in sylence: they haue strowed asshes vpon their heades, and gyrded them selues with sack cloth. The maydens of Ierusalem hange downe their heades to the grounde.
Lamentations 2:11 Caph. Myne eyes begynne to fayle me thorowe wepyng, my body is disquieted, my leuer is poured vpon the earth, for the greate hurte of my people, seynge the chyldren and babes dyd swowne in the stretes of the cytie.
Lamentations 2:12 Lamed. Euen when they spake to their mothers: where is meate and dryncke? for whyle they so sayde, they fell downe in the stretes of the cytye, lyke as they had bene wounded, and some dyed in their mothers bosome.
Lamentations 2:13 Mem. What shall I saye of the, O thou daughter Ierusalem, to whom shall I lycken the? To whom shall I compare the, O thou daughter Sion, to conforte the with all? Thy hurte is lyke a many see, who maye heale the?
Lamentations 2:14 Nun. Thy prophetes haue loked out vayne and folish thinges for the, they haue not shewed the of thy wickednesse, to kepe the from captyuite: but haue ouerladen the, and thorowe falshed scatred the abrode.
Lamentations 2:15 Samech. All they that go by the, clappe their handes at the: hissynge and waggynge their heades vpon the daughter Ierusalem, and saye: is this the cytie that man call so fayre, wherin the whole lande reioyseth?
Lamentations 2:16 Ain. All thyne enemyes gape vpon the, whisperynge and bytynge their teth, sayinge: let vs deuoure, for the tyme that we loked for, is come: we haue founde and sene it.
Lamentations 2:17 Phe The Lord hath fullfylled the thynge, that he was purposed to do: and perfourmed that he had dewysed longe a go: he hath destroyed and not spared. He hath caused thyne aduersary to triumphe ouer the, & set vp the horne of thyne enemye.
Lamentations 2:18 Zade. Let thyne hert crye vnto the Lorde, O thou cytie of the daughter Sion: let thy teares runne downe lyke a ryuer daye & night: rest not, & let not the aple of thine eye leaue of.
Lamentations 2:19 Koph. Stande vp and make thy prayer in the first watch of the nyght, poure oute thyne herte lyke water before the Lord: lyft vp thyne handes, for the lyues of thy yonge chyldren, that dye of honger in the stretes.
Lamentations 2:20 Res. Behold, O Lord, and consydre, why hast thou gathered me vp so cleane? Shall the wemen then eate their owne fruyte, euen chyldren of a spanne longe? Shall the prestes and prophetes be slayne thus in the Sanctuarye of the Lorde?
Lamentations 2:21 Sin. Yonge & olde lye behynde the stretes vpon the grounde, my maydens & yonge men are slayne wyth the swearde: whom thou in the daye of thy wrathfull indignacyon haste put to death: yee euen thou hast put them to death, and not spared them.
Lamentations 2:22 Thau. My neyghbours that are rounde aboute me, hast thou called, as it were to a feast daye: so that in the daye of the Lordes wrath none escaped, nether was eny left behinde. Those that I had brought vp and noryshed, hath myne enemy destroyed.

CHAPTER: 3

Lamentations 3:1 Aleph. I am the man, that (thorowe the rodd of hys wrath) haue experyence of mysery.
Lamentations 3:2 He droue me forth, and led me: yee into darcknesse, but not in to lyght.
Lamentations 3:3 Agaynst me onely he turneth hys hande, and layeth it euer vpon me.
Lamentations 3:4 Beth. My flesh & my skynne hath he made olde, and my bones hath he brused.
Lamentations 3:5 He hath buylded rounde aboute me, & closed me in wyth gall and trauayle.
Lamentations 3:6 He hath set me in darcknesse, as they that be deed for euer.
Lamentations 3:7 Gymel. He hath so hedged me in, that I can not get out, and hath layed heuy lynckes vpon me.
Lamentations 3:8 Though I crye and call piteously, yet heareth he not my prayer.
Lamentations 3:9 He hath stopped vp my wayes wyth foure squared stones, and made my pathes croked.
Lamentations 3:10 Daleth. He layeth wayte for me lyke a Bere, & as a lyon in a hole.
Lamentations 3:11 He hath marred my wayes, and broken me in peces, he hath layed me waste altogether
Lamentations 3:12 He hath bent his bowe, and made me as it were a marck to shutte at.
Lamentations 3:13 He. The arowes of his quyuer hath he shot, euen into my reynes.
Lamentations 3:14 I am laughed to scorne of al my people, they make songes vpon me all the daye longe.
Lamentations 3:15 He hath fylled me with bytternesse, and geuen me wormwod to dryncke.
Lamentations 3:16 Vau. He hath smytten my teth in peces, & rolled me in the dust.
Lamentations 3:17 He hath put my soule out of rest, I forget all good thynges.
Lamentations 3:18 I thought in my selfe: I am vndone, there is no hope for me in the Lorde.
Lamentations 3:19 Zain. O remembre yet my mysery & my trouble the wormwod and the gall.
Lamentations 3:20 Yee thou shalt remembre them, for my soule melteth awaye in me.
Lamentations 3:21 Whyle I consydre these thynges in my hert, I get a hope agayne.
Lamentations 3:22 Heth. Namely, that the mercyes of the Lord are not cleane gone, and that hys louynge kyndnesse ceasseth not.
Lamentations 3:23 His faythfulnes is greate, and renueth it selfe as the mournynge.
Lamentations 3:24 The Lorde is my porcyon, sayeth my soule therfore wyll I hope in hym.
Lamentations 3:25 Teth. O how good is the Lord vnto them, that put their truste in him, & to the soule that seketh after him?
Lamentations 3:26 O how good is it with stylnesse to wate & tarye, for the health of the Lorde?
Lamentations 3:27 O how good is it for a man, to take the yock vpon hym from hys youth vp.
Lamentations 3:28 Iod. He sytteth alone, he holdeth hym still, and dwelleth quyetly by him selfe?
Lamentations 3:29 He layeth his face vpon the earth, yf (percase) there happen to be eny hope.
Lamentations 3:30 He offreth hys cheke to the smyter, he wyl be content with reproues.
Lamentations 3:31 Caph. For the Lorde wyll not forsake for euer.
Lamentations 3:32 But though he do cast of, yet accordynge to the multitude of hys mercyes, he receyueth to grace agayne.
Lamentations 3:33 For he doeth not plage, & cast out the chyldren of men from his herte.
Lamentations 3:34 Lamed. To treade all the presoners of the earth vnder hys fete.
Lamentations 3:35 To moue the iudgement of man before the most hyghest.
Lamentations 3:36 To condemne a man in hys cause: The Lorde hath no pleasure in soche thynges.
Lamentations 3:37 Mem. What is he then that sayeth: there shuld somethynge be done without the Lordes commaundement:
Lamentations 3:38 Out of the mouth of the mooste Hyghest goeth not euell and good?
Lamentations 3:39 Wherfore then murmureth the lyuynge man? let hym murmure at hys owne synne.
Lamentations 3:40 Nun. Let vs loke well vpon oure owne wayes, and remembre oure selues, and turne agayne to the Lorde.
Lamentations 3:41 Let vs lyft vp oure hertes with oure handes vnto the Lorde that is in heauen.
Lamentations 3:42 We haue bene dyssemblers, and haue offended, wylt thou therfore not be intreated?
Lamentations 3:43 Samech. Thou hast couered vs in thy wrath, & persecuted vs, thou hast slayne vs wythout any fauoure.
Lamentations 3:44 Thou hast hyd thy selfe in a cloude, that oure prayer shulde not go thorow.
Lamentations 3:45 Thou hast made vs outcastes, and to be despysed amonge the Heathen.
Lamentations 3:46 Ain. All oure enemyes gape vpon vs.
Lamentations 3:47 Feare and snare is come vpon vs, yee despyte and destruccyon.
Lamentations 3:48 Whole riuers of water gushe out of myne eyes, for the greate hurte of my people.
Lamentations 3:49 Phe Myne eyes runne, and can not ceasse, for there is no rest.
Lamentations 3:50 O Lorde, when wylt thou loke downe from heauen and consydre?
Lamentations 3:51 Myne eye breaketh my herte, because of all the daughters of my cyte.
Lamentations 3:52 Zade. Myne enemyes hunted me out sharpely, lyke a byrde, yee and that without a cause
Lamentations 3:53 They haue put downe my life into a pitte and layed a stone vpon me.
Lamentations 3:54 They poured water vpon my head, then thought I: now am I vndone.
Lamentations 3:55 Koph. I called vpon thy name, O Lorde, out of the depe pytte.
Lamentations 3:56 Thou hast herde my voyce, and hast not turned awaye thine eares fro my syghinge & cryenge.
Lamentations 3:57 Thou hast enclyned thy self vnto me, when I called vpon the, and haste sayde: feare not.
Lamentations 3:58 Res. Thou (O Lorde) hast mayntened the cause of my soule, and hast redemed my lyfe.
Lamentations 3:59 O Lorde, thou hast sene my blasphemers take thou my cause vpon the.
Lamentations 3:60 Thou hast well consydred how they go about to do me harme, and that all their councels are agaynst me.
Lamentations 3:61 Sin. Thou hast herde their despytefull wordes (O Lorde) yee and all their ymaginacyons agaynst me.
Lamentations 3:62 The lippes of myne enemyes, and their deuyces that they take agaynst me, all the daye longe.
Lamentations 3:63 Thou seyst also their syttinge downe and their rysinge vp, they make their songes of nothinge but of me.
Lamentations 3:64 Thau. Rewarde them (O Lorde) accordynge to the workes of their handes.
Lamentations 3:65 Geue them the thynge, that their owne herte is afraied of: euen thy curse.
Lamentations 3:66 Persecute them (O Lorde) with thyne indygnacyon, and rote them out from vnder the heauen.

CHAPTER: 4

Lamentations 4:1 Aleph. O how is the golde become so dymme? How is the goodly coloure of it so sore chaunged? and the stones of the Sanctuarye thus scatred in the corner of euery strete?
Lamentations 4:2 Beth. The chyldren of Syon that were alwaye in honoure, & clothed with the most precious golde: how are they now becomme lyke the erthen vessels whych be made wyth the potters hande,
Lamentations 4:3 Gymel. The Lamyes geue their yonge ones suck with bare brestes: but the daughter of my people is cruell, and dwelleth in the wyldernesse: lyke the Eltriches.
Lamentations 4:4 Daleth. The tonges of the suckyng chyldren, cleue to the rofe of their mouthes for very thyrste. The yonge chyldren aske bred, but there is noman, that geueth it them.
Lamentations 4:5 He. They that were wonte to fayre delicatly, peryshe in the streates: they that a fore were brought vp in purple, make now moche of donge.
Lamentations 4:6 Dau. The synne of the daughter of my people is be come greater then the wyckednesse of Sodome, that sodenly was destroyed, & not taken with handes.
Lamentations 4:7 Zain. Herabsteyners (or Nazarees) were whyter then the snowe or mylke: their coloure was fresh read as the Corall, their beutie lyke the Saphyre.
Lamentations 4:8 Heth. But now their faces are very black: In so moche, that thou shuldest not knowe them in the streates. Their skynne cleueth to their bones, It is wythered, & become lyke a drye stock.
Lamentations 4:9 Teth. They that be slayne with the swearde, are happier then soch as dye of honger, and perishe awaye famyshyng for the fruites of the felde.
Lamentations 4:10 Iod. The wemen (which of nature are pitieful) haue sodden their owne children with their handes that they might be their meate, in the miserable destruccion of the daughter of my people.
Lamentations 4:11 Caph. The Lorde hath perfourmed hys heuy wrath: he hath poured out the furiousnes of hys dyspleasure. He hath kyndled a fyre in Sion, which hath consumed the foundacions therof.
Lamentations 4:12 Lamed. Nether the kinges of the earth, ner all the inhabitours of the worlde, wolde haue beleued that the enemie & aduersarye shulde haue come in at the gates of the cytie of Hierusalem.
Lamentations 4:13 Mem. Whiche neuertheles is come to passe for the synnes of her prophetes, and for the wyckednes of her Prestes that haue shed innocentes bloude with in her.
Lamentations 4:14 Nun. So that these blynde men wente stomblynge in the streates, & stayned them selues with bloude, whiche els wolde touche no bloudy cloth.
Lamentations 4:15 Samech. But they cryed vnto euerye man: flee the staynyng, awaye, get you hence touch it not. Yee (sayde they) ye muste be brent, ye muste dwell amonge the Gentiles, and byde no longer here.
Lamentations 4:16 Ain. The countenaunce of the Lorde hath banished them, and shall neuer loke more vpon them: For they them selues nether regarded the prestes, not pytied their elders.
Lamentations 4:17 Phe. Wherfore yet oure eyes fayle vs, whyle we loke for vayne helpe: seynge we be euer wayting vpon a people, that can do vs no good.
Lamentations 4:18 Zade. They laye so sharpe waite for vs, that we can not go safe vpon the streates: for our ende is come, oure dayes are fulfylled, oure ende is here.
Lamentations 4:19 Koph. Oure persecuters are swyfter then the Aegles of the ayre, they folowed vpon vs ouer the mountaynes, and layed wayte for vs in the wildernesse.
Lamentations 4:20 Res. The verye breth of oure mouth: euen the anoynted Lorde him self shalbe taken in oure synnes, of whom we saye: Vnder his shadowe we shalbe preserued amonge the Heythen.
Lamentations 4:21 Sin. And thou (O daughter Edom) that dwellest in the lande of Huz, be glad and reioyce: for the cuppe shall come vnto the also, which whan thou soppest of thou shalt be droncken.
Lamentations 4:22 Thau. Thy sinne is well punished (O thou daughter Sion) he shall not suffre the to be caryed awaye eny more. But thy wyckednesse (O daughter Edom) shall he vyset, and for thy synnes sake, he shall lede the in to captiuite.

CHAPTER: 5

Lamentations 5:1 Call to remembraunce (O Lorde) what we haue suffred, consydre and se oure confusyon.
Lamentations 5:2 Oure enherytaunce is turned to the straungers, and oure houses to the aleauntes.
Lamentations 5:3 We are become carefull and fatherlesse, and oure mothers are as the wydowes.
Lamentations 5:4 We are fayne to drinke oure owne water for money, and oure owne wod muste we bye wyth moneye.
Lamentations 5:5 Oure nec are vnder persecucyon, we are weery, and haue no rest.
Lamentations 5:6 A fore tyme we yelded oure selues to the Egypcians, and now to the Assiryans, onely that we myght haue bred ynough.
Lamentations 5:7 Oure fathers (whiche now are gone) haue synned, & we must beare their wyckednesse.
Lamentations 5:8 Seruauntes haue the rule of vs, & no man delyuereth vs out of their handes.
Lamentations 5:9 We must gett oure lyuynge with the parell of oure lyues because of the drouth of the wyldernesse.
Lamentations 5:10 Oure skynne is as it had bene brent in an ouen, for very sore honger.
Lamentations 5:11 The wyues are raueshed in Syon, and the maydens in the cytyes of Iuda.
Lamentations 5:12 The prynces are hanged vp wyth the hande of the enemyes, they haue not spared the olde sage men,
Lamentations 5:13 they haue taken yonge mens lyues from them, and the boyes are hanged vp vpon trees.
Lamentations 5:14 The elders syt no more vnder the gates, and the yonge men vse no more playeng of Musyke.
Lamentations 5:15 The ioye of oure herte is gone, oure merye quere is turned into mournynge.
Lamentations 5:16 The garlande of oure head is fallen: alas, that euer we synned so sore.
Lamentations 5:17 Therfore oure herte is full of heuynesse, and oure eyes dymme:
Lamentations 5:18 because of the hyll of Syon that is destroyed. In so moch, that the foxes runne vpon it.
Lamentations 5:19 But thou, O Lord, that remaynest for euermore, and thy seate world wythout ende:
Lamentations 5:20 wherfore wilt thou styll forgett vs, and forsake vs so longe?
Lamentations 5:21 O Lord, turne thou vs vnto the, and so shall we be turned. Renne our dayes as in olde tymes,
Lamentations 5:22 for thou hast banyshed vs now long ynough, & hast bene sore dyspleased at vs.

BOOK: Ezekiel

CHAPTER: 1

Ezekiel 1:1 It chaunsed in the .xxx. yeare the fifth daye of the .iiij. Moneth, that I was amonge the presoners by the ryuer of Cobar: where the heauens opened, and I sawe a vysyon of God.
Ezekiel 1:2 Now the fyfth daye of the moneth made out the fyfth yeare of Kyng Ioacins captiuytye.
Ezekiel 1:3 At the same tyme came the worde of the Lord vnto Ezechiel the sonne of Buzi the Preste, in the lande of the Caldees by the water of Cubar, where the hande of the Lorde came vpon hym.
Ezekiel 1:4 And I loked, and beholde a stormy wynde came out of the North with a greate cloude full of fyre, which with hys glystre lyghtned all rounde aboute. And in the myddest of the fyre it was all cleare,
Ezekiel 1:5 and as it were the lycknesse of foure beastes, which were fashyoned lyke a man: sauyng,
Ezekiel 1:6 that euery one had foure faces and foure wynges.
Ezekiel 1:7 Their legges were streyght, but their fete were lyke bullackes fete, and they glystered, as it had bene fayre scoured metall.
Ezekiel 1:8 Vnder their wynges vpon all the foure corners they had mens handes. Their faces and their wynges were towarde the foure corners:
Ezekiel 1:9 yet were the wynges so, that one euer touched another. When they wente, they turned them not aboute: but echone went streyght forwarde.
Ezekiel 1:10 Vpon the ryght syde of these foure, their faces were lyke the face of a man, and the face of a Lyon: But vpon the left syde, they had the face of an oxe, and the face of an Aegle.
Ezekiel 1:11 Their faces also and their wynges were spred out aboue: so that two winges of one touched euer two wynges of of another, and wyth the other they couered their body.
Ezekiel 1:12 Euery one when it wente, it wente streyght forwarde. Where as the sprete ledd them, thether they went, and turned not aboute in their goynge.
Ezekiel 1:13 The fashyon and countenaunce of the beastes was lyke hoate coales of fyre, euen as though burnynge cressettes had bene amonge the beastes: and the fyre gaue a glystre, and out of the fyre there wente lyghtenynge.
Ezekiel 1:14 When the beastes wente forwarde and backwarde, one wolde haue thought it had lyghtened.
Ezekiel 1:15 Now when I had well considered the beastes, I sawe a worcke of wheles vpon the earth with foure faces also lyke the beastes.
Ezekiel 1:16 The fashyon and worcke of the wheles was lyke the sea. The foure wheles were ioyned and made (to loke vpon) as it had bene one whele in another.
Ezekiel 1:17 When one wente forwarde, they wente all foure, and turned them not about in their goinge.
Ezekiel 1:18 They were large, greate and horryble to loke vpon. Their bodyes were full of eyes round about them all foure. When the beastes wente the wheles wente also with them:
Ezekiel 1:19 And when the beastes lyft them selues vp from the earth, the wheles were lyft vp also.
Ezekiel 1:20 Whether soeuer the sprete wente, thether wente they also, and the wheles were lyft vp, and folowed them: for the sprete of lyfe was in the wheles.
Ezekiel 1:21 When the beastes went forth, stode styll, or lyft them selues vp from the earth: then the wheles also wente, stode styll, and were lyft vp, for the breth of lyfe was in the wheles.
Ezekiel 1:22 Aboue ouer the heades of the beastes there was a fyrmament, whyche was fashyoned as it had bene of the most pure Chrystal, and that was spred out aboue vpon their heades:
Ezekiel 1:23 vnder the same fyrmament were their wynges layed abrode, one toward another, and two winges couered the body of euery beast.
Ezekiel 1:24 And when they wente forth, I hearde the noyse of their wynges, lyke the noyse of greate waters, as it had bene the voyce of the greate God, and a russhynge together as it were of an hoost of men. And when they stode styll, they let downe their wynges.
Ezekiel 1:25 Now when they stode styll, and had letten downe their wynges, it thondred in the fyrmament that was aboue their heades.
Ezekiel 1:26 Aboue the firmament that was ouer their heades, there was the fashyon of a seate, as it had bene made of Saphir. Vpon the seate there sat one lyke a man.
Ezekiel 1:27 I behelde hym, & he was lyke a cleare lyght, as it had bene all of fyre with in from hys loynes vpwarde. And beneth when I loked vpon him vnder the loynes, me thought he was lyke a shynyng fyre, that geueth lyght on euery syde. Yee the shyne & glystre that lyghtened rounde aboute,
Ezekiel 1:28 was lyke a raynbowe, which in a raynye daye appeareth in the cloudes. Euen so was the symylitude, wherin the glory of the Lorde appeared. When I sawe it, I fel vpon my face, and herkened vnto the voyce of him that spake.

CHAPTER: 2

Ezekiel 2:1 And then sayde he vnto me: Stande vp vpon thy fete (O thou sonne of man) and I wyll talke with the.
Ezekiel 2:2 And as he was commonynge with me, the sprete came in to me, and sett me vp vpon my fete: so that I marcked the thinge, that he sayde vnto me.
Ezekiel 2:3 And he sayde: Beholde, thou sonne of man: I wyll sende the to the chyldren of Israell, to those runnagates and obstynate people: for they haue taken parte agaynst me and are runne awaye fro me: both they and their forefathers vnto this daye.
Ezekiel 2:4 Yee I will sende the vnto a people that haue rough disages and styf stomackes: vnto whom thou shalt saye on this maner: This the Lorde God hym selfe hath spoken,
Ezekiel 2:5 that whether they be obedyent or no (for it is a frowarde housholde) they maye knowe yet that there hath bene a Prophet amonge them.
Ezekiel 2:6 Therfore (thou sonne of man) feare them not, nether be afrayed of their wordes: for they shall rebell agaynst the, and despyse the. Yee thou shalt dwell amonge scorpions: but feare not their wordes, be not abashed at their lokes, for it is a frowarde housholde.
Ezekiel 2:7 Se that thou speake my wordes vnto them, whether they be obedyent or not, for they are obstynate.
Ezekiel 2:8 Therfore, thou sonne of men, obey thou all thynges, that I saye vnto the, and be not thou styfnecked, lyke as they are a styfnecked housholde. Open thy mouth and eate that I geue the.
Ezekiel 2:9 So as I was lokynge vp, beholde, there was sent vnto me an hande, wherin was a closed boke:
Ezekiel 2:10 & the hande opened it before me, & it was wrytten within & wythout, full of carefull mournynges: alas, and wo.

CHAPTER: 3

Ezekiel 3:1 After this sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, eate that, whatsoeuer it be: yee eate that closed boke & go thy waye, and speak vnto the chyldren of Israel.
Ezekiel 3:2 So I opened my mouth, and he gaue me the boke for to eate,
Ezekiel 3:3 and sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, thy bely shall eate, and thy bowels shalbe fylled with the boke, that I geue the. Then dyd I eate the boke, and it was in my mouth sweter then hony.
Ezekiel 3:4 And he sayde vnto me: thou sonne of man, get the soone vnto the house of Israel, and shewe them the wordes, that I commaunde the:
Ezekiel 3:5 for I sende the not to the people that hath a straunge, vnknowne, or harde speache, but vnto the house of Israel:
Ezekiel 3:6 Not to many nacyons, which haue dyuerse speaches & harde languages, whose wordes thou vnderstandest not: Neuerthelesse: yf I sent the to those people, they wolde folowe the:
Ezekiel 3:7 But the house of Israel wyll not folowe the, for they wyll not folowe me: yee all the house of Israell haue styf foreheades and harde hertes.
Ezekiel 3:8 Beholde therfore, I wyll make thy face preuayle agaynst their faces, and harden thy foreheade agaynst their foreheades:
Ezekiel 3:9 so that thy foreheade shalbe harder then an Adamaunte or flynt stone: that thou mayeste feare them the lesse, and be lesse afrayed of them, for they are a frowarde housholde.
Ezekiel 3:10 He sayde moreouer vnto me: thou sonne of man, take dylygent hede wyth thyne eares, to the wordes that I speake vnto the, fasten them in thyne herte:
Ezekiel 3:11 and go to the presoners of thy people, speake vnto them, and saye on this maner: Thus the Lorde God hath spoken: whether ye heare, or heare not.
Ezekiel 3:12 Wyth that the sprete toke me vp. And I hearde the noyse of a greate russhynge and remouynge of the most blessed glory of the Lorde out of his place.
Ezekiel 3:13 I hearde also the noyse of the wynges of the beastes, that russhed one agaynst another, yee and the ratlynge of the wheles, that were by them, whyche russhynge and noyse was very greate.
Ezekiel 3:14 Now when the sprete toke me vp, and caried me awaye, I wente with an heuy and a sorowfull mynde, but the hande of the Lorde comforted me ryght soone.
Ezekiel 3:15 And so in the begynnynge of the moneth Abib, I came to the presoners, that dwelt by the water of Cobar, and remayned in that place, where they were: And so contynued I amonge them seuen dayes, beinge verye sory.
Ezekiel 3:16 And when the seuen dayes were expired, the Lord sayde vnto me:
Ezekiel 3:17 Thou sonne of man I haue made the a watchman vnto the house of Israell: therfore take good hede to the wordes, and geue them warnyng at my commaundement.
Ezekiel 3:18 If I sayde vnto the, concernynge the vngodly man: that (wythout doute) he muste dye, and thou geuest hym not warnynge, ner speakest vnto hym, that he maye turne from hys euell waye, and so to lyue: Then shalll the same vngodly man dye in hys owne vnryghtuousnes: but hys bloude wyll I requyre of thyne hande.
Ezekiel 3:19 Neuertheles, yf thou geue warnynge vnto the wycked, and he yet forsake not his vngodlynesse: then shall he dye in his owne wyckednesse, but thou hast discharged thy soule.
Ezekiel 3:20 Now yf a ryghtuous man go from his rightuousnesse, and do the thynge that is euell: I will laye a stomblynge blocke before hym, & he shall dye, because thou hast not geuen him warning: yee dye shall he in hys owne synne so that the vertue, which he dyd before, shall not be thought vpon: but hys bloude wyll I requyre of thyne hande.
Ezekiel 3:21 Neuerthelesse, yf thou exhortest the ryghtuous, that he synne not, & so the ryghtuous do not synne: then shall he lyue, because he hath receyued thy warnynge, and thou hast dyscharged thy soule.
Ezekiel 3:22 And there came the hand of the Lorde vpon me, and he sayde vnto me: Stande vp, and go into the felde, that I may there talke wyth the.
Ezekiel 3:23 So when I had rysen vp, and gone forth in to the felde: Beholde, the glory of the Lord stode there, lyke as I saw it afore, by the water of Cobar. Then fell I downe vpon my face,
Ezekiel 3:24 and the sprete came in to me, whych set me vp vpon my fete, & sayde thus vnto me: Go thy waye, and sparre thy self in thyne house.
Ezekiel 3:25 Beholde, (O thou sonne of man) there shall chaynes be brought for the, to bynde the withall, so that thou shalt not escape out of them.
Ezekiel 3:26 And I wyll make thy tunge cleue so to the rofe of thy mouth, that thou shalt be domme, and not be as a chyder wyth them: for it is an obstynate housholde.
Ezekiel 3:27 But when I speake vnto the, then open thy mouth, and saye: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: who so heareth, lett hym heare: who so wyll not, let hym leaue: for it is an obstynate housholde.

CHAPTER: 4

Ezekiel 4:1 Thou sonne of man: take a tylle stone, & laye it before the, and descrybe vpon it the cytie of Ierusalem,
Ezekiel 4:2 how it is beseged, how bulworckes & stronge dyches are grauen on euery syde of it: descrybe also tentes, and an hooste of men rounde aboute it.
Ezekiel 4:3 Moreouer, take an yron panne, and set it betwixte the and the cyte, insteade of an yron wall. Then set thy face towarde it, besege it, and laye ordynaunce agaynst it, to wynne it. This shalbe a token vnto the house of Israel.
Ezekiel 4:4 But thou shalt slepe vpon thy left syde, and laye the sinne of the house of Israell vpon the. Certayne dayes appoynted, thou shalt slepe vpon that syde, and beare their synnes.
Ezekiel 4:5 Neuerthelesse, I wyll appoynte the a tyme (to put of their sinnes) and the nombre of the dayes: Thre hundreth and .xc. dayes muste thou beare the wyckednesse of the house of Israell.
Ezekiel 4:6 When thou hast fulfylled these dayes lye downe agayne, and slepe vpon thy right syde .xl. dayes, and beare the synnes of the house of Iuda. A daye for a yeare, a daye (I saye) for a yeare, wyll I euer laye vpon the.
Ezekiel 4:7 Therfore set now thy face agaynst that beseged Ierusalem, and dyscouer thyne arme, that thou mayest prophecye agaynst it.
Ezekiel 4:8 Beholde, I wyll laye chaynes vpon the, that thou shalt not turne the frome one side to another, tyll thou haste ended the dayes of thy sege.
Ezekiel 4:9 Wherfore, take vnto the wheate, barlye beanes, growell sede, Millium and fitches: and put these together in a vessell, and make the loaues of bred therof, accordynge to the nombre of the dayes that thou must lye vpon thy side: that thou mayeste haue bred to eate, for thre hundreth and .xc. dayes.
Ezekiel 4:10 And the meate that thou eatest, shall haue a certayne wayght appoynted: namely twentye sicles euery daye. This apoynted meate shalt thou eate daylye, from the begynnynge to the ende.
Ezekiel 4:11 Thou shalt dryncke also a certayne measure of water: Namely, the syxte parte of an Hin shalt thou dryncke daylye from the begynnynge vnto the ende.
Ezekiel 4:12 Barlye cakes shalt thou eate, yet shalt thou fyrste stracke them ouer with mans donge, that they maye se it.
Ezekiel 4:13 And with that sayde the Lorde: Euen thus shall the chyldren of Israel eate their defiled bred in the myddest of the Gentyles, amonge whom I wyll scatre them.
Ezekiel 4:14 Then sayde I: Oh Lorde God. Beholde, my soule was yet neuer stayned: for fro my youth vp vnto this houre. I did neuer eate of a deed carcase, or of that whiche was slayne of wylde beastes, nether cam there euer eny vncleane flesh in my mouth.
Ezekiel 4:15 Wher vnto he answered me, and sayde Well than, I wyll graunte the to take cowes donge, for the donge of a man, and to strake the bred ouer with all, before them.
Ezekiel 4:16 And he sayde vnto me: Beholde thou sonne of man, I wyll mynishe all the prouisyon of bred in Ierusalem, so that they shall wepe theyr bred, and eate it with scarcenesse. But as for water, they shall haue a verye lytle measure therof, to dryncke.
Ezekiel 4:17 And when they haue nomore bred ner water, one shall be destroyed wyth another, and famyshe awaye for their wyckednesse.

CHAPTER: 5

Ezekiel 5:1 O thou sonne of man, take the then a sharpe knyfe, namely, a rasoure. Take that, & shaue the hearre of thy head and beerd: Then take the scoales and the waight, and deuyde the hearre a sunder.
Ezekiel 5:2 And burne the thirde parte therof in the fyre in the myddest of the cytie, & cut the other thirde parte in peces with a knyfe. As for the thirde parte that remayneth, cast it in the wynde, & then shewe the bare knyfe.
Ezekiel 5:3 Yet afterwarde take a lytle of the same, and bynde it in thy cote lappe.
Ezekiel 5:4 Then take a curtesy of it, and cast it in the myddest of the fyre: & burne it in the fyre. Out of the same fyre shall there goo a flame, vpon the whole house of Israell.
Ezekiel 5:5 Morouer, thus sayde the Lorde God: This same is Ierusalem. I sett her in the myddest of the Heathen & nacions: that are rounde aboute her,
Ezekiel 5:6 but she hath despysed my iudgmentes more then the Gentiles them selues, and broken my commaundementes more then the nacyons, that lye round aboute her: For they haue cast out myne ordinaunces, & not walcked in my lawes.
Ezekiel 5:7 Therfore, thus sayeth the Lord God: For so moch as ye with youre wickednesse farre exceade the Heathen, that dwell rounde aboute you: (For ye haue not walcked in my lawes, nether haue ye kepte myne ordinaunces)
Ezekiel 5:8 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God. I wyll also come vpon the, for in the myddest of the wyll I syt in iudgment, in the syght of the Heathen,
Ezekiel 5:9 and wyll handle the of soch a fashion, as I neuer dyd before, and as I neuer will do from that tyme forth, and that because of all thyne abhominacyons.
Ezekiel 5:10 For in the fathers shall be fayne to eate their owne sonnes, and the sonnes their owne fathers. Soch a courte will I kepe in the, & the whole remnaunt will I scatre in to all the wyndes.
Ezekiel 5:11 Wherfore as trulye as I lyue (sayeth the Lord God) seyng thou hast defiled my Sanctuary, with all maner of abhominacyons and with al thy shameful offences: For this cause will I also destroye the. Myne eye shall not ouer se the, nether will I spare the.
Ezekiel 5:12 One thirde parte within the, shall dye of the pestilence and of honger: Another thirde parte shall be slayne downe rounde aboute the, with the swearde: The other thirde parte that remayneth, will I scatre abroade towarde all the wyndes, and drawe out the swearde after them.
Ezekiel 5:13 Thus I wyll perfourme my indignacion & set my wrath agaynst them, and ease my selfe. So that when I haue fulfylled myne anger agaynst them, they shall knowe that I am the Lorde, whiche with a feruent glousye haue spoken it.
Ezekiel 5:14 Moreouer I wyll make the waste and abhorred, befor all the Heathen that dwell aboute the, & in the syght of all them, that go by the:
Ezekiel 5:15 so that when I punishe the in my wrath, in myne anger, & with the plage of my whote displeasure: thou shalt be a very abhominacion, shame, a gasynge & wondrynge stocke, amonge the Heathen that lye aboute the. Euen I the Lorde haue spoken it, and it shall come to passe,
Ezekiel 5:16 when I shute amonge them the perlous dartes of honger, which shalbe but death: Yee therfore shall I shute them, because I wyll destroye you I will encrease hunger, & mynishe all the prouisyon of bred amonge you.
Ezekiel 5:17 Plages and mysery wyll I sende you, yee and wylde beastes also to destroye you Pestilence & bloudshedynge shall come vpon you, and the swearde will I bringe ouer you. Euen I the Lorde, haue sayde it.

CHAPTER: 6

Ezekiel 6:1 And the worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 6:2 Thou sonne of man, turne thy face to the mountaynes of Israel, that thou mayest prophecie vnto them,
Ezekiel 6:3 & saye Heare the worde of the Lorde God, O ye mountaynes of Israell: Thus hath the Lorde God spoken to the mountaynes, hilles, valleyes and dales. Beholde, I wyll brynge a swearde ouer you, & destroye youre hye places:
Ezekiel 6:4 I wyll cast downe youre aulters, & breake downe youre temples. Youre slayne men wyll I laye before youre goddes,
Ezekiel 6:5 and the deed carcases of the chyldren of Israell wyll I caste before their ymages, youre bones will I destroye rounde aboute youre aulters,
Ezekiel 6:6 and dwellynge places. The cyties shalbe desolate, the hyllchapels layed waste: youre aulters destroyed, and broken: youre goddes caste downe and taken awaye, youre tempels layde eauen wyth the grounde, youre owne worckes cleane rote oute.
Ezekiel 6:7 Youre slayne men shall lye amonge you, that ye maye learne to knowe, how that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 6:8 Those that amonge you haue escaped the swearde, will I leaue amonge the Gentyles, for I wyll scatre you amonge the nacyons.
Ezekiel 6:9 And they that escape from you, shall thyncke vpon me amonge the Heathen, where they shalbe in captiuyte. As for that whorysh & vnfaythfull herte of theirs, wherwyth they runne awaye fro me, I wyll breake it: yee and put oute those eyes of theirs, that commytte fornicacyon with their Idols. Then shall they be ashamed, and displeased wyth their selues, for the wyckednesses & abhomynacions, which they haue done:
Ezekiel 6:10 and shall learne to knowe, how that it is not in vayne, that I the Lorde spake, to brynge soch mysery vpon them.
Ezekiel 6:11 The Lorde sayde moreouer vnto me: Smyte thyne handes together, and stampe wyth thay fete, & saye: Wo worth all the abhominacions and wickednesses of the house of Israel, for because of them, they shall perishe wyth the swearde, with honger & wyth pestilence.
Ezekiel 6:12 Who so is farre of, shall dye of the pestilence: he that is nye at hande, shall perish with the swearde: and the other that are beseged, shall dye of honger. Thus wyll I satisfye my wrothfull displeasure vpon them.
Ezekiel 6:13 And so shall ye learne to knowe, that I am the Lorde, when youre slayne men lye amonge youre goddes, and aboute youre aulters: vpon all hye hylles & toppes of mountaynes, amonge all grene trees, amonge all thycke okes: euen in the places, where they dyd sacrifyce to all their Idols.
Ezekiel 6:14 I wyll stretch myne hande oute vpon them, and wyll make the lande waste: So that it shall lye desolate and voyde, from the wyldernesse of Deblathah forth, thorow all their habitacyons: to learne them for to knowe, that I am the Lorde

CHAPTER: 7

Ezekiel 7:1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me on this maner:
Ezekiel 7:2 The I call, O thou sonne of man. Thus sayeth the Lorde God vnto the lande of Israell: The ende commeth, yee verely the ende commeth vpon all the foure corners of the earth.
Ezekiel 7:3 But now shall the ende come vpon the: for I wyll sende my wrath vpon the, and wyll punishe the accordynge to thy wayes, and rewarde the after all thy abhominacyons.
Ezekiel 7:4 Myne eye shall not ouerse the, nether will I spare the, but rewarde the accordynge to thy wayes, and declare thy abhomynacyons. Then shall ye knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 7:5 Thus sayeth the Lord God: Beholde, one mysery & plage shall come after anothr:
Ezekiel 7:6 the ende is here. The ende (I saye) that wayteth for the, is come all readye,
Ezekiel 7:7 the houre is come agaynst the, that dwellest in the lande. The tyme is at hande, the daye of sedicyon is hard by, and no glad tydynges vpon the mountaynes.
Ezekiel 7:8 Therfore, I will shortly poure out my sore displeasure ouer the, and fulfyll my wrath vpon the. I will iudge the after thy wayes, and recompence the all thy abhominacyons.
Ezekiel 7:9 Myne eye shall not ouerse the, nether will I spare the: but rewarde the after thy wayes, and shewe thy abhomynacions, to learne you for to knowe, how that I am the Lorde that smyteth.
Ezekiel 7:10 Beholde, the daye is here the daye is come, the houre is runne oute, the rodde florisheth, wylfulnesse waxeth grene,
Ezekiel 7:11 malicious violence is growne vp, and the vngodly waxen to a stafe. Yet shall there no complaynte be made for them, ner for the trouble that shall come of these thynges.
Ezekiel 7:12 The tyme commeth, the daye draweth nye: Who so byeth, lett hym not reioyce: he that selleth, let hym not be sory: for why. Trouble shall come in the myddeste of all reste:
Ezekiel 7:13 so that the seller shall not come agayne to the byer, for nether of them both shall lyue. For the vysion shall come so greatly ouer all, that it shall not be hyndered: No man also with his wickednesse shall be able to saue hys owne lyfe.
Ezekiel 7:14 The trompettes shall ye blowe and make you all ready, but no man shall goo to the battel, for I am wroth with all the whole multitude.
Ezekiel 7:15 The swearde shalbe wythout, pestilence and honger wythin: so that who so is in the felde, shalbe slayne with the swearde: and he that is in the cytie, shall perishe wyth honger and pestilence.
Ezekiel 7:16 And soche as escape and fle from amonge them, shall be vpon the hylles, lyke as the doues in the felde: euery one shalbe afrayed, because of his owne wickednesse.
Ezekiel 7:17 All handes shalbe let downe, and all knees shalbe weake as the water:
Ezekiel 7:18 they shall gyrde them selues with sacke clothe, feare shall fall vpon them. Their faces shalbe confounded, and their heades balde:
Ezekiel 7:19 their syluer shall lye in the stretes, and their golde shalbe despysed: Yee their siluer and golde maye not deliuer them, in the daye of the fearfull wrath of the Lorde. They shall not satysfye their hongry soules, nether fyll their emptye belyes therwith: For it is become their owne decaye thorowe their wickednes:
Ezekiel 7:20 because they made therof not only costly Ieweles for their pompe and pryde, but also abhomynable ymages and Idoles. For this cause wyll I make them to be abhorred.
Ezekiel 7:21 Moreouer, I will geue it into the handes of the straungers to be spoyled: and to the wycked, for to be robbed, and they shall destroye it.
Ezekiel 7:22 My face wyll I turne from them, my treasury shalbe defiled: for the theues shall go in to it, and suspende it.
Ezekiel 7:23 I wyll make clene ryddaunse, for the land is whole defiled with vnrightuous iudgement of innocent bloud & the citie is full of abhomynacyons.
Ezekiel 7:24 Wherfore, I wyll brynge the most cruell tyrauntes from amonge the Heathen, to take theyr houses in possession. I wil make the pompe of the proude to ceasse, and they shall take in theyr sanctuary.
Ezekiel 7:25 When thys trouble commeth they shall seke peace, but they shal haue none.
Ezekiel 7:26 One myschefe & sorowe shall folowe another, and one rumoure shall come after another: Then shall they seke visions in vayne at theyr Prophetes. The lawe shalbe gone from the Priestes, and wysdom from the elders.
Ezekiel 7:27 The king shal mourne, the Princes shalbe clothed with heuinesse, and the handes of the people in the lande shall tremble for feare. I wyll do vnto them after theyr owne wayes, and according to theyr owne iudgementes wyll I iudge them, to learne them for to knowe, that I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 8

Ezekiel 8:1 It happened, that in the syxte yeare the fyfth daye of the syxte moneth I sat in my house, & the Lordes of the councell of Iuda with me: and the hande of the lord God fell euen there vpon me.
Ezekiel 8:2 And as I loked vp, I saw, as it were a lykenesse of fyre from hys loynes douneward, and from hys loines vpwarde it shyned maruelous cleare.
Ezekiel 8:3 This similytude stretched oute an hande, and toke me by the hearry lockes of my head, and the spryte lyfte me vp betwyxte heauen & earthe: and God brought me in a vision to Ierusalem, into the entrye of the inner porte that lyeth towarde the Northe: there stode an ymage, with whome he that hath all thynges in hys power, was very wroth.
Ezekiel 8:4 And beholde, the glorye of the God of Israel was in the same place: euen as I had sene it afore in the felde.
Ezekiel 8:5 And he sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, O lyfte vp thyne eyes, and loke towarde the northe. Then lyfte I vp myne eyes towarde the northe, and beholde: besyde the porte Northwarde, there was an aulter made vnto the ymage of prouocacyon in the verye entrynge in.
Ezekiel 8:6 And he sayd further more vnto me: Thou sonne of man, seist thou what these do? Seyst thou the great abhomynacyons that the house of Israel commytte in this place? which oughte not to be done in my sanctuarye? But turne the aboute, and thou shalte se yet greater abhomynacyons.
Ezekiel 8:7 And with that broughte he me to the courtegate, & when I loked, beholde, there was an hole in the wal.
Ezekiel 8:8 Then sayd he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, dygge thorowe the wall. And when I dygged thorow the wal, behold, ther was a dore.
Ezekiel 8:9 And he sayde vnto me: Go thy waye in, & loke what wycked abhomynacions they do there.
Ezekiel 8:10 So I wente in, & sawe: and beholde, there were all maner ymages of wormes & beastes, all Idoles and abhominacions of the house of Israel paynted euery one round aboute the wall.
Ezekiel 8:11 There stode also before the ymages .lxx. lordes of the councell of the house of Israel, and in the myddeste of them stode Iaazamah the sonne of Saphan: and euerye one of them had a censoure in hys hande, and out of the incense, there wente a smoke, as it had bene a cloude.
Ezekiel 8:12 Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, haste thou sene what the Senatoures of the house of Israel do secretly euerye one in hys chambre: For they saye: Tush, the Lorde seyth vs not, the Lord regardeth not the worlde.
Ezekiel 8:13 And he sayde vnto me: Turne the yet agayne, and thou shalte se the greate abhomynacyons that they do.
Ezekiel 8:14 And with that he broughte me to the dore of the port of the Lordes house, towarde the north. And beholde there sate women mournynge for Thamus.
Ezekiel 8:15 Then sayde he vnto me: haste thou sene this thou sonne of man. Turne the about & thou shalte se yet greater abhomynacyons.
Ezekiel 8:16 And so he broughte me into the inward court of the Lordes house: and beholde at the porte of the Lordes house, betwyxte the fore entrye and the aulter, there were fyue and twentye men, that turned theyr backes vpon the temple of the Lorde, and theyr faces towarde the east & these worshipped the sonne.
Ezekiel 8:17 And he sayde vnto me: hast thou sene this, thou sonne of man? Thyncketh the house of Israel, that it is but a tryflle, to do these abhomynacyons here? Shulde they fyll the lande full of wyckednesse, & vndertake to prouoke me vnto anger? Yea and purposelye to caste vp their noses vpon me:
Ezekiel 8:18 Therfore wyll I also do some thynge in my wrothfull displeasure, so that myne eye shall not ouerse them, nether wyll I spare them. Yea and though they crye in myne eares with loude voyce, yet wyll I not heare them.

CHAPTER: 9

Ezekiel 9:1 He cryed also with a loude voice in myne eares, sayinge: Come here ye rulers of the citie, euery man with hys weapened hand to the slaughter.
Ezekiel 9:2 Then came there sixe men oute of the strete of the vpper porte toward the north, and euery man a weapen in hys hand to the slaughter. There was one amongest them, that had on hym a lynen rayment, & a wryters ynckhorne by hys syde. These wente in, & stode besyde the brasen aulter:
Ezekiel 9:3 for the glorye of the Lorde was gone awaye from the Cherub, & was come doune to the thresholde of the house, and he called the man that had the lynen raymente vpon hym, & the wryters ynckhorne by hys syde,
Ezekiel 9:4 and the Lorde sayde vnto hym: Go thy waye thorow the cytie of Ierusalem, and set thys marcke Than vpon the foreheades of them, that mourne & are sory for all the abhomynacyons, that be done therin.
Ezekiel 9:5 And to the other, he sayde that I myght heare: Go ye after hym thorow the cytye, slaye, ouerse none, spare none:
Ezekiel 9:6 kyl and destroye bothe olde men and yonge, maydens, chyldren, and wyues. But as for those, that haue thys marcke Than vpon them: se that ye touche them not, & begynne at my sanctuarye. Then they began at the elders, whiche were in the temple,
Ezekiel 9:7 for he had sayde vnto them: When ye haue defyled the temple, and fylled the courte wyth the slayne, then go your waye forth. So they went oute, & slewe doune the slaughter,
Ezekiel 9:8 and I yet escaped: I fell doune vpon my face, and cryed sayinge: O Lorde, wylte thou then destroy al the resydue of Israel, in thy sore displeasure, that thou hast poured vpon Ierusalem?
Ezekiel 9:9 Then sayde he vnto me: The wickednesse of the house of Israel and Iuda is very greate: so that the lande is full of bloude, and the citie full of vnfaythfulnesse: For they saye: Tushe, the Lord regardeth not the earth, he seyth vs not.
Ezekiel 9:10 Therfore wyl I vpon them, myne eye shall not ouerse them, neyther wil I spare them, but wil recompense theyr wyckednesse vpon theyr heades.
Ezekiel 9:11 And beholde, the man that had the lynen rayment vpon hym, and the wryters ynckhorne by hys syde: tolde all the matter how it happened, and sayde: Lorde, as thou haste commaunded me, so haue I done.

CHAPTER: 10

Ezekiel 10:1 And as I loked, beholde in the fyrmament that was aboue the Cherubyns ther apeared the similitude of a stole of Saphir vpon them
Ezekiel 10:2 Then sayd he that sat therin, to him that had the lynen raiment vpon him: Crepe in betwene the wheles that are vnder the Cherubins, and take thyne hande full of hoate coles oute from betwene the Cherubyns, & cast them ouer the citie. And he crept in, that I myght se.
Ezekiel 10:3 Now the Cherubyns stode vpon the right syde of the house, when the man wente in, and the cloude fylled the ynnermer court,
Ezekiel 10:4 But the glory of the Lorde remoued from the Cherubyns, and came vpon the thresholde of the house: so that the temple was full of cloudes, and the courte was full of the shyne of the Lordes glory.
Ezekiel 10:5 Yea and the sounde of the Cherubyns winges was heard into the fore court lyke as it had bene the voyce of the almyghty God, when he speaketh.
Ezekiel 10:6 Now when he had bydden the man that was clothed in lynen, to go and take the hote coales from the myddest of the wheles, whiche were vnder the Cherubyns: he went & stode besyde the wheles.
Ezekiel 10:7 Then the one Cherub reached forth hys hand from vnder the Cherubyns, vnto the fyre that was betwene the Cherubyns, and toke thereof, & gaue it vnto hym that had on the lynen raymente in hys hande: whiche toke it, and went oute.
Ezekiel 10:8 And vnder the wynges of the Cherubyns, there apeared the lykenesse of a mans hande:
Ezekiel 10:9 I sawe also foure wheles besyde the Cherubyns, so that by euerye Cherub there stode a whele. And the wheles were (to loke vpon) after the fashyon of the precyous stone of Tharsis:
Ezekiel 10:10 yet (vnto the syght) were they fashyoned and lyke, as yf one whele had ben in another.
Ezekiel 10:11 When they wente forthe, they wente all foure together, not turnynge aboute in theyr goynge, But where the fyrste wente, thyther wente they after also, so that they turned not aboute in theyr goynge.
Ezekiel 10:12 Theyr whole bodyes theyr backes, theyr handes and wynges, yea and the wheles also, were all full of eyes rounde aboute them all foure.
Ezekiel 10:13 And I hearde hym call the wheles, Galgal (that is) a rounde boule.
Ezekiel 10:14 Euery one of them had foure faces: so that the one face was the face of a Cherub, the seconde of a man, the thyrde of a lyon, the fourthe of an Aegle,
Ezekiel 10:15 and they were lyfted vp aboue. This is the beaste, that I sawe at the water of Cobar,
Ezekiel 10:16 Nowe when the Cherubins wente, the wheles wente wyth them, & when the Cherubyns shoke theyr wynges to lyfte them selues vpwarde, the wheles remayned not behynde, but were with them also.
Ezekiel 10:17 Shortly, when they stode, these stode also: And when they were lyfte vp, the wheles were lyfte vp also with them, for the sprete of lyfe was in the wheles.
Ezekiel 10:18 Then the glory of the Lorde was lyfte vp from the thresholde of the temple, and remayned vpon the Cherubyns.
Ezekiel 10:19 And the Cherubins flackred wyth theyr wynges, & lyft them selues vp from the earth: so that I sawe when they wente, and the wheles with them. And they stode at the east syde of the porte that is in the house of the Lorde. So the glorye of the Lorde was vpon them.
Ezekiel 10:20 Thys is the beast that I saw vnder the god of Israel, by the water of Cobar. And I perceyued, that it was the Cherubyns.
Ezekiel 10:21 Euerye one had foure faces, and euery one foure wynges, and vnder theyr wynges, as it were mens handes.
Ezekiel 10:22 Now the fygure of theyr faces was, euen as I had sene them, by the water of Cobar, & so was the countenaunce of them: Euery one in hys goynge wente strayght forwarde.

CHAPTER: 11

Ezekiel 11:1 Moreouer, the sprete of the Lorde lyft me vp, & broughte me vnto the Easte porte of the Lordes house. And beholde, there were .xxv. men vnder the dore among whome I sawe Iaazaniah the sonne of Azur, and Pheltiah the sonne of Bananiah, the rulers of the people.
Ezekiel 11:2 Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: Thou sonne of man: these men ymagyn myschefe, and a wycked councel take they in this citie,
Ezekiel 11:3 sayinge: tushe, there is no destruccyon at hande, let vs buylde houses: thys Ierusalem is the cauldron, & we be the fleshe.
Ezekiel 11:4 Therfore shalte thou prophecye vnto them, yea prophecye shalte thou vnto them, O sonne of man.
Ezekiel 11:5 And wyth that fell the spryte of the Lorde vpon me, and sayd vnto me: Speake, thus saith the Lord: On thys maner haue ye spoken (O ye house of Israell) and I knowe the ymagygacyons of youre hertes.
Ezekiel 11:6 Many one haue ye murthered in thys cyte, and fylled the stretes full of the slayne.
Ezekiel 11:7 Therfore, thus sayth the Lord God: The slayne men that ye haue layed on the grounde in thys cytye, are the fleshe, and thys cytie is the cauldron: But I wyll brynge you oute of it:
Ezekiel 11:8 ye haue drawen out the sweard euen so wyll I also brynge a swearde ouer you, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 11:9 I wyll dryue you oute of this citie, and delyuer you into youre enemyes hande, and wyll condemne you.
Ezekiel 11:10 Ye shall be slayne in all the coastes of Israell, I wyll be auenged of you: to learne you for to knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 11:11 This cytie shall not be youre cauldron, neyther shall ye be the fleshe therein: but in the coastes of Israell wil I punyshe you,
Ezekiel 11:12 that ye maye knowe, that I am the Lorde: in whose commaundementes ye haue not walcked, nor kepte his lawes: but haue done after the customes of the Heathen, that lye rounde aboute you.
Ezekiel 11:13 Now when I preached, Pheltiah the sonne of Bananiah dyed. Then fell I doune vpon my face, and cried with a loud voyce: O Lord God, wylte thou then vtterlye destroy all the remnaunte in Israell?
Ezekiel 11:14 And so the word of the Lorde came to me on thys maner:
Ezekiel 11:15 thou sonne of man: thy brethren: thy kynsfolke, and the whole house of Iuda, whiche dwell at Ierusalem, saye: They be gone farre from the Lord, but the lande is geuen vs in possessyon.
Ezekiel 11:16 Therfore tell them, thus sayth the Lorde God: I wyll sende you farre of amonge the Gentyles, and scatre you amonge the nacyons, & I wyll halowe you but a lytle, in the landes where ye shal come.
Ezekiel 11:17 Tel them also, thus saith the Lorde God: I wyll gather you agayne oute of the nacyons, and bryng you from the countrees where ye be scatred, and wyl geue you the lande of Israel agayne:
Ezekiel 11:18 and thyther shall ye come. And as for all impedymentes and all youre abhomynacyons: I wyll take them awaye.
Ezekiel 11:19 And I wil geue you one herte, and I wyll plante a newe sprete wythin youre bowels. That stony herte wyll I take oute of youre body, & geue you a fleshy herte:
Ezekiel 11:20 that ye maye walke in my commaundementes, and kepe myne ordynaunces, & do them: that ye maye be my people, and I youre God.
Ezekiel 11:21 But loke, whose hertes are dysposed to folowe theyr abhomynacyons & wicked lyuynges: those mens dedes wyll I brynge vpon their owne heades, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 11:22 After thys did the Cherubins lyft vp theyr wynges, and the wheles wente wyth them, and the glorye of the Lorde was vpon them.
Ezekiel 11:23 So the glorye of the Lorde wente vp from the myddeste of the cytye, and stode vpon the mounte of the cytye towarde the east.
Ezekiel 11:24 But the wynde toke me vp, & in a vision (which came by the spryte of God) it brought me vp agayne into Caldea among the presoners. Then the vision that I had sene, vanyshed awaye fro me.
Ezekiel 11:25 So I spake vnto the presoners, all the wordes of the Lorde, whiche he had shewed me.

CHAPTER: 12

Ezekiel 12:1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 12:2 Thou sonne of man, thou dwellest in the myddest of a frowarde housholde: whiche haue eyes to se, and yet se not: eares haue they to hear, & yet heare thei not, for they are an obstinate housholde.
Ezekiel 12:3 Therfore (O thou sonne of man) make thy gere ready to flyt, and go forth by fayre daye lyghte, that they may se. Yea euen in theyr syght shalt thou go from thy place to another place: yf peraduenture they wyll consydre, that they be an vnobedyente housholde.
Ezekiel 12:4 Thy gere that thou hast made redy to flyt withal, shalt thou bear oute by fayre daye lyghte, that they maye se: and thou thy selfe shalte go forth also at euen in theyr sighte, as a man doeth when he flytteth.
Ezekiel 12:5 Dygge thorowe the wall, that they may se, & beare thorowe it the same thing, that thou tokest vp
Ezekiel 12:6 in theyr sight. As for thy selfe, thou shalte go forth in the darcke. Hyde thy face that thou se not the earthe, for I haue made the a shewtoken vnto the house of Israel.
Ezekiel 12:7 Nowe as the Lorde commaunded me, so I dyd: the gere that I had made ready, brought I oute by daye. At euen I brake doune an hole thorowe the wall with my hande: & when it was darcke, I toke the gere vpon my shoulders, and bare them oute in theyr syghte.
Ezekiel 12:8 And in the mornynge, came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 12:9 Thou sonne of man, yf Israell that frowarde houshold aske the, and saye: what doest thou there?
Ezekiel 12:10 Then tel them: Thus saith the Lorde God: Thys punyshmente toucheth the chefe rulers at Ierusalem, & all the house of Israell, that dwel amonge them:
Ezekiel 12:11 Tell them: I am youre shewtoken: lyke as I haue done, so shall it happen vnto you: Flyt shall ye also, and go into captyuyte.
Ezekiel 12:12 The chefest that is amonge you, shall lade hys shoulders in the darcke, and get him awaye. He shall breake doune the wal, to cary stuf there thorowe: He shall couer hys face, that he se not the grounde, with his eyes.
Ezekiel 12:13 My lyne wyll I sprede oute vpon hym, & catche him in my net, & carye hym to Babylon, in the lande of the Caldees: whiche he shall not se, and yet shall he dye there.
Ezekiel 12:14 As for al his helpers, & all hys hostes, that be aboute hym, I wyll scatre them towarde all the wyndes, and drawe out a sweard after them.
Ezekiel 12:15 So when I haue scatred them amonge the Heathen, and strowed them in the landes, they shall knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 12:16 But I wyll leaue a lytle nombre of them from the swearde, hunger and pestilence: to tell all theyr abhomynacyons amonge the Heathen, where they come, that they maye knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 12:17 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 12:18 Thou sonne of man: wyth a fearfull tremblynge shalte thou eate thy breade, with carefulnesse & sorowe shalte thou drincke thy water.
Ezekiel 12:19 And vnto the people of the lande, speake thou on thys maner: Thus sayeth the Lorde God, to them that dwell in Ierusalem, & to the lande of Israel: Ye shall eate youre breade with sorowe, and drincke youre water with heuynesse: Yea the lande with the fulnesse therof shalbe layde waste, for the wickednesse of them that dwell therin.
Ezekiel 12:20 And the cyties that nowe be well occupyed, shall be voyde, and the lande desolate: that ye maye knowe, how that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 12:21 Yet came the worde of the Lorde vnto me agayne, sayinge:
Ezekiel 12:22 Thou sonne of man, what maner of byworde is that, whiche ye vse in the lande of Israel, sayinge: Thus, seynge that the dayes are so slacke in commynge, all the visyons are of none effecte:
Ezekiel 12:23 Tell them therfore: thus sayth the Lorde God: I wil make that by worde to ceasse, so that it shal no more be commonlye vsed in Israel. But saye this vnto them: The dayes are at hande, that euery thinge whiche hath bene prophecyed, shalbe fulfylled.
Ezekiel 12:24 There shal no visyon be in vayne, neyther anye prophecye fayle amonge the chyldren of Israel:
Ezekiel 12:25 For it is I the Lorde, that speake it: and whatsoeuer I the Lorde speake, it shall be perfourmed, & not be slacke in commynge. Yea euen in youre dayes (O ye frowarde housholde) wyll I deuyce some thynge, and brynge it to passe, sayeth the Lord God.
Ezekiel 12:26 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
Ezekiel 12:27 Beholde, thou sonne of man: The house of Israel saye in this maner: Tushe, as for the vysion that he hath sene, it wil be many a day or it come to passe: Is it farre of it, the thyng that he prophecyeth.
Ezekiel 12:28 Therfore say vnto them: Thus sayth the Lorde GOD: All my wordes shall no more be slacke: Loke what I speake, that same shall come to passe, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 13

Ezekiel 13:1 The worde of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
Ezekiel 13:2 Thou sonne of man. Speake prophecye agaynst those Prophetes, that preache in Israel: & say thou vnto them that prophecye oute of theyr owne hertes: Heare the worde of the Lorde,
Ezekiel 13:3 thus sayeth the Lorde God: Wo be vnto those folysh prophetes, that folowe their owne spryte, and speake where they se nothyng
Ezekiel 13:4 O Israell, thy prophetes are lyke the foxes vpon the drye felde:
Ezekiel 13:5 For they stande not in the gappes, nether make they an hedge for the house of Israel, that men myght abyde the parell in the daye of the Lord.
Ezekiel 13:6 Vayne thinges they se, & tel lyes, to maintayne their preachynges with al. The Lorde (saye they) hath spoken it, when in very dede the Lorde hath not sent them.
Ezekiel 13:7 Vayne vysions haue ye sene, and spoken false Prophecyes, when ye saye: the Lorde hathe spoken it where as I neuer sayde it.
Ezekiel 13:8 Therfore, thus sayth the Lorde God: Because youre wordes be vayne, & ye seke oute lyes: Beholde, I wyll vpon you, saith the Lord
Ezekiel 13:9 Myne handes shall come vpon the Prophetes that loke out vayne thinges, & preache lies: thei shal not be in the councell of my people, nor writen in the boke of the house of Israel, neyther shall they come in the lande of Israel, that ye maye knowe, how that I am the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 13:10 And that for this cause, they haue disceyued my people, and tolde them of peace, where no peace was. One setteth vp a wal, and they daube it with louse claye.
Ezekiel 13:11 Therfore tell them which dawbe it wyth vntempered morter, that it shal fal. For there shal come a great shower of rayne, greate stones shall fall vpon it, and a sore storme of wynde shal breake it,
Ezekiel 13:12 so shall the wal come doune. Shal it not then be sayde vnto you: where is now the morter, that ye daubed it with all?
Ezekiel 13:13 Therfore thus sayth the Lorde God: I wyll breake oute in my wrothfull displeasure with a stormye wynd, so that in myne anger there shall come a myghtye shower of rayne, & hayle stones in my wrath, to destroye withall.
Ezekiel 13:14 As for the wall, that ye haue dawbed wyth vntempered morter, I wyll breake it doune, make it eauen wyth the grounde, so that the foundacyon therof shall remoue, & it shall fal, yea and ye youre selues shall perysh in the middest therof: to learne you for to knowe, that I am the Lord.
Ezekiel 13:15 Thus wil I perfourme my wrath vpon thys wall, and vpon them that haue dawbed it with vntempered morter, and then wyll I saye vnto you: The wall is gone, and the dawbers are awaye.
Ezekiel 13:16 These are the Prophetes of Israel, whiche prophecye vnto the cytye of Ierusalem, and loke oute vysyons of peace for them, where as no peace is, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 13:17 Wherfore (O thou sonne of man) set thy face agaynste the doughters of thy people, whiche prophecye oute of theyr owne hertes: & speake thou prophecye against them,
Ezekiel 13:18 and saye: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Wo be vnto you, that sowe pylowes vnder all arme holes, and bolsters vnder the heades both of yong and olde, to catche soules wyth all. For when ye haue gotten the soules of my people in your captiuite, ye promise them lyf
Ezekiel 13:19 and dishonoure me to my people, for an handfull of barleye, and for a pece of breade: when ye kyll the soules of them, that dye not, & promes lyfe to them, that lyue not: Thus ye dyssemble with my people, that beleueth youre lyes.
Ezekiel 13:20 Wherfore thus saith the Lorde God: Beholde, I wyll also vpon the pyllowes, wherwith ye catche the soules in flyenge: then wyl I take from youre armes, and let the soules go, that ye catche in flyenge.
Ezekiel 13:21 Youre bolsters also will I teare in peces, & delyuer my people out of youre hande: so that they shal come no more in youre handes to be spoyled, and ye shall knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 13:22 Seynge that with youre lyes ye discomforte the herte of the ryghteous, whome I haue not discomforted: Agayne. For so muche as ye corage the hande of the wycked, so that he maye not turne from hys wicked waye, and lyue:
Ezekiel 13:23 therfore shall ye spye oute no more vanite, nor prophecye youre owne gessinges: for I wyl delyuer my people oute of youre hande, that ye maye knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 14

Ezekiel 14:1 There resorted vnto me certayne of the elders of Israel, and satte doune by me.
Ezekiel 14:2 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, sayeng:
Ezekiel 14:3 Thou sonne of man, these men beare theyr Idols in their hertes, and go purposly vpon the stomblynge block of their owne wyckednesse: how darre they then aske councell at me?
Ezekiel 14:4 Therfore speake vnto them, & saye: Thus sayth the Lorde God. Euerye man of the house of Israell that beareth hys Idols in his herte, purposynge to stomble in hys owne wickednesse, and commeth to a Prophete, to enquere any thynge at me by hym: vnto that man will I the Lorde my self geue aunswere, accordynge to the multytude of hys Idoles,
Ezekiel 14:5 that the house of Israell maye be snared in theyr owne hertes, because they be cleane gone from me, for theyr Idoles sakes.
Ezekiel 14:6 Wherfore, tell the house of Israell: thus sayeth the Lorde God: Be conuerted, forsake youre Idols, and turne youre faces from all youre abhomynacyons.
Ezekiel 14:7 For euery man (whether he be of the house of Israell or a straunger, that sogeourneth in Israell) whiche departeth fro me, & caryeth Idols in hys herte, purposynge to go still stombling in his owne wickednesse, & commeth to a Prophete, for to aske councell at me thorowe him: vnto that man wyll I the Lorde geue aunswere, by myne owne selfe.
Ezekiel 14:8 I wyll set my face agaynste that man, & will make him to be an example for other, yea & a comon by worde, and wyll rote hym oute of my people, that he maye knowe how that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 14:9 And yf that Prophete be deceyued, when he telleth hym a worde: then I the Lorde my selfe haue dysceyued that Prophete, & wyl stretche forth myne hande vpon hym, to rote hym out of my people of Israel,
Ezekiel 14:10 and they bothe shalbe punished for theyr wyckednesse. Accordinge to the sinne of hym that asketh, shall the synne of the Prophet be,
Ezekiel 14:11 that the house of Israel be led nomore fro me thorow erroure, & be no more defyled in theyr wyckednesse: but that they maye be my people, & I their God, sayeth the Lorde God,
Ezekiel 14:12 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 14:13 Thou sonne of man, when the lande synneth againste me, & goeth forthe in wyckednesse: I will stretche oute myne hand vpon it, & destroye all the prouysyon of theyr bread, and sende derth vpon them, to destroy man & beast in the lande.
Ezekiel 14:14 And thoughe Noe, Daniel & Iob these thre men were amonge them, yet shal they in their rightuousnesse delyuer but theyr owne soules, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 14:15 If I brynge noysome beastes into the lande, to waste it vp, and it be so desolate, that no man maye go therein for beastes:
Ezekiel 14:16 yf these thre men also were in the lande, as truelye as I lyue (sayth the Lorde God) they shall saue neither sonnes nor doughters, but be only delyuered them selues: and as for the lande, it shall be waste.
Ezekiel 14:17 Or yf I bring a swearde into the lande, & charge it to go thorow the land, so that I slay doune man and beast in it,
Ezekiel 14:18 and yf these thre men were therein: As truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde God) they shal delyuer neyther sonnes nor doughters, but onelye be saued them selues.
Ezekiel 14:19 If I sende a pestilence into the lande, & poure oute my sore indignacion vpon it in bloude, so that I rote oute of it bothe man & beast,
Ezekiel 14:20 & yf Noe, Daniel and Iob were therin: as truly as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde GOD) they shall delyuer neyther sonnes nor doughters, but saue their owne soules in theyr ryghtuousnes.
Ezekiel 14:21 Moreouer thus sayth the Lord god: Though I sende my foure troublous plages vpon Ierusalem: the swearde, honger, perlous, beastes and pestilence, to destroye man and beaste oute of it:
Ezekiel 14:22 yet shall there be a remnaunte saued therin, whiche shall bryng forth theyr sonnes and doughters. Beholde, they shall come forthe vnto you, & ye shall se theyr waye, and what they take in hande, and ye shall be comforted, as touchynge all the plages that I haue broughte vpon Ierusalem.
Ezekiel 14:23 They shal comforte you, when ye se theyr waye and worckes: and ye shal knowe, howe that it is not wythoute a cause, that I haue done so agaynste Ierusalem, as I dyd, sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 15

Ezekiel 15:1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 15:2 Thou sonne of man: What commeth of the vyne amonge al other trees? & of the vyne stock amonge al other timbre of the groaue?
Ezekiel 15:3 Do men take wode of it, to make any worcke withall? Or maye there a nayle be made of it, to hange any thyng vpon:
Ezekiel 15:4 Beholde, it is caste in the fyre to be brente, the fyre consumeth both the endes of it, the myddest is brente to asshes. Is it mete then for any worcke? No.
Ezekiel 15:5 Seyng then that it was mete for no worke being whole: muche lesse maye there any thing be made of it, when the fyre hath consumed & brente it.
Ezekiel 15:6 And therfore thus sayth the Lorde God: Like as I cast the vyne into the fyre for to be brent, as other trees of the wode. Euen so wyll I do with them that dwell in Ierusalem,
Ezekiel 15:7 & set my face against them: they shall go out from the fyre, & yet the fyre shall consume them. Then shall ye knowe, that I am the Lorde, when I set my face agaynst them,
Ezekiel 15:8 and make the lande waste, because they haue so sore offended, sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 16

Ezekiel 16:1 Agayne, the worde of the Lorde spake vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 16:2 Thou sonne of man, shewe the citie of Ierusalem theyr abhominacions
Ezekiel 16:3 & saye: Thus sayth the Lorde God vnto Ierusalem: Thy progeny & kinred came oute of the lande of Canaan, thy father was an Amoryte, thy mother a Cethyte.
Ezekiel 16:4 In the daye of thy byrthe, when thou waste borne, the strynge of thy nauel was not cut of: thou wast not bathed in water to make the cleane: Thou wast neyther robbed with salt, nor swedled in cloutes:
Ezekiel 16:5 No man regarded the so muche, as to do any of these thinges for the or to shewe the suche fauoure, but thou waste vtterlye cast oute vpon the felde, yea despised wast thou in the daye of thy byrthe.
Ezekiel 16:6 Then came I by the, and sawe the troden doune in thyne owne bloude, and sayde vnto the: thou shalte be pourged from thyne owne bloude, from thyne owne bloude (I say) shalt thou be clensed.
Ezekiel 16:7 So I planted the, as the blossome of thy felde: thou arte growen vp, and waxen greate: thou haste gotten a maruelous pleasaunt beutie, thy brestes are come vp, thy heare is goodly growen, where as thou wast naked and bare afore.
Ezekiel 16:8 Now when I wente by the, & loked vpon the: beholde, thy tyme was come, yea euen the tyme to vowe the. Then spred I my clothes ouer the, to couer thy dishonesty: yea I made an othe vnto the, and maryed my selfe wyth the (sayeth the Lorde God) and so thou becameste myne owne.
Ezekiel 16:9 Then washed I the wyth water, and pourged thy bloude from the. I anoynted the wyth oyle,
Ezekiel 16:10 I gaue the chaunge of raymentes, I made the shues of Tarus lether: I gyrthed the about with whyte sylcke, I clothed the with kerchues,
Ezekiel 16:11 I decked the wyth costly apparell, I put rynges vpon thy fyngers: a chayne aboute thy necke,
Ezekiel 16:12 spanges vpon thy fore head, eare rynges vpon thyne eares, and set a beutyfull croune vpon thyne heade.
Ezekiel 16:13 Thus waste thou deckte with syluer & golde, and thy rayment was of fyne whyte sylke, of nedle worke & of dyuerse colours. Thou dyddest eate nothynge but symnels, hony and oyle: maruelous goodly wast thou & beutiful, yea euen a very Quene wast thou:
Ezekiel 16:14 In so muche, that thy beutye was spoken of amonge the Heythen, for thou waste excellent in my beuty, which I put vpon the, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 16:15 But thou haste put confidence in thyne owne beutye, & played the harlot, when thou haddest gotten the a name. Thou haste commytted whordome, wyth all that wente by the, & hast fulfilled theyr desyres:
Ezekiel 16:16 yea thou hast taken thy garmentes of dyuerse colours, & deckte thyne aulters therwith, where vpon thou myghtest fulfyll thyne whoredome, of suche a fashyon, as neuer was done, nor shalbe.
Ezekiel 16:17 The goodly ornamentes & Iewels whiche I gaue the of myne owne golde and syluer, hast thou taken, and made the mens ymages thereof, and commytted whordome with al.
Ezekiel 16:18 Thy garmentes of dyuerse coloures haste thou taken, and deckte them ther wyth: myne oyle and incense hast thou set before them.
Ezekiel 16:19 My meate whiche I gaue the, as symnels, oyle & honye (to fede the withall) that haste thou set before them, for a swete sauoure. And thys came also to passe, saieth the Lord God.
Ezekiel 16:20 Thou haste taken thyne owne sonnes & doughters, whom thou hast begotten vnto me, and these haste thou offered vp vnto them, to be theyr meate. Is this but a smal whordome of thine (thinckest thou)
Ezekiel 16:21 that thou slayest my children and geuest them ouer, to be brent vnto them?
Ezekiel 16:22 And yet in all thy abhominacyons & whordome, thou hast not remembred the dayes of thy youth, howe naked and bare thou wast at that tyme, and troden doune in thyne owne bloude.
Ezekiel 16:23 After all these thy wickednesses (wo wo vnto the, sayeth the Lord)
Ezekiel 16:24 thou hast buylded thy stewes and brodel houses in euery place: yea at the heade of euery stret
Ezekiel 16:25 hast thou builded the an aulter. Thou hast made thy beuty to be abhorred, thou hast laied out thy legges to euery one that came by, and multiplyed thine whoredom.
Ezekiel 16:26 Thou hast committed fornicacyon with the Egipcians thy neyghbours whiche had muche flesh, and thus haste thou vsed thyne whoredome, to anger me.
Ezekiel 16:27 Beholde, I will stretch out mine hande ouer the, and will minishe the stoare of fode, & deliuer the ouer into the willes of the Philistines thine enemies, whiche are ashamed of thy abhominable waye.
Ezekiel 16:28 Thou hast plaied the whore also with the Assirians, whyche might not satisfye the: Yea thou haste played the harlot, and not had ynough.
Ezekiel 16:29 Thus hast thou stil committed thy fornicacyon from the lande of Canaan vnto the Caldees, and yet thy lust not satisfyed.
Ezekiel 16:30 How shoulde I circumcyse thine herte (sayeth the Lorde God) seynge thou doest all these thinges, thou precyous whore:
Ezekiel 16:31 buyldinge thy stewes at the head of euerye strete, and thy brodell houses in all places? Thou hast not ben as another whore that maketh boost of her winninge,
Ezekiel 16:32 but as a wyfe that breaketh wedlock, and taketh other in steade of her husbande.
Ezekiel 16:33 Gyftes are geuen to al other whores, but thou geuest rewardes vnto all thy louers: and offrest them gyftes, to come vnto the out of all places, and to committe fornicacyon wt the.
Ezekiel 16:34 It is come to passe wyth the in thy whordomes contrarye to the vse of other women, yea there had no such fornicacion bene committed after the, seyng that thou proferest gyftes vnto other, and no rewarde is geuen the: thys is a contrarie thing.
Ezekiel 16:35 Therfore heare the worde of the Lorde O thou harlot:
Ezekiel 16:36 thus sayeth the Lorde God: For so much as thou hast spent thy moneye, and discouered thy shame, thorow thy whordome wyth all thy louers, and wyth all the Idols of thy abhominacions in the bloude of thy children, whom thou hast geuen them:
Ezekiel 16:37 Beholde therfore, I wyll gather together all thy louers, vnto whome thou hast made thy selfe comen: yea and all them whom thou fauourest, and euery one that thou hatest: and wil discouer thy shame before them, that they al maye se thy fylthines.
Ezekiel 16:38 Moreouer, I will iudge the as a breaker of wedlocke and a murtherer, & recompence the thyne owne bloud in wrath and gelousy.
Ezekiel 16:39 I will geue the ouer into their power, that shal breake doune thy stewes, and destroye thy brodel houses, they shall stryppe the oute of thy clothes, al thy fayre and beutyfull Iewels shall they take from the, and so let the syt naked and bare:
Ezekiel 16:40 yea they shal bryng the comen people vpon the, whiche shall stone the, and slaye the doune with their sweardes.
Ezekiel 16:41 They shall burne vp thy houses, & punish the in the syght of manye wemen. Thus wyll I make thy whordome to ceasse, so that thou shalt geue out no mo rewardes.
Ezekiel 16:42 Shoulde I make my wrath to be styl, take my gelousy from the, be content, and no more to be displeased?
Ezekiel 16:43 seynge thou remembrest not the dayes of thy youth, but haste prouoked me to wrath in all these thinges? Behold therfore, I wyll brynge thyne owne wayes vpon thyne heade, sayeth the Lorde God: howe be it, I neuer dyd vnto the, accordynge to thy wyckednesse and all thy abhominacions.
Ezekiel 16:44 Beholde, al they that vse comen prouerbes, shall vse this prouerbe also against the: suche a mother, suche a doughter.
Ezekiel 16:45 Thou art euen thy mothers owne doughter, that hast cast of her housbande & their children. Yea, thou art the syster of thy systers, whiche forsoke their husbandes and their children. Youre mother is a Cethite, and youre father an Amorite.
Ezekiel 16:46 Thyne eldest syster is Samaria, she and her doughters that dwel vpon thy left hande. But thy youngest syster that dwelleth on thy ryght hand, is Sodoma & her doughters.
Ezekiel 16:47 Yet hast thou not walked after their wayes, nor done after their abhomynacyons: but in all thy wayes thou hast bene more corrupte then they.
Ezekiel 16:48 As truly as I lyue, sayeth the lorde God: Sodoma thy sister with her doughters hath not done so euyl, as thou and thy doughters.
Ezekiel 16:49 Beholde, the sinnes of thy sister Sodoma were these: Pryde, fulnesse of meate, aboundaunce and Idelnesse: these thynges had she and her doughters. Besydes that, they reached not their hande to the pore and nedy,
Ezekiel 16:50 but were proude, and dyd abhomynable thinges before me: therfore I toke them awaye, when I had sene it.
Ezekiel 16:51 Neyther had Samaria done halfe of thy synnes, yea thou haste exceaded them in wyckednesse. In so muche that in comparyson of all the abhomynacions whyche thou haste done, thou haste made thy systers good wemen.
Ezekiel 16:52 n/a
Ezekiel 16:53 As for their captyuite, namely the captyuite of Sodoma and her doughters: the captiuyte of Samaria and her doughters. I wyll brynge them agayne, so wyl I also brynge agayne thy captiuite amonge them:
Ezekiel 16:54 that thou mayest take thyne owne confusion vpon the, and be ashamed of all that thou hast done, & to comforte them.
Ezekiel 16:55 Thus thy sisters (namelye) Sodoma and her doughters: Samaria and her doughters with thy selfe and thy doughters, shalbe brought agayne to youre olde estate.
Ezekiel 16:56 When thou wast in thy pryde,
Ezekiel 16:57 and before the wyckednes came to lyght, thou wouldest not heare speake of thy sister Sodoma, vntill the tyme that the Sirians with all their townes, and the Philistines with all that lye rounde aboute them, brought the to shame & confusyon:
Ezekiel 16:58 that thou myghtest beare thyne owne fylthines and abhomynacyon, sayeth the Lorde.
Ezekiel 16:59 For thus sayeth the Lorde God: I shoulde (by ryght) deale with the, as thou hast done. Thou hast despysed the ooth, and broken the couenaunte.
Ezekiel 16:60 Neuerthelesse, I wyll remembre the couenaunte, that I made wyth the in thy youth, in so much that it shalbe an euerlastinge couenaunt:
Ezekiel 16:61 so that thou also remembre thy wayes, & be ashamed of them: then shalte thou receyue of me thy elder and younger sisters, whome I will make thy doughters, and that besyde thy couenaunt.
Ezekiel 16:62 And so will I renue my couenaunt with the, that thou mayest know that I am the Lorde:
Ezekiel 16:63 that thou mayest thyncke vpon it, be ashamed, and excuse thine owne confusyon no more: when I haue forgeuen the, all that thou hast done, sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 17

Ezekiel 17:1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 17:2 Thou sonne of man: put forthe a darcke speakinge, and a parable, vnto the house of Israel,
Ezekiel 17:3 and saye: Thus sayeth the Lorde God. There came a great Aegle with greate wynges, yea with myghty long winges, and full of fethers of dyuerse coloures, vpon the mount of Libanus, and toke a braunche from a Cedre tree,
Ezekiel 17:4 and brake of the toppe of his twigge, and caryed it into the lande of Canaan, and set it in a cytye of marchauntes.
Ezekiel 17:5 He toke also a braunche of the land & planted it in a fruteful ground, he brought it vnto greate waters, and set it as a wyllye tree therby.
Ezekiel 17:6 Then dyd it growe, and was a greate vynestocke, but low by the grounde: thus there came of it a vyne, and it broughte forth blossomes, and spred oute braunches.
Ezekiel 17:7 But there was another Aegle, a great one, whych had great wynges and many fethers: and behold the rotes of this vyne had an hunger after hym, and spred oute his braunches towarde hym, to water hys frutes.
Ezekiel 17:8 Neuertheles it was planted vpon a good grounde besyde greate waters: so that (by reason) it shoulde haue brought out braunches & frute & haue bene a goodly vyne.
Ezekiel 17:9 Speake thou therfore, thus sayeth the lord God: Shall thys vyne prospere? shal not his rotes be pluckte oute, his frute be broken of, his grene braunches withere & fade awaye? yea without eyther strong arme or many people, shall it be plucked vp by the rotes.
Ezekiel 17:10 Beholde it was planted: shall it prospere therfore? Shal it not be dryed vp and wythered, yea euen in the shutynge out of his blossomes, as sone as the east wynde bloweth?
Ezekiel 17:11 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayinge:
Ezekiel 17:12 Speake to that frowarde housholde: knowe ye not, what these thinges do signyfye? Tell them: Beholde the king of Babylon came to Ierusalem, and toke the kynge and hys Princes, and ledde them to Babylon.
Ezekiel 17:13 He toke of the kinges sede, and made a couenaunt wyth him, and toke an ooth of him. The Prynces of the lande toke he wyth hym also,
Ezekiel 17:14 that the land myght be holden in subieccyon, and not to rebelle, but kepe the couenaunt, and fulfyll it.
Ezekiel 17:15 But he fell from him, & sent hys Embassitoures into Egipte, that he myght haue horses and much people. Should that prospere? Shoulde he be kept safe, that doeth suche thynges? Or shoulde he escape that breaketh his couenaunt?
Ezekiel 17:16 As truely as I lyue sayeth the Lorde God: He shal dye at Babylon, in the place where the kyng dwelleth, that made him King: whose othe he hath despysed, and whose couenaunte he hath broken.
Ezekiel 17:17 Neyther shall Pharao wyth his greate hoste and multitude of people, maynteyne him in the warre: when they cast vp dyches, and set vp bulworches to destroye much people.
Ezekiel 17:18 For seyng he hath despysed the othe, and broken the couenaunt (where as he yet gaue his hande thervpon) and done all these thynges, he shall not escape.
Ezekiel 17:19 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: As truely as I lyue. I wil bring myne othe that he hath despised, & my couenaunt that he hath broken, vpon his owne heade.
Ezekiel 17:20 I will cast my net aboute hym, and catche him in my yarne. To Babylon wil I carye him, there wyll I punyshe him, because of the greate offence that he made me.
Ezekiel 17:21 As for those that fle from him out of the hoste, they shalbe slayne with the swerd. The residue shalbe scatred toward all the wyndes, and ye shal knowe, that I the Lorde haue spoken it.
Ezekiel 17:22 Thus sayeth the Lord God: I wyll also take a braunche from an hye Cedre tree, & will set it, and take the vttermost twygge, that yet is but tendre, and plante it vpon an hye hill:
Ezekiel 17:23 Namely, vpon the hye hill of Syon wil I plante it: that it may brynge forth twigges, and geue frute, and be a greate Cedre tree: so that all maner of foules maye byde in it, and make their nestes vnder the shadowe of hys braunches.
Ezekiel 17:24 And all the trees of the felde shall knowe that I the Lord haue brought doune the hye tree, and set the low tre vp: that I haue dryed vp the grene tree, and made the drye tree to florysh. Euen I the Lorde that spake it, haue also brought it to passe.

CHAPTER: 18

Ezekiel 18:1 The worde of the Lord came vnto me, on this maner:
Ezekiel 18:2 what meane by thys comen prouerbe that ye vse in the land of Israel sayinge: The fathers haue eaten soure grapes, and the childrens teth are set on edge?
Ezekiel 18:3 As truly as I lyue, sayeth the Lord God, ye shall vse thys byworde nomore in Israel.
Ezekiel 18:4 Beholde, all soules are myne. Lyke as the father is mine, so is the sonne myne also. The soul that synneth shal dye.
Ezekiel 18:5 Yf a man be godly and do the thinge that is equall and ryght
Ezekiel 18:6 he eateth not vpon the hilles: he lyfteth not his eyes vp to the Idols of Israel: he defyleth not his neyghboures wyfe, he medleth with no menstruous woman:
Ezekiel 18:7 he greueth no body, he geueth his detter his pledge agayn he taketh none other mans good by vyolence: he parteth his mete with the hongrye: he cloteth the naked:
Ezekiel 18:8 he lendeth nothinge vpon vsury: he taketh nothinge ouer: he wythdraweth his hand from doynge wronge: he handleth faythfully betwixte man & man:
Ezekiel 18:9 he walked in my commaundementes, and kepeth my lawes, and perfourmeth them faithfully: This is a ryghteous man, he shal surely liue sayeth the Lord God.
Ezekiel 18:10 Yf he now get a sonne, that is a murtherer a sheder of bloude: yf he do one of these thinges
Ezekiel 18:11 (though he do not all) he eateth vpon the hilles: he defyled his neyghboures wife:
Ezekiel 18:12 he greueth the poore & nedy: he robbeth and spoiled: he geueth not the detter his pledge againe he lyfteth vp his eyes vnto Idols, & medleth with abhominable thinges:
Ezekiel 18:13 he lendeth vpon vsury, & taketh moreouer. Shall thys man lyue? He shall not lyue. Seynge he hath done all these abhomynacions, he shall dye, hys bloude shalbe vpon him.
Ezekiel 18:14 Now yf this man get a sonne also, that seyth al his fathers synnes, whiche he hath done: and feareth, neyther doth such lyke.
Ezekiel 18:15 Namely he eateth not vpon the mountaynes: he lyfteth not his eyes vp to the Idols of Israel: he defyleth not his neighboures wife:
Ezekiel 18:16 he vexeth no man: he kepeth no mans pledge: he neyther spoyleth, nor robbeth anye man: he dealeth his meate with the hongrye: he clotheth the naked:
Ezekiel 18:17 he oppresseth not the poore: he receyueth no vsury, nor any thinge ouer: he kepeth my lawes, and walcketh in my commaundementes: This man shall not dye in his fathers sinne, but shall lyue withoute fayle.
Ezekiel 18:18 As for his father: because he oppressed and spoiled his brothers, and dyd wyckedly amonge his people: lo, he is dead in his owne sinne.
Ezekiel 18:19 And yet saye ye: Wherfore then should not this sonne beare his fathers sinne? Therfore: because the sonne hath done equitie and ryght, hath kepte al my commaundementes, and done them: therfore shal he leue in dede.
Ezekiel 18:20 The same soule that synneth, shall dye. The sonne shal not beare the fathers offence, neyther shall the father beare the sonnes offence. The ryghteousnes of the righteous shalbe vpon him, and the wickednes of the wycked shalbe vpon him selfe also.
Ezekiel 18:21 But yf the vngodlye will turne away from all his synnes that he hath done, and kepe al my commaundementes, and do the thinge that is equall and ryght, doutles he shall lyue, and not dye.
Ezekiel 18:22 As for all his synnes that he did before, they shall not be thought vpon: but in his ryghteousnes, that he hath done, he shall lyue.
Ezekiel 18:23 For haue I any pleasure in the death of a synner, sayeth the Lorde God, but rather that he conuerte and lyue.
Ezekiel 18:24 Agayne, yf the righteous turne awaye from his righteousnes, and do iniquytie, according to all the abhomynacyons, that the wycked man doth: shal he lyue? Al the ryghteousnes that he hath done, shal not be thought vpon: but in the faute that he hath offended withall and in the synne that he hath done, he shall dye.
Ezekiel 18:25 And yet ye say: Tush, the waye of the lord is not indifferent. Heare therfore the house of Israel: Is not my way ryght? Or, are not youre wayes rather wicked?
Ezekiel 18:26 When a ryghteous man turneth away from his ryghteousnesse, and medleth with vngodlynes: he must dye therin: yea for the vnryghteousnes that he hath done, must he dye.
Ezekiel 18:27 Agayne, when the wycked man turneth awaye from his wickednesse, that he hath done, & doth the thinge whiche is equall and ryght, he shall saue hys soule alyue.
Ezekiel 18:28 For in so muche as he remembreth hym selfe, & turneth him from all the vngodlynes, that he had vsed, he shall lyue, and not dye.
Ezekiel 18:29 And yet sayeth the house of Israell: Tush the waye of the Lorde is not equall. Are my wayes vnryght, O ye house of Israel: Are not youre wayes rather vnequal?
Ezekiel 18:30 As for me I will iudge euery man, accordynge to hys wayes, O ye house of Israel, sayeth the Lord God. Wherfore be conuerted, and turne you cleane from all youre wickednesse, so shall there no sinne do you harme.
Ezekiel 18:31 Caste awaye from you all your vngodlinesse, that ye haue done: make you new hertes and a new spirit. Wherfore will ye dye, O ye house of Israel?
Ezekiel 18:32 seyng, I haue no pleasure in the death of him that dyeth, sayeth the Lorde God. Turne you then, and ye shall lyue.

CHAPTER: 19

Ezekiel 19:1 Bvt mourne thou for the princes of Israel,
Ezekiel 19:2 & saye: Wherfore laye thy mother that lionesse amonge the lions, & noryshed her yonge ones amonge the lyons whelpes?
Ezekiel 19:3 One of her whelpes she brought vp, and it became a lyon it learned to spoyle, and to deuoure folcke.
Ezekiel 19:4 The Heathen hearde of him, and toke hym in their nettes, and brought him in chaynes vnto the lande of Egipte.
Ezekiel 19:5 Now when the damme sawe, that all her hope and comforth was awaye, she toke another of her whelpes, and made a lyon of him
Ezekiel 19:6 which went amonge the lyons, and became a fearce lion, learned to spoyle and to deuoure folcke:
Ezekiel 19:7 he destroyed their palaces, and made their cities waste. In so muche that the whole lande and euery thinge therin, were vtterlye desolate, thorow the very voyce of his roarynge.
Ezekiel 19:8 Then came the Heathen together on euery side oute of all countreyes againste him, layed their nettes for him, and toke him in their pitte.
Ezekiel 19:9 So they bounde him with chaynes, and brought him to the kinge of Babilon: which put him in preson, that his voyce shoulde nomore be hearde vpon the mountaynes of Israel.
Ezekiel 19:10 As for thy mother, she is like a vyne in thy bloude, planted by the water syde: her frutes and braunches are growen out of many waters,
Ezekiel 19:11 her stalkes were so stronge, that men myght haue made staues thereof for officers: she grow so hye in her stalckes. So when men sawe that she exceaded the heyght and multytude of her braunches,
Ezekiel 19:12 she was roted out in displeasure, and cast doune to the grounde. The East wynde dryed vp her frute, her stronge stalkes were broken of wythered and brent in the fyre.
Ezekiel 19:13 But now she is planted in the wildernesse, in a drye and thurstye grounde.
Ezekiel 19:14 And there is a fyre gone out of her stalckes, which hath brent vp her braunches and her frute: so that she hath no mo stronge stalckes, to be staues for offycers. This is a pyteous and miserable thynge.

CHAPTER: 20

Ezekiel 20:1 In the .xvij. yeare the .x. day of the .v. Moneth, it happened, that certayne of the elders of Israel came vnto me, for to aske councell at the Lord, and sat them doune by me.
Ezekiel 20:2 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me on this maner.
Ezekiel 20:3 Thou sonne of man: speake vnto the elders of Israel, and say vnto them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Are ye come hytherto to aske any thinge at me? As truely as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde)
Ezekiel 20:4 I wyll geue you no answere. Wilt thou not reproue them (thou sonne of man) wilt thou not reproue them? Shew them the abhomynacions of their forefathers,
Ezekiel 20:5 and tell them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: In the day when I chose Israel, and lyft vp myne hand vpon the sede of the house of Iacob, and shewed my selfe vnto them in the lande of Egypte: Yea, when I lyfte vp myne hande ouer them, and sayd: I am the Lorde youre God,
Ezekiel 20:6 euen in the daye that I lift vp mine hande ouer them, to bring them out of the lande of Egipte, into a lande that I haue prouided for them, which floweth with milcke and hony, and it is a pleasaunte lande amonge al other:
Ezekiel 20:7 Then sayde I vnto them: Cast awaye euerye man the abhomynacyons that he hath before him, and defyle not youre selues with the Idoles of Egipte, for I am the Lorde youre God.
Ezekiel 20:8 But they rebelled agaynst me, and would not folowe me, to cast awaye euery man the abhominacions of his eyes, & to forsake the Idoles of Egipte. Then I made to poure my indignacion ouer them, and to satisfye my wrath vpon them, yea euen in the myddest of the lande of Egipte.
Ezekiel 20:9 But I woulde not do it, for my names sake, that it shoulde not be vnhalowed before the Heathen, amonge whom they dwelt, and among whom I shewed my selfe vnto them, that it woulde brynge them out of the lande of Egipte.
Ezekiel 20:10 Now when I had caried them out of the lande of Egipte, and brought them into the wildernesse:
Ezekiel 20:11 I gaue them my commaundementes, and shewed them my lawes, whiche who so kepeth, shall lyue in them.
Ezekiel 20:12 I gaue them also my holy dayes, to be a token betwixte me and them, and therby know, that I am the Lorde, whiche haloweth them.
Ezekiel 20:13 And yet the house of Israel rebelled agaynste me in the wildernesse, they woulde not walcke in my commaundementes, they haue cast awaye my lawes (whiche whoso kepeth, shoulde lyue in them) and my Sabboth dayes haue thy greatly vnhalowed. Then I made me to poure oute my indignacion vpon them, and to consume them in the wyldernesse.
Ezekiel 20:14 Yet I would not do it, for my names sake: lest it shoulde be dishonoured before the Heathen, from the which I had caried them away.
Ezekiel 20:15 But I swore vnto them in the wildernesse, that I woulde not byrnge them into the lande, whiche I gaue them, a land that floweth with milck and honye, and is a pleasure of all landes,
Ezekiel 20:16 and that because they refused my lawes, and walcked not in my commaundementes, but and vnhalowed my Sabbathes, for their herte was gone after their Idoles.
Ezekiel 20:17 Neuerthelesse myne eye spared them so that I woulde not vtterly slaye them, and consume them in the wyldernes.
Ezekiel 20:18 Moreouer I sayde vnto their sonnes in the wildernesse: walcke not in the statutes of your forfathers kepe not their ordinaunces, and defyle not youre selues with their Idoles,
Ezekiel 20:19 for I am the Lorde youre God. But walcke in my statutes, kepe my lawes and do them,
Ezekiel 20:20 halowe my Sabbothes: for they are a token betwyxte me and you, that ye may know, howe that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 20:21 Notwythstandinge, their sonnes rebelled against me also: they walcked not in my statutes, they kepte not my lawes to fulfyll them (whiche he that doeth shall lyue in them) neyther halowed they my Sabboth dayes. Then I made me againe to poure out my indignacion ouer them, and to satisfye my wrath vpon them in the wildernesse.
Ezekiel 20:22 Neuerthelesse I wythdrewe my hande for my names sake, least it shoulde be vnhalowed amonge the Heathen, before whome I had brought them forth.
Ezekiel 20:23 I lift vp myne hand ouer them also in the wildernesse, that I would scatre them amonge the Heathen, & strowe them amonge the nacions:
Ezekiel 20:24 because they had not kepte my lawes, but cast asyde my commaundementes, vnhalowed my Sabbothes, and lyft vp their eyes to their fathers Idoles.
Ezekiel 20:25 Wherfore I gaue them also commaundementes not good, and lawes thorow the whyche they shoulde not lyue,
Ezekiel 20:26 & I vnhalowed them in their owne gyftes (when I appointed for my selfe all their fyrstborne) to make them desolate: that they might knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 20:27 Therfore (O thou sonne of man) tell the house of Israell, thus sayeth the Lorde God: Besyde all this, youre forefathers haue yet blasphemed me more, and greatly offended agaynst me.
Ezekiel 20:28 For after I had brought them in to the lande, that I promysed to geue them, when they sawe euery hye hyll and the thicke trees: they made their offerynges, and prouoked me with their oblacyons, makinge swete sauoures there, and poured oute their drynckeofferynges.
Ezekiel 20:29 Then I asked them: what haue ye to do withall, that ye go thyther? And therefore it is called the hye place vnto thys daye.
Ezekiel 20:30 Wherfore, speake vnto the house of Israel: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: yea are euen as vnclene as youre forefathers, and committe whordome also with their abhominacions.
Ezekiel 20:31 In al youre Idoles, where vnto ye bring your oblacions, and to whose honoure ye burne your children: ye defyle youre selues, euen vnto this day: howe darre ye then come and aske any question at me? O ye housholde of Israel? As truly as I liue (saieth the Lord God) ye get no answere of me:
Ezekiel 20:32 & as for the thinge, that ye go aboute, it shall not come to passe, where as ye saye: we wil be as the heathen, & do as other people in the lande, wood and stone wyl we worshippe.
Ezekiel 20:33 As truly as I liue, sayeth the Lorde God, I my selfe wyll rule you with a myghty hand with a stretched out arme, and with indignacyon poured out ouer you:
Ezekiel 20:34 and wyll brynge you out of the nacyons and landes, wherin ye are scatred: and gather you together wyth a myghtye hande, with a stretched oute arme and with indignacyon poured out vpon you:
Ezekiel 20:35 and wyll brynge you into the wildernesse of the people, and there I will reason with you face to face.
Ezekiel 20:36 Like as I punished youre forefathers in the wildernesse, so will I punyshe you also, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 20:37 I will bring you vnder my iurisdiccion, & vnder the bonde of the couenaunt.
Ezekiel 20:38 The forsakers also and the transgressours will I take from among you, & bringe them out of the lande of youre habitacion: as for the lande of Israel, they shall not come in it: that they may knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 20:39 Go now then (sayeth the Lorde God) ye house of Israel, cast awaye, and destroye euery man his Idoles: then shall ye heare me, & no more blaspheme my holie name with your offeringes and Idoles.
Ezekiel 20:40 But vpon my holye hil, euen vpon the hye hil of Israel shal al the house of Israel and all that is in this lande, worshippe me: and in the same place wyll I fauoure them, and there wil I require youre heaueofferinges, and the fyrstlynges of your oblacions, with all youre holie thinges.
Ezekiel 20:41 I will accepte your swete sauoure, when I bringe you from the nacions, and gather you together oute of the landes, wherin ye be scatred: that I maye be halowed in you before the Heathen,
Ezekiel 20:42 and that ye maye knowe, that I am the Lorde, whiche haue broughte you into the lande of Israel: yea into the same lande, that I swore to geue vnto youre forefathers.
Ezekiel 20:43 There shall ye call to remembraunce your own wayes and all your ymaginacions, wherin he haue bene defiled, and ye shalbe displeased wyth your own selues, for al your wickednes that ye haue done.
Ezekiel 20:44 And ye shall know that I am the Lorde: when I entreate you after my name, not after youre wycked wayes, nor accordynge to youre corrupte workes: O ye house of Israel, sayeth the lord.
Ezekiel 20:45 Moreouer the worde of the Lorde came vnto me saying:
Ezekiel 20:46 Thou sonne of man, set thy face towarde the south, & speake to the south wind,
Ezekiel 20:47 and say to the the wood toward the south: Heare the worde of the Lorde: thus sayeth the Lorde God: Beholde, I wil kindle a fire in the, that shal consume the grene trees with the drye. No man shal be able to quenche hys flamme, but al that loketh from the south to the north, shalbe brent therin:
Ezekiel 20:48 & al flesh shal se, that I the Lord haue kindled it, so that no man maye quenche it.
Ezekiel 20:49 Then saide I: O Lord they will saye of me: Tush, they are but fables, that he telleth.

CHAPTER: 21

Ezekiel 21:1 The worde of the Lorde came to me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 21:2 Thou sonne of man set thy face toward Ierusalem, speake against the Sanctuary, & prophecie againste the lande of Israel, saye to the lande of Israel:
Ezekiel 21:3 Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Beholde, I wil vpon the, & wil drawe my swerde out of the sheath, and rote out of the both the righteous & the wycked.
Ezekiel 21:4 Seinge then that I will rote oute of the both the righteous and wicked, therfore shall my swerde go oute of his sheath againste all flesh from the North to the south:
Ezekiel 21:5 that al flesh may know that I the Lord haue drawen my swerde out of the sheath, and it shall not be put in agayne.
Ezekiel 21:6 Mourne therfore (O thou sonne of man) that thy loines crack withal, ye mourne bitterly for them.
Ezekiel 21:7 And yf they saye, wherfore mournest thou? Then tel them: for the tydinges that commeth, at the whiche al hertes shal melt, all handes shalbe letten doune, all stomackes shall faynte, and all knees shal waxe feble. Beholde, it commeth and shalbe fulfilled, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 21:8 Agayne the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayinge:
Ezekiel 21:9 Thou sonne of man, prophecye and speake: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: speake, the swearde is sharpened and well scoured.
Ezekiel 21:10 Sharpened is it for the slaughter, & scoured that it may be bright. O, the destroyinge staf of my sonne, shall bringe doune all wod.
Ezekiel 21:11 He hath put his swerd to the dighting the good holde may be taken of it. This swerd is sharpened & dight, that it may be geuen into the hande of the manslayer.
Ezekiel 21:12 Crie (O thou sonne of man) and howle, for this swerde shall smyte my people, & all the rulers in Israel, which with my people shall be slayne doune to the grounde thorow this swerde.
Ezekiel 21:13 Smyte thou vpon the thyghe, for wherfore shoulde not the plage & staf of iudgement come?
Ezekiel 21:14 Prophecy thou sonne of man, & smite thine handes together: make the swerd two edged, yea make it thre edged, that manslayers swerde, that swerde of the greate slaughter, whiche shall smyte them, euen in their preuichambres,
Ezekiel 21:15 to make them abashed & faynt at the hertes, and in all gates to make some of them fall. O how bright and sharpe it is, how well dight & mete for the slaughter.
Ezekiel 21:16 Get the to some place alone, ether vpon the ryght hand or on the left, whether soeuer thy face turneth.
Ezekiel 21:17 I wyll smyte my handes together also, & satisfye my wrothful indignacion. Euen I the Lorde haue sayde it.
Ezekiel 21:18 The worde of the Lorde came yet vnto me agayne sayenge:
Ezekiel 21:19 Thou sonne of man, make the two stretes, that the swerde of the kynge of Babylon maye come. Bothe these stretes shall go oute of one lande. He shall set him vp a place, at the heade of the strete shall he chose hym oute of a corner.
Ezekiel 21:20 Make the a strete, that the swerde maye come towarde Kabath of the Ammonites, and to the stronge cytye of Ierusalem.
Ezekiel 21:21 For the kinge of Babylon shall stande in the turning of the waye, at the head of the two stretes, to aske councell at the sothsayers, castynge the lottes with hys arowes to aske councell at the Idols, and to loke in the lyuer.
Ezekiel 21:22 But the sothsayenge shall poynte to the ryght syde vpon Ierusalem, that he maye set men of warre, to smyte it wyth a greate noyse, to crye out Alarum, to set batelrammes agaynst the gates, to graue vp dyches, and to make bulworckes.
Ezekiel 21:23 Neuertheles, as for the sothsayenge, they shal holde it but for vanitie, euen as thoughe a yest were tolde them: yea & they them selues remembre their wyckednesse, so that by ryght they must be taken and wonne.
Ezekiel 21:24 Therfore sayeth the Lord God: For so muche as ye youre selues shew your offence, & haue opened your wickednesse, so that in all your worckes men may se youre synnes: yea in so muche (I say) that ye youre selues haue made mencyon thereof ye shalbe taken by vyolence.
Ezekiel 21:25 O thou shamefull wycked gyde of Israel whose daye is come: euen the tyme that wyckednesse shall haue an ende.
Ezekiel 21:26 Thus sayeth the Lorde God: take away the myre, and put of the croune, and so is it awaye: the humble is exalted, and the proude brought low.
Ezekiel 21:27 Punish punyshe, yea punish them will I, and destroy them: and that shall not be fulfilled vntyll he come, to whome the iudgement belongeth, & to whome I haue geuen it.
Ezekiel 21:28 And thou (O sonne of man) prophecye and speake: Thus sayeth the Lorde God to the children of Ammon, and to their blasphemye, speake thou: The swerde, the swerde is drawen forth al readye to the slaughter, and scoured that it glistreth
Ezekiel 21:29 (because thou hast loked the out vanities, and prophecied lies) that it may come vpon thy necke, like as vpon the other vngodly, which be slayne: whose day came, when their wickednesse was full.
Ezekiel 21:30 Though it were put vp agayn into the sheath, yet wyl I punysh the, in the land where thou wast noryshed and borne,
Ezekiel 21:31 and pour my indignacion vpon the and will blowe vpon the in the fyre of my wrath, and delyuer the vnto cruell people, whych are learned to destroye.
Ezekiel 21:32 Thou shalt fede the fyre and thy bloud shall be shed in the lande, that thou mayest be put out of remembraunce. Euen I the Lord haue spoken it.

CHAPTER: 22

Ezekiel 22:1 Moreouer, the worde of the lord came vnto me, & sayd:
Ezekiel 22:2 thou sonne of man, wilt thou not reproue his bluodthursty citye? Shewe hem their abhomynacions,
Ezekiel 22:3 and tell them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: O thou cyty, that sheddest bloude in the middest of the, that thy tyme may come also: & makest the Idoles to defyle the withall.
Ezekiel 22:4 Thou haste made thy selfe gyltye, in the bloud that thou hast shed: & defyled the in the Idoles, whiche thou hast made. Thou hast caused thy dayes to drawe nye, & made the tyme of thy yeares to come. Therfore wyll I make the to be confounded among the Heathen, & to be despysed in all the landes,
Ezekiel 22:5 whether they be nye or farre from the: they shal laugh the to scorne, thou that hast gotten the so foule a name, & art full of myschefe.
Ezekiel 22:6 Beholde, the rulers of Israel haue brought euery man his power, to shed bloud in the.
Ezekiel 22:7 In the haue they dispysed father & mother, in the haue they oppressed the straunger, in the haue they vexed the widdowe and the fatherlesse.
Ezekiel 22:8 Thou haste despysed my Sanctuarye, and vnhalowed my Sabboth.
Ezekiel 22:9 Murtherers are there in the, that shede bloude, & eate vpon the hylles, and in the they vse vnhappynesse.
Ezekiel 22:10 In the haue they discouered their fathers shame, in the haue they vexed wemen in their sicknesse.
Ezekiel 22:11 Euery man hath dealte shamefully wyth hys neyghboures wyfe, and abhomynably defiled his doughter in law. In the hath euery man forced his owne syster, euen his fathers doughter:
Ezekiel 22:12 yea gyftes haue bene receyued in the, to shede bloude. Thou haste taken vsury and encreace, thou haste oppressed thy neyghbours by extorcion, and forgotten me, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 22:13 Beholde, I haue smitten my handes vpon thy couetousnesse, that thou hast vsed, and vpon the bloude whyche hath bene shed in the.
Ezekiel 22:14 Is thy herte able to endure it, or may thy handes defende them selues in the tyme that I shall brynge vpon the? Euen I the Lorde that speake it, will brynge it also to passe.
Ezekiel 22:15 I will scatre the amonge the Heathen, and strow the aboute in the landes, & wil cause thy filthinesse to ceasse oute of the:
Ezekiel 22:16 yea and I will haue the possession in the sight of the Heathen, that thou mayest know, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 22:17 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayinge:
Ezekiel 22:18 Thou sonne of man, the house of Israel is turned to drosse. Al they that shoulde be brasse, tynne, yron and leade, are in the fire become drosse.
Ezekiel 22:19 Therfore, thus sayeth the lord God: For so muche as ye all are turned into drosse, beholde, I wyl bringe you together vnto Ierusalem,
Ezekiel 22:20 lyke as syluer, brasse, yron, tynne and leade are put together in the fornace, and the fyre blowen there vnder to melt them. Euen so wil I gather you, put you in together, and melt you in my wrath and indignacyon.
Ezekiel 22:21 I will bringe you together, and kindle the fyre of my cruel displeasure vnder you, that ye may be melted therin.
Ezekiel 22:22 Lyke as the syluer is melted in the fyre, so shal ye also be melted therin, that ye may know, how that I the Lord haue poured my wrath vpon you.
Ezekiel 22:23 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayinge:
Ezekiel 22:24 Thou sonne of man, tell her: thou art an vncleane lande, whiche is not rayned vpon in the daye of the cruell wrath:
Ezekiel 22:25 thy Prophetes that are in the, are sworne together to deuoure soules, lyke as a roarynge Lyon, that lyueth by his praye. They receyue ryches and good, and make many widdowes in the.
Ezekiel 22:26 Thy priestes breake my lawe, and defyle my Sanctuarye. They put no dyfference betwene the holy and vnholy, nether discerne betwene the cleane and vncleane: they turne their eyes from my Sabbothes, & I am vnhalowed among them.
Ezekiel 22:27 Thy rulers in the ate like rauishing wolues, to shed bloude, and to destroye soules, for their owne couetous lucre.
Ezekiel 22:28 As for thy Prophetes, they dawbe wyth vntempered claye, they se vanytyes, and prophecye lyes vnto them, sayinge: the Lorde God sayeth so, where as the Lorde hathe not spoken.
Ezekiel 22:29 The people in the lande vseth wicked extorcyon and robbery. They vexe the poore and nedye and oppresse the straunger agaynste ryghte.
Ezekiel 22:30 And I soughte in the lande for a man, that woulde make vp the hedge, and set him selfe in the gappe before me in the landes behalfe, that I shoulde not vtterlye destroy it: but I coulde fynde none.
Ezekiel 22:31 Therfore will I pour out my cruel displeasure vpon them, and burne them in the fyre in my wrath: their owne wayes will I recompence vpon their heades sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 23

Ezekiel 23:1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 23:2 Thou sonne of man, there were two wemen, that had one mother:
Ezekiel 23:3 these (when they were younge) beganne to playe the harlottes in Egipte. There were their brestes brosed, and the pappes of their mayden head destroyed.
Ezekiel 23:4 The eldest of them was called Oholah and her youngest syster Oholibah. These two were myne, & bare sonnes and doughters. Their names were, Samaria, and that was Oholah: and Ierusalem, that was Oholibah.
Ezekiel 23:5 As for Oholah she beganne to go a whorynge, when I had taken her to me. She was set on fyre vpon her louers the Assirians,
Ezekiel 23:6 whiche had to do with her: euen the princes & lordes, that were deckte in costly araye: fayre younge men, lusty riders of horses.
Ezekiel 23:7 Thus thorowe her whordome she cleued vnto all the younge men of Assiria. Yea she was made vpon them, and defyled her self with al their Idols.
Ezekiel 23:8 Neyther ceassed she from the fornicacyon, that she vsed wyth the Egyptians, for in her youth they laye wt her, they brosed the brestes of her maydenheade, and poored their whordome vpon her.
Ezekiel 23:9 Wherfore I deliuered her into the handes of her louers euen the Assirians, whom she so loued.
Ezekiel 23:10 These discouered her shame, toke her sonnes and doughters, and slue her with the swerde. An euyll name gat she of all people, and they punyshed her.
Ezekiel 23:11 Her sister Oholibah sawe this, & destroyed her selfe with inordinate loue, more then she, & exceaded her syster in whordome:
Ezekiel 23:12 she loued the Assirians (which also lay wt her) namelye the princes & greate lordes, that were clothed with all maner of gorgyous apparell, all lustye horsemen and faire younge personnes.
Ezekiel 23:13 Then I sawe, that they bothe were defiled a like.
Ezekiel 23:14 But she increased still in whordome: for when she sawe men paynted vpon the wall, the ymages of the Caldees set forthe wyth freshe colours,
Ezekiel 23:15 with fayre gyrdles aboute them and goodly bonnettes vpon their heades, lokinge all like Princes (after the maner of the Babilonians and Caldees in their owne lande where they be borne)
Ezekiel 23:16 immediatly, as sone as she sawe them, she brent in loue vpon them, & sent messaungers for them into the lande of the Caldees.
Ezekiel 23:17 Now when the Babilonians came to her they laye with her, and defiled her with their whordome, and so was she polluted wyth them. And when her lust was abated from them:
Ezekiel 23:18 her whordome and shame was dyscouered & sene: then my herte forsoke her, lyke as my herte was gone from her syster also.
Ezekiel 23:19 Neuerthelesse she vsed her whordome euer the longer the more, and remembred the dayes of her youth, wherin she hath played the harlot in the lande of Egipte:
Ezekiel 23:20 she brent in lust vpon them, whose flesh was like the fleshe of Asses & their sede like the sede of horses.
Ezekiel 23:21 Thus thou hast renued the filthinesse of thy youth, when thy louers brosed thy pappes, & marred thy brestes in Egipte.
Ezekiel 23:22 Therfore (O Oholibah) thus sayeth the lord God. I will raise vp thy louers (with whom thou hast satisfied thy lust) against the, and gather them together rounde aboute the:
Ezekiel 23:23 namely, the Babilonians, & all the Caldees: Perod, Schoa and Coa, with al the Assirians: al younge and fayre louers: prynces and lordes knightes and gentlemen, whiche be all good horsmen:
Ezekiel 23:24 These shal come vpon the with horses, charrettes, and a great multitude of people: whiche shalbe harnessed about the on euery side, with brestplates, sheldes and helmettes. I will punishe the before them, yea they them selues shal punish the, accordinge to their owne iudgement.
Ezekiel 23:25 I will put my gelousy vpon the, so that they shall deale cruelly with the. They shall cut of thine nose and thyne eares, and the remnaunte shall fall thorow the swerde. They shall carie awaye thy sonnes and doughters, and the residue shalbe brent in the fyre.
Ezekiel 23:26 They shall stripe the oute of thy clothes, and cary the costly Iewels away with them.
Ezekiel 23:27 Thus wil I make an ende of thy filthinesse and whordome, whiche thou haste broughte oute of the lande of Egipte: so that thou shalt turne thyne eyes no more after them, and cast thy minde no more vpon Egipte.
Ezekiel 23:28 For thus sayeth the Lorde: behold, I wil deliuer the into the handes of them, whom thou hatest: yea euen into the handes of them, wt whom thou hast fulfilled thy lust,
Ezekiel 23:29 whiche shall deale cruellye with the: Al thy laboure shall they take with them, and leaue the naked & bare, & thus the shame of thy filthy whordome shal come to light.
Ezekiel 23:30 All these thynges shall happen vnto the, because of thy whordome, whyche thou hast vsed amonge the Gentiles wyth whose Idoles thou hast defiled thy selfe.
Ezekiel 23:31 Thou hast walcked in the waye of thy syster, therefore will I geue the her cuppe in thy hande.
Ezekiel 23:32 Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Thou shalte dryncke vp thy sisters cuppe, how depe and farre soeuer it be to the botome. Thou shalte be laughed to scorne, and had as greatlye in derysyon, as is possible.
Ezekiel 23:33 Thou shalte be full of dronckennes and sorowe, for the cuppe of thy sister Samaria is a cuppe of destruccyon and wastynge:
Ezekiel 23:34 the same shalt thou dryncke, & suppe it oute euen to the dregges, yea thou shalt eate vp the broken peces of it, and so feare thine owne brestes: For euen I haue spoken it, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 23:35 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: For so muche as thou hast forgotten me, & cast me aside, so beare now thyne owne fylthynesse & whordome.
Ezekiel 23:36 The Lord sayde moreouer vnto me: Thou sonne of man wilt thou not reproue Oholah and Oholibah? Shewe them their abhominacyons:
Ezekiel 23:37 namelye, that they haue broken their wedlocke, and stayned their handes with bloud: yea euen with their ydoles haue they committed aduoutry, & offered them their owne children (to be deuoured) whom they had borne vnto me.
Ezekiel 23:38 Yea, and this haue they done vnto me: also, they haue defiled my Sanctuary in that same daye, & haue vnhalowed my Sabboth.
Ezekiel 23:39 For when they haue slayne their children for their Idoles, they came the same daye into my Sanctuary to defile it. Lo, thys haue they done in my house.
Ezekiel 23:40 Beside all thys, thou hast sent thy messaungers for men oute of farre countreyes: and when they came, thou hast bated, trimmed and set forth thy selfe of the best fashion:
Ezekiel 23:41 thou sattest vpon a goodlye bed, & a table spred before the: whervpon thou hast set mine incense and myne oyle.
Ezekiel 23:42 Then was there greate cheare with her, & the men that were sent from farre countreyes ouer the desert, vnto these they gaue bracelettes vpon their handes, and set glorious crounes vpon their heades:
Ezekiel 23:43 then thought I: no doute, these will vse their harlotry also wyth yonder old whore.
Ezekiel 23:44 And they wente into her, as vnto a comen harlot: Euen so wente they also to Oholah & Oholibah those fylthy wemen.
Ezekiel 23:45 O ye all that loue vertu & ryghteousnes, iudge them, punish them, as aduoutrers and murtherers ought to be iudged & punished. For they are breakers of wedlocke, and the bloude is in their handes.
Ezekiel 23:46 Wherfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: bringe a great multitude of people vpon them, & make them be scatred and spoyled:
Ezekiel 23:47 these shall stone them, & gore them with their swerdes. They shall slaye their sonnes and doughters and burne vp their houses with fyre.
Ezekiel 23:48 Thus will I destroye all such filthynes out of the land: that al wemen may learne, not to do after your vnclennesse.
Ezekiel 23:49 And so they shal lay your filthinesse vpon your owne selues, & ye shalbe punished for the sinnes, that ye haue committed with your Idols, & ye shall know that I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 24

Ezekiel 24:1 In the .ix. year, in the .x. Moneth the .x. day of the Moneth, came the worde of the Lorde vnto me sayinge:
Ezekiel 24:2 O thou sonne of man wryte vp the name of this daye, yea euen the houre of this present day: when the kinge of Babilon set hym selfe agaynste Ierusalem.
Ezekiel 24:3 Shewe that obstinate housholde a parable and speake vnto them: Thus saieth the Lord God: Get the a pot, se it on, & poure water into it:
Ezekiel 24:4 put al the peces together in it, all the good peces: the loyne and the shoulder, and fyll it with the best bones.
Ezekiel 24:5 Take one of the best shepe, and an heape of bones with all: let it boyle well, and let the bones set well therin.
Ezekiel 24:6 With that sayde the Lorde God on thys maner: Wo be vnto the bloudye citie of the pot, whervpon the rustinesse hangeth, and is not yet scoured awaye. Take out the peces that are in it, one after another: there neade not lottes be cast therfore,
Ezekiel 24:7 for the bloude is yet in it. Vpon a playne drye stone hath she poured it, and not vpon the grounde, that it might be couered with dust:
Ezekiel 24:8 & therfore haue I letten her poure her bloude vpon a playne drye stony rocke, because it should not be hid and that I might bringe my wrothful indignacion and vengeaunce vpon her.
Ezekiel 24:9 Wherfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: O wo be vnto that bloud thursty cyty, for whom I wyll prepare a heape of wood:
Ezekiel 24:10 beare thou the bones together, kindle you the fire, seeth the fleshe, let all be well soden, that the bones maye be suckte oute.
Ezekiel 24:11 Moreouer, set the pot empty vpon the coales, that it may be warme & the metall hote: that the fylth & rustinesse maye be consumed.
Ezekiel 24:12 But it wyl not go of, there is so muche of it: the rustinesse must be brent out.
Ezekiel 24:13 Thy filthinesse is abhominable, for I woulde haue clensed the, but thou wouldest not be clensed. Thou canste not be pourged from thyne vnclennesse, tyll I haue poured my wrothfull indignacyon vpon the.
Ezekiel 24:14 Euen I the Lorde haue so deuysed: Yea, it is come therto already, that I wil do it. I wyll not go backe, I will not spare, I will not be intreated: but accordynge to thy wayes & ymaginacions, thou shalt be punyshed, sayeth the lord God.
Ezekiel 24:15 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayinge:
Ezekiel 24:16 Thou sonne of man, beholde I wil take awaye the pleasure of thyne eyes with a plage: yet shalt thou neyther mourne, nor wepe, nor water thy chekes therfore:
Ezekiel 24:17 thou mayest mourne by thy self alone, but vse no deadly lamentacyon. Hold on thy bonet, and put on thy shues vpon thy fete, couer not thy face, and eate no mourners breade.
Ezekiel 24:18 So I spake vnto the people by tymes in the morninge and at euen my wyfe dyed: then vpon the next morowe, I did as I was commaunded.
Ezekiel 24:19 And the people sayde vnto me: wilt thou not tell vs, what that signifyeth, whyche thou doest?
Ezekiel 24:20 I answered them, the word of the lord came vnto me sayinge:
Ezekiel 24:21 Tell the house of Israell, thus sayeth the Lorde God: beholde, I wyl suspende my sanctuarye: euen the glorye of your power, the pleasure of youre eyes, & the thyng that ye loue, youre sonnes & doughters whome ye haue left, shall fal thorow the swerde.
Ezekiel 24:22 Lyke as I haue done, so shall ye do also: Ye shall not hide youre faces, ye shall eate no mourners bread:
Ezekiel 24:23 your bonnettes shall ye haue vpon youre heades, and shues vpon your fete. Ye shall neyther mourne nor wepe, but in youre sinnes ye shalbe sorowful, and one repente with another.
Ezekiel 24:24 Thus Ezechiel is your shewtoken. For loke as he hath done, so when this commeth ye shall do also: that ye maye learne to knowe that I am the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 24:25 But beholde, O thou sonne of man: In the daye, when I take from them their power, their ioye and honoure, the lust of their eyes, the burthen of their bodies: namelye, their sonnes and doughters.
Ezekiel 24:26 Then shall there one escape, and come vnto the, for to shew the.
Ezekiel 24:27 In that daye shall thy mouth be opened to him, whiche is escaped, that thou mayest speake, & be no more domme: Yea and thou shalt be their shewtoken, that they may knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 25

Ezekiel 25:1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
Ezekiel 25:2 Thou sonne of man, set thy face againste the Ammonites, prophecy vpon them,
Ezekiel 25:3 & say vnto the Ammonites: hear the worde of the Lorde God. Thus sayeth the Lorde God: For so muche as thou speakest ouer my Sanctuarye. A ha, I trow it be now suspended: and ouer the lande of Israel, I trowe it be nowe desolate: ye and ouer the house of Iuda, I trow they be now led away presoners:
Ezekiel 25:4 Beholde, I will deliuer the to the people of the east, that they maye haue the in possession, these shal set their castels and houses in the. They shall eate thy frute, & drincke vp thy milcke.
Ezekiel 25:5 As for Rabath. I will make of it a stall for camels, and of Ammon a shepefolde: & ye shal knowe, that I am the Lord.
Ezekiel 25:6 For thus sayeth the lord God: In so much as thou hast clapped with thine handes, and stamped with thy fete, yea reioysed in thyne herte ouer the lande of Israell with despyte:
Ezekiel 25:7 beholde, I will stretche out myne hand ouer the also, and delyuer the, to be spoyled of the Heathen, and rote the out from amonge the people, and cause the to be destroyed out of al landes: yea, I will make the be layed waste, that thou mayest know, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 25:8 Thus sayeth the Lorde God: For so much as Moab and Seir do say: As for the house of Iuda, it is but lyke as all other Gentyles be.
Ezekiel 25:9 Therfore beholde, I will make the cytyes of Moab weapenlesse, and take awaye their strength: thir cyties and chefe coastes of their lande, whiche are the pleasures of the countrey. As namelye: Bethiesimoth, Baalmeon and Cariathaim:
Ezekiel 25:10 these will I open vnto them of the East, that they maye fall vpon the Ammonites: and wil geue it them in possession, so that the Ammonites shall no more be had in remembraunce amonge the Heathen.
Ezekiel 25:11 Euen thus will I punishe Moab also, that they may knowe, how that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 25:12 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde God: Because that Edom hath auenged and eased him selfe vpon the house of Iuda,
Ezekiel 25:13 therefore thus sayeth the Lorde: I wyll reache oute myne hande vpon Edom, and take awaye man and beast oute of it. From Theman vnto Dedan will I make it desolate, they shalbe slayne wt the swearde.
Ezekiel 25:14 Thorowe my people of Israell will I auenge me agayne vpon Edom: they shall handle him, accordinge to my wrath & indignacion, so that they shall know my vengeaunce, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 25:15 Thus sayeth the Lorde God: For so much as the Philistines haue done this, namely taken vengeaunce with despitefully stomackes and of an olde euyl will set them selues to destroye.
Ezekiel 25:16 Therfore thus saith the Lorde God: Beholde: I will stretch oute mine hande ouer the Philistines, and destroye the destroyer, and cause all the remnaunt of the sea coaste to perishe.
Ezekiel 25:17 A greate vengeaunce will I take vpon them, & punish them cruelly: that they maye knowe, how that I am the Lorde, which haue auenged me of them.

CHAPTER: 26

Ezekiel 26:1 It happened, that in the .xi. yeare the firste daye of the Moneth, the worde of the Lord came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 26:2 Thou sonne of man, because that Tyre hathe spoken vpon Ierusalem: A ha, now I trow the portes of the people be broken, & she turned vnto me, for I haue destroied my bely ful:
Ezekiel 26:3 yea therfore saieth the lord God. Beholde O Tire I wil vpon the, I wil bring a great multitude of people agaynst the, lyke as when the sea ariseth with his waues:
Ezekiel 26:4 These shal breake the walles of Tire, and cast doune her toures. I wil scrape the ground from her, & make her a bare stone:
Ezekiel 26:5 yea as the dryinge place, where the fyshers hange vp their nettes by the sea syde. Euen I haue spoken it, sayeth the Lorde God. The gentyles shal spoile her:
Ezekiel 26:6 her doughters vpon the felde shall peryshe with the swerde, that they may knowe, how that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 26:7 For thus sayeth the Lord God: Beholde, I will bringe hither Nabuchodonozor (which is the Kynge of Babylon, and a kinge of kinges) from the North vpon Tire, with horses charettes, horsmen, and with a greate multytude of people.
Ezekiel 26:8 Thy doughters that are in the lande, shall he slaye with the swearde: but agaynst the, he shal make bulworckes & graue vp diches aboute the, & lyft vp his shylde againste the.
Ezekiel 26:9 His slynges and batelrammes shall he prepare for thy walles, and with his weapens breake doune thy towres.
Ezekiel 26:10 The dust of his horses shall couer the: they shalbe so many: thy walles shall shake at the noyse of the horse men, charettes and wheles: when he cometh to thy portes, as men do into an open cyty.
Ezekiel 26:11 With the hostes of his horse fete, shall he treade doune all thy stretes. He shall sleye thy people with the swerde, & breake doune the pylers of thy strengthe.
Ezekiel 26:12 They shal wast awaye thy riches, and spoile thy marchaundyse. Thy walles shall they breake doune, and destroy thy houses of pleasure. Thy stones, thy timbre and foundacions shal they cast in the water.
Ezekiel 26:13 Thus will I bring the melody of thy songes, and the voyce of thy minstrelsy to an ende, so that they shall no more be hearde.
Ezekiel 26:14 I will make a bare stone of the, yea a dryinge places for nettes, & shalt neuer be builded agayne: For euen I the lord haue spoken it, sayeth the Lorde God:
Ezekiel 26:15 thus hath the Lord God spoken concerning Tire. The Iles shalbe moued at the noyse of thy fall, & at the crye of the slayne, that shall be murthered in the.
Ezekiel 26:16 Al kinges of the sea shall come doun from their seates regal, they shal laye awaye their roabes, & put of their costly clothinge. Yea with tremblinge shal they be clothed, they shall syt vpon the ground: they shalbe afrayed at thy soden fall, and be abashed at the.
Ezekiel 26:17 They shall mourne for the, and saye vnto the: O thou noble city, that hast bene so greatly occupyed of olde, thou that haste bene the strongest vpon the sea with thine inhabitours of whom al men stode in feare: How art thou nowe so vtterlye destroyed?
Ezekiel 26:18 Nowe at the tyme of thy fal the inhabytoures of the Iles, yea and the Iles them selues, shall stande in feare at thyne ende.
Ezekiel 26:19 For thus sayeth the Lord God: when I make the a desolate cytye (as other cities be, that no man dwell in) and when I brynge the depe vpon the, that greate waters maye couer the:
Ezekiel 26:20 Then wyl I cast the doune vnto them, that descende into the pytte: vnto a people that hath bene longe deade, and set the in a lande that is beneth, lyke the olde wildernesse, with them whiche go doune to their graues, so that no man shall dwell more in the. And I wyll make the to be no more in honoure in the lande of the lyuynge.
Ezekiel 26:21 I wil make an ende of the, and thou shalt be gone. Thoughe thou be sought for, yet shalte thou not be founde for euermore, sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 27

Ezekiel 27:1 The word of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 27:2 O thou sonne of man, make a lamentable complaynte vpon Tyre,
Ezekiel 27:3 and say vpon Tyre, whyche is a porte of the sea, that occupyeth with muche people and many Iles: thus speaketh the Lord God: O Tire thou hast sayde: what, I am a noble cytye:
Ezekiel 27:4 thy borders are in the middest of the sea, & thy buylders haue made the maruelous goodly.
Ezekiel 27:5 All thy tables haue they made of Cypre trees of the mount Sanir. From Libanus haue they taken Cedre trees, to make the mastes:
Ezekiel 27:6 and the Okes of Basan to make the rowers. Thy boordes haue they made of yuery, & of costly wood out of the Ile of Cethim.
Ezekiel 27:7 Thy sayle was of white small nedle worcke oute of the land of Egipte, to hang vpon thy mast & thy hanginges of yalowe sylcke purple, out of the Iles of Elisah.
Ezekiel 27:8 They of Sydon and Arnah were thy mariners, and the wisest in Tyre were thy shipmaysters.
Ezekiel 27:9 The eldest and wisest at Gebal were they, that mended and stopped thy shippes. All shippes of the sea with their shipmen occupied their marchaundyes in the.
Ezekiel 27:10 The Perses, Lydians and Lybians were in thine host, & helped the to fight: these hanged vp their shildes & helmettes wt the, these set forth thy bewty.
Ezekiel 27:11 They of Arnad were with thine host round about thy walles, and were thy watchmen vpon thy towres, these hanged vp their shildes rounde aboute thy walles, & made the maruelous goodlye.
Ezekiel 27:12 Tharsis occupied wt the in all maner of wares, in siluer, yron, tinne & lead, and made thy market great.
Ezekiel 27:13 Iauan, Tubal, & Mesech were thy marchauntes which brought the men, & ornamentes of metal for thy occupying.
Ezekiel 27:14 They of the house of Thogarma brought vnto the at the tyme of thy marte, horse, horsmen and mules.
Ezekiel 27:15 They of Dedan were thy marchauntes: & many other Iles that occupied with the, brought the whethers, elephant bones and Paycockes for a present.
Ezekiel 27:16 The Sirians occupied wt the, because of thy diuerse worckes, & increased thy marchaundies, with Smaragdes, with scarlet, with nedle worcke, wt white lynen cloth, with silcke and with Christall.
Ezekiel 27:17 Iuda and the lande of Israel occupied with the, and brought vnto thy markettes, wheate balme, hony, oyle and triacle.
Ezekiel 27:18 Damascus also vsed marchaundyes with the, in the beste wine and whyte woll, because the occupying was so greate, & thy wares so manye.
Ezekiel 27:19 Dan, Iauan, and Meusall haue broughte vnto thy markettes, yron redy made, with Casia and Calamus, accordinge to thyne occupyinge.
Ezekiel 27:20 Dedan occupied with the, in fayre tapestrye worcke & quishins.
Ezekiel 27:21 Arabia & al the prynces of Cedar haue occupied with the, in shepe, wethers and goates.
Ezekiel 27:22 The marchauntes of Seba and Rema haue occupied also with the, in al costlye spices, in all precious stones and goulde, which they broughte vnto thy markettes.
Ezekiel 27:23 Haran, Chene and Eden, the marchauntes of Saba, Assiria and Chelmad, were al doers with the,
Ezekiel 27:24 and occupyed with the: In costly raiment, of yalow silcke and nedle worcke (very precious, and therfore packte & bounde together with roapes) Yea and in Cedre wood, of the tyme of thy markettes.
Ezekiel 27:25 The shippes of Tharsis were the chefe of thy occupyinge. Thus thou art ful, and in great worshippe euen in the middest of the sea.
Ezekiel 27:26 Thy mariners were euen bringinge vnto the oute of manye waters. But the East wynde shall ouerbeare the into the myddest of the sea,
Ezekiel 27:27 so that thy wares, thy marchaundies, thy riches, thy mariners, thy shipmaisters, thy helpers, thy occupiers (that brought the thinges necessarye) the men of warre that are in the: yea and all thy commens shall peryshe in the myddest of the sea, in the daye of thy fall.
Ezekiel 27:28 The suburbes shall shake at the loude crye of thy shipmen.
Ezekiel 27:29 All whirry men, and all maryners vpon the sea, shal leape oute of their boates, and let them selues vpon the land.
Ezekiel 27:30 They shal lyft vp their voice because of the, and make a lamentable crye. They shall cast dust vpon their heades, & lye doune in the ashes.
Ezekiel 27:31 They shall shaue them selues, and put sacke clothe vpon them for thy sake. They shal mourne for the with hertfull sorowe,
Ezekiel 27:32 and heauy lamentacion, yea their children also shal wepe for the. Alas, what cytye hath so bene destroyed in the sea, as Tyre is?
Ezekiel 27:33 When thy wares & marchaundies came from the seas, thou gauest al people ynoughe. The kinges of the earth hast thou made ryche, thorowe the multytude of thy wares and occupyinge.
Ezekiel 27:34 But thou art nowe caste doune into the depe of the sea, al thy resorte of people is perished with the.
Ezekiel 27:35 All they that dwell in the Iles are abashed at the, and all their kinges are afrayed, yea their faces haue chaunced colour.
Ezekiel 27:36 The marchauntes of the nacions wondre at the, In that thou arte so cleane broughte to naught, and commeth no more vp.

CHAPTER: 28

Ezekiel 28:1 The word of the lord came vnto me saying:
Ezekiel 28:2 Thou sonne of man, tell the Prince of Tyre. Thus saieth the lord god because thou haste a proude hert & hast said: I am a god: I haue my seate in the middest of the sea like a God, where as thou art but a man and not God, & yet standest in thine own conceyt, that thou art God.
Ezekiel 28:3 Behold, thou thinckest thy self wyser then Daniel, that there is no secretes hyd from the.
Ezekiel 28:4 With thy wysedome and thy vnderstanding, thou hast gotten the great welthinesse, and gathered treasure of syluer and goulde.
Ezekiel 28:5 With thy great wysedome and occupying, hast thou increased thy power, and because of thy great ryches, thy hert is proude.
Ezekiel 28:6 Therfore thus sayeth the Lord God: For so muche as thou hast lyft vp thyne herte, as though thou were God:
Ezekiel 28:7 behold, I wil bring enemies vpon the, euen the tyrauntes of the Heathen: these shall drawe out their swerdes vpon thy bewtye and wysedome, and shall defyle thy glory.
Ezekiel 28:8 They shall cast the doune to the pytte, so that thou shalt dye in the middest of the sea,
Ezekiel 28:9 as they that be slayne. Let se, yf thou wylt saye then (before them that slaye the) I am God: where as thou arte but a man and not God, in the handes of them that slay the.
Ezekiel 28:10 Dye shalte thou, euen as the vncircumcysed in the handes of the enemyes: for I my selfe haue spoken it, sayeth the Lord God.
Ezekiel 28:11 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 28:12 Thou sonne of man, make a lamentable complaynte ouer the kynge of Tyre, and tell hym: Thus sayth the Lorde God: Thou arte a seale of a lykenesse, full of wysdome & excellente beutye.
Ezekiel 28:13 Thou hast ben in the pleasaunte garden of God: thou art dect with all maner of precyous stones: wyth Ruby, Topas, Christal, Iacincte, Onic, Iaspys, Saphyr, Smaragde, Carbuncle, and golde. Thy bewty and the holes that be in the, were set forthe in the daye of thy creacyon.
Ezekiel 28:14 Thou arte a fayre Cherub, stretched wyde oute for to couer. I haue set the vpon the holye mounte of God, there hast thou bene, and walked among the fayre glysterynge stones.
Ezekiel 28:15 From the tyme of thy creacyon thou haste bene ryghte excellent, tyll wyckednesse was founde in the.
Ezekiel 28:16 Because of thy greate marchaundyse, thy hert is full of wickednesse, and thou haste offended. Therfore wyll I caste the from the mounte of God (O thou couerynge Cherub) and destroye the among the glisteryng stones.
Ezekiel 28:17 Thy herte was proud in thy fayre beuty, & thorow thy beuty thou haste destroyed thy wysdom. I wil cast the doune to the ground, & that in the sight of kinges.
Ezekiel 28:18 Thou haste defyled thy sanctuarye, wyth the great wyckednesse of thy vnryghteous occupyenge. I wyl brynge a fyre from the myddest of the, to consume the: and wyll make the to ashes, in the syghte of al them that loke vpon the.
Ezekiel 28:19 All they that haue bene acquaynted with the amonge the Heathen shalbe abashed at the, seynge thou arte so cleane brought to naught, and commest no more vp.
Ezekiel 28:20 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayenge:
Ezekiel 28:21 Thou sonne of man, set thy face agaynst Sydon. Prophecy vpon it,
Ezekiel 28:22 and speake Thus sayth the Lorde God: Beholde o Sidon, I wyll vpon the, and get me honoure in the: that it maye be knowne, howe that I am the Lorde, when I punyshe her, and get me honoure in her.
Ezekiel 28:23 For I wyll sende pestilence and bloudsheddyng into her streates, so that those which be slayne with the swearde, shall lye rounde aboute in the myddest of her: and they shall knowe, that I am the Lord.
Ezekiel 28:24 She shal no more be a prickinge thorne, and an hurtynge breer vnto the house of Israel, nor vnto them that lye rounde aboute her, and hate her, and they shall knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 28:25 Thus sayth the Lord God: when I gather the housholde of Israel together agayne from the nacyons amonge whom they be scatered: then shall I be sanctifyed in them, in the sight of the Gentyles, & they shal dwell in the lande that I gaue to my seruaunte Iacob.
Ezekiel 28:26 They shall dwell safely therin, buylde houses, and plante vyneyardes: yea safely shal they dwel therin, when I haue punyshed all those, that despyse them rounde aboute: and then shall they knowe, that I am the Lorde theyr God.

CHAPTER: 29

Ezekiel 29:1 In the .x. yeare vpon the .xij. day of the .x. moneth, the word of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 29:2 O thou sonne of man, set nowe thy face agaynste Pharao the kynge of Egypte, Prophecye agaynst him & against the whole lande of Egypte:
Ezekiel 29:3 Speake, & tel him: thus sayth the Lorde God: Beholde O Pharao thou kynge of Egypte, I wyll vpon the, thou greate dragon, that lyest in the waters: thou that sayest: the water is myne. I haue made it my selfe.
Ezekiel 29:4 I wyl put an hoke in thy chawes, & hange al the fysh in thy waters vpon thy scales, after that I wyl draw the out of thy waters, yea and all the fyshe of thy waters that hange vpon thy scales.
Ezekiel 29:5 I wyll caste the oute vpon the drye lande: wyth the fysh of thy waters, so that thou shalte lye vpon the felde. Thou shalte not be gathered nor taken vp: but shalte be meate for the beastes of the feld, and for the foules of the ayre,
Ezekiel 29:6 that al thei whiche dwell in Egypte, maye knowe, that I am the Lorde: because thou haste bene a staffe of rede to the house of Israel.
Ezekiel 29:7 When they toke hold of the with theyr hand thou brakest & pryekest them on euerye syde, & yf they leaned vpon the, thou brakest & hurtest the reynes of theyr backes.
Ezekiel 29:8 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: beholde, I wyll brynge a swearde vpon the, & rote oute of the bothe man and beaste.
Ezekiel 29:9 Yea the lande of Egypte shalbe desolate and waste, & they shal knowe, that I am the Lord. Because he sayde: the water is myne, I my selfe haue made it.
Ezekiel 29:10 Beholde, therfore, I wyll vpon the & vpon thy waters: I wyll make the lande of Egypte waste and desolate, from the towre of Syenes vnto the borders of the Moryans land,
Ezekiel 29:11 so that in .xl. yeares there shall no fote of man walcke there, neyther fote of cattell go there, neyther shall it be inhabyted.
Ezekiel 29:12 I wyll make the lande of Egypte to be desolate, amonge other waste countreyes, and her cytyes to lye voyde .xl. yeares, among other voyde cytyes: And I wyll scatre the Egypcyans amonge the Heathen and nacyons.
Ezekiel 29:13 Agayne, thus saith the Lorde God: When the .xl. yeares are expyred, I wyll gather the Egypcyans together agayne, oute of the nacyons, among whome they were scatred,
Ezekiel 29:14 and wyll brynge the presoners of Egypte agayne into the lande of Pathures theyr owne natyue countre, that they maye be there a lowlye small kyngdome:
Ezekiel 29:15 yea they shalbe the smallest amonge other kyngedomes, leste they exalte them selues aboue the Heathen, for I wyll so monyshe them
Ezekiel 29:16 that they shal no more rule the Heathen. They shall no more be an hope vnto the house of Israel, neyther prouoke them anye more wyckednesse, to cause them turne backe, & to folowe them: and they shall knowe that I am the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 29:17 In the .xxvij. yeare, the fyrste daye of the fyrste moneth, came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 29:18 Thou sonne of man, Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon hath made hys hoste, wyth greate trauayle and laboure to come before Tyre: that euerye head may be balde, and euerye shoulder bare. Yet hath Tyre geuen neyther hym nor hys hoost anye rewarde, for the greate trauayle that he hath taken there.
Ezekiel 29:19 Therfore thus sayeth the Lord god: beholde, I wyl geue the lande of Egypt vnto Nabuchodonosor the kynge of Babylon, that he maye take awaye all her substaunce, robbe her robberyes, and spoyle her spoyles, to pay hys hoste theyr wagyes wythall.
Ezekiel 29:20 I wil geue hym the lande of Egypte for hys labour, that he toke for me before Tyre.
Ezekiel 29:21 At the same tyme wyll I cause the horne of the house of Israell to growe forthe, & open thy mouth agayne amonge them: that they maye knowe, howe that I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 30

Ezekiel 30:1 The worde of the Lord came moreouer vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 30:2 thou sonne of man, prophecye & speake: thus sayth the Lorde God: Mourne wo worth this daye,
Ezekiel 30:3 for the daye is here, the daye of the Lorde is come: the darck daye of the Heathen, the houre is at hande,
Ezekiel 30:4 the swearde commeth vpon Egypte. When the wounded men fall doune in Egypte, when her people are taken awaye, and when her foundacyons are destroyed,
Ezekiel 30:5 the Moryans lande shall be afrayed, yea the Moryans lande, Lybya and Lydia, al theyr comen people, & Chub and al that be confederate vnto them, shal fal with them thorowe the swearde.
Ezekiel 30:6 Thus sayeth the Lorde: The maynteyners of the land of Egypt shall fall, the pryde of her power shall come doune: euen vnto the tower of Syenes shall they be slayne doune wyth the swearde, sayeth the Lorde God:
Ezekiel 30:7 amonge other desolate countreys they shalbe made desolate, & amonge other waste cytyes they shalbe wasted.
Ezekiel 30:8 And they shal know, that I am the Lorde, when I kyndle a fyre in Egypte, and when all her helpers are destroyed.
Ezekiel 30:9 At that tyme, shall theyr messaungers go forth fro me in shippes, to make the carelesse Morians afrayed, and sorowe shall come vpon them in the daye of Egypte for doubtles it shall come.
Ezekiel 30:10 Thus sayth the Lorde God: I wyll make an ende of the people of Egypte thorowe the hande of Nabuchodonosor kynge of Babylon.
Ezekiel 30:11 He and hys people with hym, yea and the cruell Tyrauntes of the heathen shalbe broughte to destroye the lande. They shal drawe oute theyr sweardes vpon Egypte, and fyl the land full of slayne men.
Ezekiel 30:12 I wyll drye vp theyr floudes of water, and sel the lande into the handes of wycked people. The lande and al that is therin, wyl I destroye thorowe the enemyes. Euen I the Lorde haue sayde it.
Ezekiel 30:13 And thus sayth the Lorde God: I wyll destroye the Idols, and bryng the ymages of Noph to an ende. There shal no more be a Prince of Egypte, and a fearfulnes wyl I sende into the Egypcyans lande.
Ezekiel 30:14 As for Pathures, I wyl make it desolate, & kindle a fire in Zoan. Alexandria wyll I punysh
Ezekiel 30:15 and poure my wrothful indignacion vpon Sin, whiche is the strengthe of Egypte. All the substaunce of Alexandria will I destroye,
Ezekiel 30:16 and kyndle a fyre in Egypte. Sin shalbe in greate heauynesse, Alexandria shalbe roted oute, and Noph shall haue daylye sorowe.
Ezekiel 30:17 The beste men of Helyopolis & Bubasto shalbe slayne wyth the swearde, & caryed awaye captyue.
Ezekiel 30:18 At Taphnis the daye shalbe darcke, when I breake there the scepter of the lande of Egypte, and when the pompe of her power shall haue an ende. A cloud shal couer her, & her doughters shalbe led awaye into captyuyte.
Ezekiel 30:19 Thus wyll I punysh Egipte that they may know, how that I am the Lord.
Ezekiel 30:20 It happened in the .xi. yeare, vpon the seuenth daye of the fyrste Moneth, that the Lordes worde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 30:21 Beholde, thou sonne of man, I wyl breake the arme of Pharao kynge of Egypte: & lo it shall not be bound vp to be healed, neyther shall any playstre be layed vpon it, for to ease it, or to make it so stronge, as to holde a sweard.
Ezekiel 30:22 Therfore, thus sayth the Lorde God: Beholde, I wyl vpon Pharao the kynge of Egypte, and bruse hys strong arme (yet is it but a broken one) & wyl smyte the swearde oute of hys hande.
Ezekiel 30:23 As for the Egypcyans, I wyl scatre them amonge the Heathen, & strowe them in the landes aboute.
Ezekiel 30:24 Agayne I wil strength the arme of the kynge of Babilon, & geue him my swerd in hys hande, but I wyl breake Pharaos arme so that he shall holde it before hym pyteously lyke a wounded man.
Ezekiel 30:25 Yea I wyll stablyshe the kyng of Babylons arme, & the armes of Pharao shal fal doune, that it maye be knowne, that I am the Lord, which geue the kynge of Babylon my swearde in his hand, that he may draw it out vpon the land of Egypte:
Ezekiel 30:26 & that when I scatre the Egypcyans amonge the Gentyles, and strowe them in the landes aboute, they maye knowe, that I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 31

Ezekiel 31:1 Moreouer, it happened in the .xi. yeare the fyrst daye of the third Moneth that the worde of the Lorde came vnto me sayinge:
Ezekiel 31:2 Thou sonne of man speake vnto Pharao the kynge of Egypte and to all hys people: Whome arte thou lyke in thy greatenesse?
Ezekiel 31:3 Beholde, Assur was lyke a Cedre tree vpon the mount of Lybanus wyth fayre braunches, so thicke, that he gaue shadowes & shote oute very hye. Hys toppe reached vnto the cloudes.
Ezekiel 31:4 The waters made hym great, & the depe set hym vp an hye. Rounde aboute the rotes of hym ranne there floudes of water, he sente oute hys lytle ryuers vnto al the trees of the felde.
Ezekiel 31:5 Therfore was he hyer then all the trees of the felde, and thorowe the multytude of waters that he sente from hym, he obtayned manye longe braunches.
Ezekiel 31:6 All foules of the ayre made theyr nestes in hys braunches, vnder his bowes gendred all these beastes of the felde and vnder hys shadowe dwelte all people.
Ezekiel 31:7 Fayre and beutyful was he in hys greatnesse and in the length of hys braunches, for hys rote stode besyde great waters,
Ezekiel 31:8 no Cedre tree myght hyde hym. In the pleasaunte garden of God, there was no fyrre tre lyke his braunches, the plaine trees were not lyke the bowes of hym. All the trees in the garden of God myght not be compared vnto hym in hys beuty
Ezekiel 31:9 so fayre and goodly had I made him wyth the multytude of hys braunches: In so muche that al the trees in the pleasaunte garden of God, had enuye at hym.
Ezekiel 31:10 Therfore, thus saith the Lorde God: for so muche as he hath lyfte vp him self so hye, & stretched his toppe into the cloudes, & seynge hys herte is proude in hys hyghnesse:
Ezekiel 31:11 I wyl delyuer hym into the handes of the myghtyest amonge the Heathen, which shall rote hym oute. Accordyng to hys wickednes will I cast him awaye,
Ezekiel 31:12 the enemyes shall destroye hym, and the myghty men of the Heathen shall so scatre hym, that his braunches shall lye vpon all mountaynes & in al valeys: hys bowes shalbe broken doune to the ground thorowoute the lande. Then all the people of the lande shal go from hys shadowe, and forsake hym.
Ezekiel 31:13 When he is fallen, all the foules of the ayre shal syt vpon hym, & all wyld beastes of the felde shall go aboute among his braunches:
Ezekiel 31:14 so that from henceforth, no tre in the water shall attayne to hys hyghnesse, nor reache hys toppe vnto the cloudes, neyther shall any tre of the water stand so hye, as he hath done. For vnto death shall they all be delyuered vnder the earthe, and go doune to the graue, like other men.
Ezekiel 31:15 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lord God: In the daye when he goeth doune to the graue, I wyl cause a lamentacyon to be made, I wyll couer the depe vpon him, I wyll staunche his floudes, and the great waters shalbe restraigned. I shall cause Lybanus to be sorowful for hys sake, and all the trees of the felde shall be smytten.
Ezekiel 31:16 I wyll make the Heathen shake at the sounde of hys fall, when I caste hym doune to hell, with them that descende into the pytte. All the trees of Eden, with all the chosen and best trees of Lybanus, yea and all they that are planted vpon the waters, shall mourne with him also in the lower habytacyons:
Ezekiel 31:17 for they shall go doune to hell wyth hym, vnto them that be slayne with the swearde, whiche dwelte afore vnder the shadowe of hys arme amonge the Heathen.
Ezekiel 31:18 To whome shalte thou be lykened, that arte so gloryous and greate, amonge the trees of Eden? Yet arte thou cast doune vnder the earthe (amonge the trees of Eden) where thou muste lye amonge vncyrcumcysed, with them that be slayne with the swearde. Euen thus is it with Pharao and al hys people, sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 32

Ezekiel 32:1 In the .xij. yeare, the fyrste day of the .xij. Moneth, the word of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 32:2 Thou sonne of man, take vp a lamentacyon vpon Pharao the kynge of Egypte, and saye vnto hym: Thou arte reputed as a Lyon of the Heathen, & as a whalfyshe in the sea. Thou castest thy waters about the, thou troublest the waters with thy fete, and stampest in theyr floudes.
Ezekiel 32:3 Thus sayth the Lorde God: I wyll sprede my nette ouer the, namelye, a greate multytude of people: these shall dryue the into my yarne,
Ezekiel 32:4 for I wyll caste the vpon the lande, and let the lye vpon the felde, that all the foules of the ayre maye syt vpon the: I wyll geue al the beastes of the felde ynoughe of the.
Ezekiel 32:5 Thy flesh wyll I caste vpon the hylles, and fyl the valleyes wt thy hyghnesse.
Ezekiel 32:6 I wyl water the land with the aboundaunce of thy bloude euen to the mountaynes, and the valleys shall be full of the.
Ezekiel 32:7 When thou arte put oute, I wyll couer the heauen, and make hys starres dymme. I wyll sprede a cloude ouer the sunne, and the moone shall not geue her lyghte.
Ezekiel 32:8 All the lyghtes of heauen wyll I put oute ouer the, and brynge darckenesse vpon thy lande, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 32:9 I will trouble the hertes of many people, when I brynge thy destruccyon amonge the Heathen & countrees, whom thou knowest not.
Ezekiel 32:10 Yea I wyl make many people with their kynges so afrayed thorowe the, that theyr hearre shal stand vp, when I shake my sweard at theyr faces Sodenly shall they be astonnyed, euerye man in hym selfe, at the day of thy fall.
Ezekiel 32:11 For thus sayeth the Lorde God: the kynge of Babylons swearde shall come vpon the,
Ezekiel 32:12 with the sweardes of the worthyes wyll I smyte doune thy people. Al they that be mightye amonge the Gentyles, shall waste the proude pompe of Egypte, and brynge doune all her people.
Ezekiel 32:13 All the cattell also of Egypte wyll I destroye, that they shall come no more vpon the waters: so that neyther mans fote, nor beastes clawe, shall stere them anye more.
Ezekiel 32:14 Then wyll I make theyr waters cleare, and cause theyr floudes to runne lyke oyle, sayeth the Lorde God:
Ezekiel 32:15 when I make the lande of Egypte desolate, and when the countre wyth al that is therin, shalbe layde waste: and when I smyte all them whiche dwell in it, that they maye knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 32:16 Thys is the mournyng, that the doughters of the Heathen shall make: Yea a sorowe and lamentacyon shal they take vp, vpon Egypte and al her people, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 32:17 In the .xij. yeare, the .xv. daye of the Moneth, came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 32:18 Thou sonne of man. Take vp a lamentacyon vpon the people of Egypte, and caste them doune, yea and the myghtye people of the Heathen also, euen with them that dwell beneth: and with them that go doune into the graue,
Ezekiel 32:19 Downe (how fayre soeuer thou be) and laye the wyth the vncyrcumcysed.
Ezekiel 32:20 Amonge those that be slayne wyth the swearde shall they lye. The swearde is geuen already, he shall be drawen forthe, and all hys people.
Ezekiel 32:21 The myghtye worthyes and hys helpers, that be gone doune, and lye wyth the vncyrcumcysed, and with them that be slayne wyth the swearde, shall speake to hym oute of the hell.
Ezekiel 32:22 Assur is there also with his companye, and theyr graues round about, which were slaine and fell all with the swearde,
Ezekiel 32:23 whose graues lye besyde hym in the lowe pytte. Hys comens are buryed rounde aboute hys graue, all together wounded, and slayne wyth the sweard whiche men afore tyme broughte feare into the lande of the lyuynge.
Ezekiel 32:24 There is Elam also wyth all hys people, and their graues round aboute: which al being wounded and slayne wyth the swearde, are gone doune vncircumcysed vnder the earthe, whiche neuertheles sometyme broughte feare into the lande of the lyuynge: for the whiche they beare theyr shame, wyth the other that be gone doune to the graue.
Ezekiel 32:25 Theyr buryall is geuen them, and al theyr people, amonge them that be slayne. Theyr graues are rounde aboute all them, which be vncyrcumcysed, & with them that be slayne thorowe the sweard: for seyng that in tymes past they made the lande of the lyuynge afrayed, they must now bear theyr owne shame, wt them that go doune to the pytte, and lye among them that be slayne.
Ezekiel 32:26 There is Mesech also and Tubal, & theyr people, and theyr graues rounde about. These al are among the vncircumcysed, & them that be slayne with the swearde, because afore tyme they made the lande of the lyuynge afrayed.
Ezekiel 32:27 Shulde not they then lye also amonge the worthyes, and vncyrcumcysed Gyauntes? which with theyr weapens are gone doune to hell: whose sweardes are layed vnder theyr heades, whose wickednesse is vpon theyr bones: because that as worthyes, they haue broughte feare into the lande of the lyuynge?
Ezekiel 32:28 Yea amonge the vncyrcumcysed shalte thou be destroyed, and slepe wyth them, that perysshed thorowe the swearde.
Ezekiel 32:29 There is the lande of Edom with her kinges & princes also, whiche with theyr strengthe are layed by them that were slayne with the swearde, yea amonge the vncyrcumcysed, and them whiche are gone doune into the pytte.
Ezekiel 32:30 Moreouer, there be all the prynces of the north wyth all the Sydonyans, whiche are gone doune to the slayne. With theyr feare & strength they are come to confusyon, and lye there vncyrcumcysed, amonge those that be slayne with the swearde: and beare theyr owne shame, with them that be gone doune to the pytte.
Ezekiel 32:31 Nowe when Pharao seyth thys, he shalbe comforted ouer all hys people, that is slayne wyth the swearde both Pharao and all hys host, sayeth the lord God.
Ezekiel 32:32 For I haue geuen my feare in the lande of the lyuynge. But Pharao and all hys people shall lye amonge the vncyrcumcysed, and amonge them that be slayne with the sweard sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 33

Ezekiel 33:1 Agayne, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 33:2 Thou sonne of man, Speake to the children of thy people, & tell them: When I sende a swearde vpon a lande, yf the people of the lande take a man of their countre, & set him to be their watchman,
Ezekiel 33:3 the same man (whan he seyth the sweard come vpon the lande) shal blowe the trompet, and warne the people.
Ezekiel 33:4 If a man now heare the noyse of the trompet, and wil not be warned, and the swearde come and take him awaye: his bloude shall be vpon hys owne head:
Ezekiel 33:5 for he hearde the sound of the trompet, and wolde not take hede: therfore hys bloude be vpon hym. But yf he wyll receyue warninge, he shall saue hys lyfe.
Ezekiel 33:6 Agayne, yf the watch man se the swearde come and shewe it not wyth the trompet, so that the people is not warned: yf the sweard come then and take any man from amonge them, the same shall be taken awaye in hys owne sinne but hys bloude wyll I requyre of the watchemans hande.
Ezekiel 33:7 And now (O thou sonne of man) I haue made the a watcheman vnto the house of Israell: that where as thou hearest anye thynge oute of my mouthe, thou mayest warne them on my behalfe.
Ezekiel 33:8 If I say vnto the wicked thou wycked, thou shalte surelye dye: & thou geuest hym not warnynge, that he maye bewarre of his vngodly waye: then shall the wicked dye in hys owne synne, but hys bloude wyll I requyre of thy hand.
Ezekiel 33:9 Neuertheles yf thou warne the wycked of hys waye, to turne from it, where as he yet will not be turned from it, then shall he dye because of hys synne, but thou haste delyuered thy soule.
Ezekiel 33:10 Therfor (O thou sonne of man) speake vnto the house of Israel. Ye saye thus: Oure offences and synnes lye vpon vs, and we be corrupte in them: how shuld we then be restored vnto lyfe?
Ezekiel 33:11 Tell them: As trulye as I lyue, sayeth the Lorde God, I haue no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but moch rather that the wicked turne from his waye and lyue. Turne you, turne you from your vngodlye wayes, O ye of the house of Israell. Oh, wherfore wyll ye dye?
Ezekiel 33:12 Thou sonne of man, tell the chyldren of thy people: The ryghtuousnes of the rightuous shall not saue hym, when soeuer he turneth awaye vnfaithfully: Agayne, the wickednesse of the wicked shal not hurt him, when soeuer he conuerteth from hys vngodlynesse. And the ryghtuousnesse of the ryghtuous shall not saue hys lyfe, when soeuer he synneth.
Ezekiel 33:13 If I saye vnto the ryghtuous, that he shall surelye lyue, and so he trust to his owne ryghtuousnesse, and do synne: then shall hys ryghtuousnesse be no more thought vpon, but in the wyckednesse that he hath done he shall dye.
Ezekiel 33:14 Agayne, yf I saye vnto the wycked: thou shalt surely dye: and so he turne from hys synnes, and do the thinge that is lawfull and ryght:
Ezekiel 33:15 In so moch that the same wicked man geueth the pledge agayne, restoreth that he had taken awaye by robbery, walcketh in the commaundementes of lyfe, & doth no wronge: Then shall he surely lyue, and not dye.
Ezekiel 33:16 Yee the synnes that he hath done shall neuer be thought vpon: For in so moch as he doth now the thinge that is lawfull and ryght, he shall lyue.
Ezekiel 33:17 And yet the children of thy people saye: Tushe, the waye of the Lorde is not ryght, where as their owne waye is rather vnright.
Ezekiel 33:18 When the rightuous turneth from his rightuousnesse, & doeth the thinge that is wycked, he shal dye therfore.
Ezekiel 33:19 But yf the wycked turne from hys wyckednesse, doing the thinge that is lawfull & ryght, he shall lyue therfore.
Ezekiel 33:20 Yet ye saye: the waye of the Lorde is not equall. O ye house of Israel, I wyll iudge euery one of you after his wayes.
Ezekiel 33:21 In the .xij. yeare, the .v. daye of the .x. moneth of oure captyuyte, it happened, that one which was fled out of Ierusalem, came vnto me, and sayde: the cytye is destroyed.
Ezekiel 33:22 Now the hande of the Lorde had bene vpon me the euenyng afore this man (which was escaped) came vnto me, & had opened my mouth, vntyll the mornynge that he came to me: yee he opened my mouth, so that I was nomore domme.
Ezekiel 33:23 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto me, and sayde:
Ezekiel 33:24 Thou sonne of man, these that dwell in the wasted land of Israel, sayde: Abraham was but one man, & he had the lande in possessyon: now are we manye, & the lande is geuen vs to possesse also.
Ezekiel 33:25 And therfore tell them: Thus sayeth the Lorde: In the bloude haue ye eaten, youre eyes haue ye lyft vp to Idoles, & haue shed bloude: shal ye then haue the lande in possessyon?
Ezekiel 33:26 Ye leane vpon youre sweardes, ye worcke abomynacyon, euery one defyleth hys neghbours wyfe: & shall ye then possesse the lande?
Ezekiel 33:27 Saye thou these wordes vnto them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: As truelye as I lyue all ye that dwell in thys wyldernesse, shalbe slayne with the sweard: what so euer is vpon the feld, will I geue vnto the beastes to be deuoured: those that be in stronge holdes & dennes shall dye of the pestylence.
Ezekiel 33:28 For I wyll make the lande so desolate and waste, and the pompe of her strength shall come to an ende. The mountaynes in Israell shalbe so waste, that no man shall trauayle therby.
Ezekiel 33:29 Then shall they learne to knowe, that I am the Lorde, when I make the lande waste and desolate, because of all theyr abomynacyons, that they haue wrought.
Ezekiel 33:30 And thou sonne of man, the chyldren of thy people that talcke of the, by th walles and in the dores of theyr houses, sayinge one to another: Come, let vs hear what worde is gone forthe from the Lorde:
Ezekiel 33:31 These come vnto the, after the maner of a great people: yea my people syt doune before the, and heare thy wordes, but they do not there after: for in theyr mouthes they shewe them selues, as though they were feruent, but their herte goeth after theyr owne couetous lucre.
Ezekiel 33:32 And as a balet that hath a swete tune, and is pleasaunt to synge, so shalte thou be vnto them: thy wordes shall they heare, but they wil not do thereafter.
Ezekiel 33:33 When thys commeth to passe (for lo, it commeth in dede) then shall they know, that there hath ben a Prophet among them.

CHAPTER: 34

Ezekiel 34:1 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, saying:
Ezekiel 34:2 Thou sonne of man, prophecy against the shepeherdes of Israel, prophecye and speake vnto them: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Wo be vnto the shepeherdes of Israel, that fede them selues. Shulde not the shepeherdes fede the flockes?
Ezekiel 34:3 Ye haue eaten vp the fatte, ye haue clothed you wyth the wol: the best fedde haue ye slayne, but the flocke haue ye not noryshed.
Ezekiel 34:4 The weake haue ye not holden vp, the sicke haue ye not healed: the broken haue ye not bounde together, the oute castes haue ye not brought agayne: the lost haue ye not soughte, but churlishly and cruellye haue ye ruled them.
Ezekiel 34:5 Thus are they scatred here and there wythoute a shepherde: yea al the beastes of the felde deuoure them, and they go astraye.
Ezekiel 34:6 My shepe go wandrynge vpon all mountaynes, and vpon euerye hye hyl. Yea they be scatred abroade in al feldes, and there is no man, that careth for them, or seketh after them.
Ezekiel 34:7 Therfore O ye shepeherdes, heare the worde of the Lorde.
Ezekiel 34:8 Thus sayth the Lorde God: As trulye as I lyue, for so much as my shepe are robbed, & deuoured of all the wylde beastes of the felde, hauynge no shepherde: and seinge that my shepeherdes take no regarde of my shepe, but fede them selues onely, and not my shepe:
Ezekiel 34:9 Therfore heare the worde of the Lorde O ye shepherdes:
Ezekiel 34:10 Thus sayth the Lord God: Beholde, I my self wyll vpon the shepherdes and requyre my shepe from theyr handes, and make them ceasse from fedynge of my shepe: yea the shepherdes shall fede them selues no more: For I wyll delyuer my shepe oute of theyr mouthes, so that they shall not deuoure them after this.
Ezekiel 34:11 For thus sayth the Lord god: Beholde, I will loke to my shepe my selfe, & seke them.
Ezekiel 34:12 Lyke as a shepherde amonge the flocke seketh after the shepe that are scatered abroade, euen so wyll I seke after my shepe, & gather them together oute of all places, wher they haue bene scatred in the cloudy & darcke daye.
Ezekiel 34:13 I wyll brynge them oute from all people, and gather them together oute of all landes. I wyll brynge them into theyr owne land, and fede them vpon the mountaynes of Israel, by the ryuers, and in all the places of the countre.
Ezekiel 34:14 I wil fede them in ryght good pastures, and vpon the hye mountaynes of Israell shal there foldes be. There shall they lye in a good folde, and in a fat pasture shall they fede, euen vpon the mountaynes of Israel.
Ezekiel 34:15 I wil fede my shepe my selfe, and brynge them to theyr rest sayeth the Lorde GOD.
Ezekiel 34:16 Suche as be loste, wyll I seke: suche as go astraye, wyll I bryng agayn: suche as be wounded, wil I bynde vp: suche as be weake, wyll I make stronge: suche as be fat and well lyking, those wil I preserue, and fede them with the thynge that is laufull.
Ezekiel 34:17 And as for you (O my shepe) sayeth the Lorde God: I wyl put a difference amonge the shepe, amonge the wethers & the goates.
Ezekiel 34:18 Was it not ynough for you to eat vp the good pasture, but ye must treade downe the residue of your pasture with your fete also? Was it not ynough for you to drink cleare water, but ye must trouble the resydue also with your fete?
Ezekiel 34:19 Thus my shepe muste be fayne to eate the thynge, that ye haue troden doune with your fete, & to drincke it, that ye with youre fete haue befyled.
Ezekiel 34:20 Therfore, thus saieth the Lorde God vnto them: Beholde, I wyll seuer the fatte shepe from the leane:
Ezekiel 34:21 for so muche as ye haue shot the weake shepe vpon the sydes & shoulders, and runne vpon them with youre hornes, so longe tyll ye haue vtterlye scatred them abroad
Ezekiel 34:22 I will helpe my shepe, so that they shall no more be spoyled: yea, I wyll discerne one shepe from another.
Ezekiel 34:23 I wyll rayse vp vnto them one onelye shepeherde: euen my seruaunt Dauid, he shall fede them, and he shall be theyr shepherde.
Ezekiel 34:24 I the Lorde wyll be theyr God, and my seruaunte Dauid shall be their prince: Euen I the Lorde haue spoken it.
Ezekiel 34:25 Moreouer, I wyll make a couenaunte of yeare with them, and driue al euyl beastes out of the lande: so that they maye dwell safelye in the wyldernes, and slepe in the wooddes.
Ezekiel 34:26 Good fortune and prosperyte wil I geue them, and vnto all that be rounde aboute my hyll. A prosperous shower and rayne wil I sende them in due season,
Ezekiel 34:27 that the trees in the wood maye brynge forthe theyr frutes, & the grounde her increase. They shalbe safe in theyr lande, & shall knowe, that I am the Lorde, whiche haue broken theyr yocke, and delyuered them oute of the handes of those, that helde them in subieccyon.
Ezekiel 34:28 They shal no more be spoyled of the Heathen, nor deuoured with the beastes of the lande: but safely shall they dwell, and no man shall fraye them.
Ezekiel 34:29 I wyll set vp an excellente plante for them, so that they shal suffre no more hunger in the lande, neither beare the reprofe of the Heathen any more.
Ezekiel 34:30 Thus shal they vnderstand that I the Lorde theyr God am with them, & that they (euen the house of Israel) are my people, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 34:31 Ye men are my flocke, ye are the shepe of my pasture: and I am youre God, sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 35

Ezekiel 35:1 Moreouer, the worde of the lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 35:2 Thou sonne of man, turne thy face towarde the mounte Seir, prophecye vpon it,
Ezekiel 35:3 & say vnto it: Thus sayeth the Lord God Beholde (O thou mount Seir) I wil vpon the, I wyl reache out myne hande ouer the, yea waste and desolate will I make the.
Ezekiel 35:4 Thy cytyes wyll I breake doune: and thou shalte lye voyde, that thou mayest knowe, how that I am the Lord.
Ezekiel 35:5 For so much as thou beareste an olde enemyte agaynst the chyldren of Israel, and with a cruell hande haste made them afrayed, what tyme as they were troubled and punyshed for theyr synne:
Ezekiel 35:6 Therfore as truelye as I lyue, sayeth the Lord GOD, I wyl prepare the vnto bloud, yea bloude shall folowe vpon the: seyng thou layest wayte for bloude, therfore shal bloude persecute the.
Ezekiel 35:7 Thus wyll I make the mounte Seir desolate and waste, and brynge to passe, that there shal no man goo thyther, ner com from thence.
Ezekiel 35:8 Hys mountaynes wyll I fyll wyth hys slayne men: thy hylles, dales and valleys shall lye full of them, that are slayne with the swearde.
Ezekiel 35:9 I wyll make the a perpetuall wyldernesse, so that no man shall dwell in thy cyties: that ye maye knowe, how that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 35:10 And because thou hast sayd: what, both these nacyons and both these landes must be myne, & I wyll haue them in possession, where as the Lorde was there. Therfore, thus sayeth the Lorde God:
Ezekiel 35:11 As trulye as I lyue, I wyll handle the accordynge to thy wrath and gelousy, lyke as thou hast dealt cruellye with them: that I maye be knowen amonge them, how I haue punished the.
Ezekiel 35:12 Yee and that thou also mayest be sure, that I the Lord haue hearde all thy despytefull wordes, whiche thou hast spoken agaynst the mountaynes of Israel, sayinge: Lo, they are made waste, & geuen vs to deuoure.
Ezekiel 35:13 Thus wyth youre mouthes ye haue mayde youre boost agaynst me, yee & multyplyed youre proude wordes agaynst me, which I haue hearde altogether.
Ezekiel 35:14 Wher vnto thus sayeth the Lorde God: when the whole worlde is in wealth, then wyll I make the waste.
Ezekiel 35:15 And like as thou (O mount Seyr) wast glad, because the heretage of the house of Israell was destroyed: euen so wyll I do vnto the also that thou & whole Edom shall be destroyed, and knowe, that I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 36

Ezekiel 36:1 Thou sonne of man, prophecie vpon the mountaynes of Israel, & speake: Heare the worde of the Lorde, O ye mountaynes of Israell:
Ezekiel 36:2 Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Because youre enemye hath sayde vpon you: A ha, the hye euerlastynge places are now become ours:
Ezekiel 36:3 prophecye therfore, and speake: thus sayeth the Lorde God: Seynge ye be wasted & troden downe on euery syde, and become a possessyon vnto the resydue of the Gentyles, whych haue brought you in to mens mouthes & vnto an euell name amonge the people:
Ezekiel 36:4 Therfore heare the worde of the Lorde God, O ye mountaynes of Israell: Thus sayeth the Lorde God vnto the mountaynes and hilles, valleys and dales, to the voyde wildernesses & desolat cytyes, whiche are spoyled, & had in derisyon on euery syde, amonge the resydue of the Heathen:
Ezekiel 36:5 Yee euen thus sayeth the Lord God: In the fyre of my gelousy haue I take a deuyce, agaynst the resydue of the Gentiles, and agaynst all Edom which haue taken in my lande vnto them selues for a possession, which also reioysed from their whole herte with a dyspiteful stomacke to waste it, and to spoyle it.
Ezekiel 36:6 Prophecy therfore vpon the lande of Israell, speake vnto the mountaynes and hilles to valleys and dales, thus sayeth the Lorde God: Beholde, this haue I deuysed in my gelousy and terrible wrath: For so moch as ye haue suffred reprofe of the Heathen,
Ezekiel 36:7 therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: I haue sworne, that the Gentyles which lye aboute you, shal beare youre confusyon them selues.
Ezekiel 36:8 And as for you (O mountaynes of Israell) ye shall shute out your braunches, and brynge forth youre fruyte to my people of Israell, for it is hard by, that it wyll come.
Ezekiel 36:9 Beholde, I come vnto you, and vnto you wyl I turne me, that ye maye be tylled and sowen.
Ezekiel 36:10 I will sende you moch people, which shal be all of the house of Israel: the cyties shalbe inhabyted, & the decayed places shalbe repayred agayne.
Ezekiel 36:11 I wyll prouyde you wt moch people and catell, whiche shall increase & brynge fruite. I wil restore you also to your old estat & shewe you more kindnes then euer ye had before: wherby ye shal knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 36:12 Yee people wyll I sende vnto you (O my folcke of Israell) whych shall haue the in possessyon, & thou shalt be their inheritaunce so that thou shalt nomore be wythout them.
Ezekiel 36:13 Agayne, thus sayeth the Lorde God: For so moch as they saye vnto you: thou art an eater vp of men, & a waster of thy people:
Ezekiel 36:14 therfore thou shalt eate no mo men, nether destroye thy people eny more, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 36:15 And I wyll not suffre the, for to heare thyne owne confusyon amonge the Gentiles from henceforth. Thou shalt not beare the reprofe of the nacions, ner cast out thyne owne people enymore, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 36:16 Moreouer, the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayeng:
Ezekiel 36:17 O thou sonne of man, when the house of Israell dwelt vpon their owne grounde they defyled them selues with their owne wayes and ymagynacyons: so that in my syght theyr waye was lyke the vnclennesse of a menstrous woman.
Ezekiel 36:18 Wherfore I poured my wrathfull dyspleasure vpon them, because of the bloude that they had shed in the lande, and because of their Idoles, wherwith they had defyled them selues.
Ezekiel 36:19 I scatred them also amonge the Heathen, so that they where strowed aboute in the landes. Accordinge to their wayes and after their owne inuencyons, so dyd I punysh them.
Ezekiel 36:20 Now when they were gone vnto the Heathen, & come in amonge them they dyshonoured my holye name: so that it was sayde of them: Are these the people of God, & must go out of their owne lande?
Ezekiel 36:21 Then spared I my holy name, which the house of Israell had dishonoured amonge the Gentyles, to whom they came.
Ezekiel 36:22 Therfore tell the house of Israell: Thus sayeth the Lord God: I do not this for youre sakes (O house of Israell) but for my holye names sake, whyche ye dyshonoured amonge the Heathen, when ye came to them.
Ezekiel 36:23 Therfore, I wyll halowe my greate name agayne, which amonge the Gentiles is euell spoken of: for ye yourselues haue dishonoured it amonge them. And the Gentiles shal knowe that I am the Lord, when I am honoured in you before their eyes, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 36:24 As for you, I wyll take you from amonge the Heathen, and gather you together out of all countrees, and brynge you agayne into your owne lande.
Ezekiel 36:25 Then wyll I poure cleare water vpon you, & ye shalbe clene: yee from all your vnclennesse and from all your Idols shal I clense you.
Ezekiel 36:26 A new herte also will I geue you, and a new sprete wyll I put into you: As for that stony herte, I wyll take it out of youre body, & geue you a fleshly herte.
Ezekiel 36:27 I will geue my sprete amonge you, and cause you to walcke in my commaundementes, to kepe my lawes, and to fulfyll them.
Ezekiel 36:28 And so ye shall dwell in the lande, that I gaue to youre forefathers, and ye shalbe my people, & I wilbe youre God.
Ezekiel 36:29 I wyll helpe you out of all youre vnclennesse. I wyll call for the corne, & will increase it, & wyll let you haue no honger.
Ezekiel 36:30 I wyll multiplye the fruites of the trees & the increase of the felde for you, so that ye shall beare no more reprofe of honger amonge the Heathen.
Ezekiel 36:31 Then shall ye remembre your, owne wicked wayes, & youre ymagynacyons, whiche were not good: so that ye shall take displeasure at youre owne selues, by reason of youre synnes & abhominacyons.
Ezekiel 36:32 But I wyll not do this for youre sakes (sayeth the Lorde God) be ye sure of it. Therfore, O ye house of Israell, be ashamed of your synnes.
Ezekiel 36:33 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lord God: what tyme as I shall clense you from all youre offences, then wyll I make the cytyes to be occupyed agayne, and wyll repayre the places that be decayed.
Ezekiel 36:34 The desolate lande shall be buylded agayne, whiche afore tyme laye waste in the sight of all them that wente by.
Ezekiel 36:35 Then shall it be sayde: this waste lande is become lyke a garden of pleasure, & the voyde, desolate and broken downe cytyes, are now strong, and fensed agayne.
Ezekiel 36:36 Then the resydue of the Heathen that lye rounde aboute you, shall knowe that I am the Lorde, whyche repayre that was broken downe, and plante agayne, that was made waste. Euen I the Lorde haue spoken it, and wyll do it in dede.
Ezekiel 36:37 Thus sayeth the Lorde God: I wyll yet ones be found agayne of the house of Israel & do this for them: I shall increase them as a flocke of men.
Ezekiel 36:38 Lyke as the holy flocke and the flocke of Ierusalem are in the hye solempne feastes: so shall also the wylde wasted cyties be fylled with flockes of men: and they shall knowe that I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 37

Ezekiel 37:1 The hande of the Lord came vpon me, & caryed me out in the sprete of the Lorde, & let me downe in a playne felde that laye full of bones,
Ezekiel 37:2 and he led me rounde aboute by them: & beholde, the bones that laye vpon the felde, were very many, and maruelous drye also.
Ezekiel 37:3 Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne of man: thinkest thou these bones maye lyue agayne? I answered: O Lorde God, thou knowest.
Ezekiel 37:4 And he sayde vnto me: prophecye thou vpon these bones, & speake vnto them: Ye drye bones, heare the worde of the Lorde.
Ezekiel 37:5 Thus sayeth the Lorde God vnto these bones: Beholde, I wyll put breth into you, that ye maye lyue:
Ezekiel 37:6 I wyll geue yow synowes, and make flesh grow vpon you, & couer you ouer with skinne: & so geue you breth, that ye may lyue, and knowe, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 37:7 So I prophecyed, as he had commaunded me. And as I was prophecyinge there came a noyse and a greate mocyon, so that the bones ranne euery one to another.
Ezekiel 37:8 Now when I had loked, beholde, they had synowes, and flesh grewe vpon them: and aboue they were couered with skynne, but there was no breth in them.
Ezekiel 37:9 Then sayde he vnto me: Thou sonne of man, prophecye thou towarde the wynde: prophecy, & speake to the wynd: Thus sayeth the Lord God: Come (O thou ayre) from the foure wyndes, and blowe vpon these slayne, that they maye be restored to lyfe.
Ezekiel 37:10 So I prophecied, as he had commaunded me: then came the breth into them, & they receyued lyfe, & stode vp vpon their fete, a maruelous greate sorte.
Ezekiel 37:11 Moreouer, he sayde vnto me: Thou sonne of man, these bones are the whole house of Israell. Beholde, they saye: Oure bones are dryed vp, oure hope is gone, we are clene cut of.
Ezekiel 37:12 Therfore prophecye thou, & speake vnto them: thus sayeth the Lord God: Beholde, I wyll open youre graues (O my people) & take you out of youre sepulcres, & bringe you in to the lande of Israel agayne.
Ezekiel 37:13 So shall ye know that I am the Lorde, when I open your graues, & bringe you out of them.
Ezekiel 37:14 My sprete also wyll I put in you, & ye shall lyue: I wyll set you agayne in youre owne lande, and ye shal knowe, that I am the Lord, which haue sayd it, and fulfylled it in dede.
Ezekiel 37:15 The worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 37:16 thou sonne of man, take a stycke and wryte vpon it: Vnto Iuda & to the chyldren of Israel his companyons. Then take another sticke, & write vpon it: Vnto Ioseph the stock of Ephraim, & to all the housholde of Israell his companyons.
Ezekiel 37:17 And then, take both these together in thyne hande, so shall there be one stycke therof.
Ezekiel 37:18 Now yf the chyldren of thy people saye vnto the: wylt thou not shewe vs, what thou meanest by these?
Ezekiel 37:19 Then geue them this answere: thus sayeth the Lorde God: beholde, I wyll take the stock of Ioseph, which is in the hande of Ephraim & of the tribes of Israell his felowes, & will put them to the stock of Iuda, & make them one stocke, & they shall be one in my hande.
Ezekiel 37:20 And the two styckes where vpon thou wrytest, shalt thou haue in thyne hande, that they may se,
Ezekiel 37:21 and shalt saye vnto them. Thus sayeth the Lorde God: beholde, I wyll take awaye the chyldren of Israel from amonge the Heathen vnto whom they be gone, & wyll gather them together on euery syde, & bringe them agayne into their owne lande:
Ezekiel 37:22 yee I wyll make one people of them in the lande, vpon the mountaynes of Israell, and they all shall haue but one kynge. They shall no mor be two peoples from henceforth, nether be deuyded in to two kyngdomes:
Ezekiel 37:23 they shall also defile them selues nomore with their abhomynacyons, Idoles, & all their wicked doinges. I will helpe them out of all their dwellinge places, wherin they haue synned: and will so clense them: that they shalbe my people, & I their God.
Ezekiel 37:24 Dauid my seruaunt shalbe their kinge, & they all shal haue one shepherde onely. They shall walke in my lawes, & my commaundementes shall they both kepe and fulfil.
Ezekiel 37:25 They shal dwel in the lande, that I gaue vnto Iacob my seruaunt, where as youre fathers also haue dwelt. Yea, euen in the same lande shall they, their chyldren, & their childers chyldren dwell for euermore: and my seruaunt Dauid shalbe their euerlastinge prince.
Ezekiel 37:26 Moreouer, I will make a bonde of peace wyth theym, whiche shalbe vnto them an euerlastinge couenaunt. I will satle them also, and multiply them, my Sanctuary wyll I set amonge them for euermore.
Ezekiel 37:27 My dwellynge shalbe wyth them, yea, I will be their God, and they shal be my people.
Ezekiel 37:28 Thus the Heathen also shall knowe, that I the Lorde am the holy maker of Israel: when my Sanctuary shalbe among them for euermore.

CHAPTER: 38

Ezekiel 38:1 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Ezekiel 38:2 Thou sonne of man, turne thy face towarde Gog in the lande of Magog, whyche is the chiefe prince at Mesech and Tubal: prophecy agaynst hym,
Ezekiel 38:3 & saye: Thus sayeth the Lord God: O Gog thou chief prince Mesech & Tuball: beholde, I will vpon the,
Ezekiel 38:4 and wil turne the about, and put a bytte in thy chawes: I will bringe the forth & all thine hoost, both horse and horsemen whiche be all weapened of the beste fashion: a great people, that handle altogether speares, shyldes, and swerdes:
Ezekiel 38:5 the Perses, Moryans and with them the Lybians, whiche all beare shyldes & helmettes:
Ezekiel 38:6 Gomer and al his hoostes: the house of Thogorma out of the north quarters, and all his hoostes, yea, & muche people with the.
Ezekiel 38:7 Therfore prepare the, set thy selfe in araye with all thy people, that are come vnto the by heapes, and be thou their defence.
Ezekiel 38:8 After many dayes thou shalt be visited, and in the latter yeares thou shalt come into the lande, that hath bene destroyed wyth the swearde, & now is replenyshed agayne wyth dyuerse people vpon the mountaynes of Israell, which haue longe lyen waste. Yee they be brought out of the nacyons, and dwell all safe.
Ezekiel 38:9 Thou shalt come vp like a stormy wether, to couer the lande, and as it were a darcke cloude: thou wyth all thyne hostes, & a greate multytude of people wyth the.
Ezekiel 38:10 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde God: At the same tyme shall manye thynges come in to thy mynde, so that thou shalt ymagyn myschefe,
Ezekiel 38:11 & saye: I will vp to yonder playne lande, seing they syt at ease, and dwell so safely (for they dwell all wythout any walles, they haue nether barres nor dores)
Ezekiel 38:12 to spoyle them, to robbe them, to laye hande vpon their so well inhabyted wyldernesses: agaynst that people, that is gathered together from amonge the Heathen, whyche haue gotten catell and good, and dwell in the myddest of the lande.
Ezekiel 38:13 Then shall Saba, and Dedan, and the marchauntes of Tharsis wyth all their worthies, saye vnto the: Art thou come to robbe? Hast thou gathered thy people together, because thou wylt spoyle? to take syluer and golde: to carye awaye catell and good: and to haue a greate praye?
Ezekiel 38:14 Therfore, O thou sonne of man, thou shalt prophecye, and saye vnto Gog: Thus sayeth the Lord God: In that daye thou shalt knowe, that my people of Israell dwelleth safe:
Ezekiel 38:15 & shalth come from thy place out of the north partes: thou & moch people with the, whych ryde vpon horses, wherof there is a greate multytude & an innumerable sorte.
Ezekiel 38:16 Yee thou shalt come vpon my people of Israell, as a cloude to couer the lande. This shall come to passe in the latter dayes: I will bringe the vp into my lande, that the Heathen maye knowe me, when I get me honoure vpon the. O Gog before their eyes.
Ezekiel 38:17 Thus sayeth the Lord God: Thou art he, of whom I haue spoken afore tyme, by my seruauntes the prophetes of Israell, whyche prophecyed in those dayes and yeares, that I shulde brynge the vpon them.
Ezekiel 38:18 At the same tyme, when Gog commeth vp in to the lande of Israell (sayeth the Lorde God) shall my indygnacyon go forth in my wrath.
Ezekiel 38:19 For in my gelousy and hote dyspleasure I haue deuysed, that there shalbe a greate trouble in the land of Israel at that tyme.
Ezekiel 38:20 The very fishes in the sea, the foules of the ayre, the beastes of the felde, and al the men that are vpon the earth, shall tremble for feare of me. The hilles also shalbe turned vp syde downe, the stayres of stone shall fall, & all walles shall syncke to the grounde.
Ezekiel 38:21 I wyll call for a swearde vpon them in all my mountaynes, sayeth the Lorde God: so that euerye mans swearde shall be vpon another.
Ezekiel 38:22 Wyth pestylence and bloude will I punysh hym: stormy rayne & hayle stones, fyre & brimstone, wyl I cause to rayne vpon him & all his heape yee & vpon al that greate people that is with hym.
Ezekiel 38:23 Thus wyll I be magnifyed, honoured, and knowne amonge the Heathen: that they maye be sure, how that I am the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 39

Ezekiel 39:1 Therfore O thou sonne of man, prophecye agaynste Gog, and speake: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Behold, O Gog: thou chefe prince at Mesech and Tubal, I wyll vpon the,
Ezekiel 39:2 and turne the aboute, & carie the forth, and leade the from the north partes, and bringe the vp to the mountaynes of Israell.
Ezekiel 39:3 As for thy bowe, I wyll smyte it out of thy left hande, and cast thyne arowes out of thy ryght hande.
Ezekiel 39:4 Thou wyth all thyne heape, and all the people that is wyth the, muste, fall vpon the mountaynes of Israell. Then wyll I geue the vnto the foules & wylde beastes of the felde, to be deuoured:
Ezekiel 39:5 there must thou lye vpon the felde: for euen I the Lorde haue spoken it, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 39:6 In to Magog, and amonge those that syt so carelesse in the Iles: will I sende a fyre, & they shall know, that I am the Lorde.
Ezekiel 39:7 I wyll make also the name of my holynesse to be knowne amonge my people of Israell: and I wyll not let my holy name be euell spoken of enymore: but the very Heathen also shal knowe, that I am the Lorde, the holye one of Israell
Ezekiel 39:8 Beholde, it commeth, and shalbe fulfylled in dede, sayeth the Lord God. This is the daye wherof I haue spoken:
Ezekiel 39:9 They that dwell in the cyties of Israel, shall go forth & set fyre vpon the weapens, & burne them: shyldes & speres bowes and arowes, bylles & clubbes: seuen yeares
Ezekiel 39:10 shall they be burnynge therof, so that they shall els bringe no styckes from the felde, nether haue nede to hew downe eny out of the wodde: For they shal haue weapens ynow to burne. They shall robbe those that robbed them, & spoyle those that spoyled them sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 39:11 At the same tyme wyll I geue vnto Gog, a place to be buried in, in Israel: euen the valley where thorow men go from the east to the see warde. Those that trauayle therby, shall abhorre it. There shall Gog and all hys people be buried: and it shalbe called the valleye of the people of Gog.
Ezekiel 39:12 Seuen monethes longe shall the house of Israell be burienge of them that they maye clense the lande.
Ezekiel 39:13 Yee al the people of the lande shall burye them. O it shall be a glorious daye, when I gett me that honoure, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 39:14 They shall ordene men also to be deed buriers, euer going thorow the lande, & appoynte them certayne places to bury those in, which remayne vpon the felde, that the lande maye be clensed. From ende to ende shall they seke, and that .vij. monethes longe.
Ezekiel 39:15 Now those that go thorow the land, where they se a mans bone, they shall set vp a token by it, till the deed buriers haue buried it also, in the valleys of the people of Gog.
Ezekiel 39:16 And the name of the cytye shalbe called. Hamonah: Thus shalt they make the land clene.
Ezekiel 39:17 And thou sonne of man: thus sayth the Lorde God: Speake vnto all the foules and euery byrde, yee and to all the wylde beastes of the felde: heape you together and come, gather you rounde aboute vpon my slaughter, that I haue slayne for you: euen a greate slaughter vpon the mountaynes of Israell: eate flesh, and drincke bloude.
Ezekiel 39:18 Ye shall eate the flesh of the worthies, and drynke the bloude of the prynces of the lande: of the wethers, of the lambes of the goates, and of the oxen that be al slayne at Basan.
Ezekiel 39:19 Eate the fat youre belyfull, & dryncke bloud, tyll ye be dronken of the slaughter, whyche I haue slayne vnto you.
Ezekiel 39:20 Fyll you at my table, with horses and stronge horsmen: with captaynes and all men of warre, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 39:21 I wyll bringe my glorye also amonge the Gentyles, that all the Heathen maye se my iudgement, that I haue kepte, and my hande which I haue layed vpon them:
Ezekiel 39:22 that the house of Israell maye knowe, how that I am the Lorde theyr God, from that daye forth.
Ezekiel 39:23 And the Heathen shall knowe, that where as the house of Israell were led in to captyuite: it was for their wickednes sake, because they offended me. For the whych cause I hyd my face from them, and delyuered them in to the handes of their enemyes, that they myght all be slayne with the swearde.
Ezekiel 39:24 Accordinge to their vnclennesse and vnfaithfull dealinges, so haue I entreated them, and hyd my face from them.
Ezekiel 39:25 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde God: Now wyll I brynge agayne the captiues of Iacob and haue mercy vpon the whole house of Israell, and be gelous for my holy names sake.
Ezekiel 39:26 All their confusion and offence that they haue done agaynst me, shall be taken awaye: and so safely shall they dwell in their lande, that no man shall make them afrayed.
Ezekiel 39:27 And when I haue brought them agayne from amonge the people, when I haue gathered them together out of their enemyes landes, & am praysed in them before many Heathen:
Ezekiel 39:28 then shall they knowe, that I am the Lorde their God, which suffred them to be led in to cautyuyte amonge the Heathen, but now haue brought them agayne in to their owne lande, and not left one of them yonder.
Ezekiel 39:29 After that, wyll I hyde my face nomore from them, but will poure out my sprete vpon the house of Israell, sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 40

Ezekiel 40:1 In the .xxv. yeare of oure captyuytye, in the beginninge of the yeare, the .x. daye of the moneth: that is the .xiiij. yeare, after that the cyte was smyten downe: the same daye came the hande of the Lorde vpon me, and caried me forth:
Ezekiel 40:2 euen into the lande of Israell brought he me in the vysyons of God: and set me downe vpon a maruelous hye mountayne, where vpon there was a buyldynge (as it had bene of a cyte) towarde the north.
Ezekiel 40:3 Thither he caried me, and beholde, there was a man, whose symylytude was lyke a brasse, which had a threde of flax in his hande, & a metterodde also. He stode in the dore,
Ezekiel 40:4 and sayde vnto me: marcke well with thyne eyes, herken to with thyne eares, & fasten it in thine hert, whatsoeuer I shall shewe the, for to the intent that they myght be shewed the, therfore art thou brought hither. And what soeuer thou seyste, thou shalt certyfye the house of Israel therof.
Ezekiel 40:5 Behalde, there was a wall on the outsyde rounde aboute the house: the meterodde that he had in hys hand, was six cubytes long & a spanne. So he measured the bredth of the buylding, which was a meterodde, & the heygth also a meterodde.
Ezekiel 40:6 Then came he vnto the east dore, and wente vp the stares, and measured the postes of the dore: wherof euery one was a meterodde thicke. Euerye chambre was a meterodde longe & brode:
Ezekiel 40:7 betwene the chambers were fyue cubytes. The poste of the dore within the porche, was one meterodde.
Ezekiel 40:8 He measured also the porche of the ynnermer dore whych conteyned a meterodde.
Ezekiel 40:9 Then measured he the entrye of the dore, that conteyned eght cubytes, and his pylers two cubytes: & this entrye stode inwarde.
Ezekiel 40:10 The chambers of the dore east warde, were thre on euerye syde: a lyke brode and longe. The pylers also that stode of both the sydes, were of one measure.
Ezekiel 40:11 After this, he measured the wydenesse of the dore, which was .x. cubytes, & the heyght of the dore .xiij. cubytes.
Ezekiel 40:12 The edge before the chambres was one cubyte brode vpon both the sydes, and the chambres six cubytes wyde of either syde.
Ezekiel 40:13 He measured the dore from the rygge of one chambre to another, whose wydnesse was .xxv. cubytes, & one dore stode agaynst another.
Ezekiel 40:14 He made pylers also .lx. cubytes hye, rounde aboute the courte dore.
Ezekiel 40:15 Before the inward parte vnto the fore entre of the ynnermer dore, were .L. cubytes.
Ezekiel 40:16 The chambers & their pylers within, rounde about vnto the dore, had sayde wyndowes: So had the fore entries also, whose wyndowes wente rounde about within. And vpon the pylers there stode date trees.
Ezekiel 40:17 Then brought he me in to the fore courte, where as were chambres & paued worckes, made in the fore courte rounde aboute .xxx. chambres vpon one paued worcke.
Ezekiel 40:18 Now the paued worcke was a longe beside the dores, & that was the lower paued worcke.
Ezekiel 40:19 After this, he measured the bredth from the lower dore, vnto the ynnermer courte of the outsyde, which had an .C. cubytes vpon the east & the north parte.
Ezekiel 40:20 And the dore in the vttermost courte towarde the north, measured he after the length and bredth:
Ezekiel 40:21 his thre chambres also on ether side, wyth his pylers & fore entries: which had euen the measure of the first dore. His heygth was fyfty cubytes, the bredth .xxv. cubytes:
Ezekiel 40:22 his wyndowes & porches wyth hys date tres, had euen lyke measure as the dore towarde the east: there were .vij. steppes to go vp vpon, and their porche before them.
Ezekiel 40:23 Now the dore of the ynnermer court stode streight ouer agaynst the dore, that was toward the north east. From one dore to another, he measured .C. cubytes.
Ezekiel 40:24 After that, he brought me to the southsyde, where there stode a dore towarde the south: whose pilers and porches he measured, these had the fyrste measure,
Ezekiel 40:25 & wyth their porches they had wyndowes rounde aboute, lyke the fyrst wyndowes. The heygth was .l. cubites, the bredth .xxv.
Ezekiel 40:26 with steppes to go vp vpon: his porche stode before hym, with his pylers & date tres on either side.
Ezekiel 40:27 And the dore of the ynnermer courte stode towarde the south, & he measured from one dore to another an .C. cubytes.
Ezekiel 40:28 So he brought me in to the ynnermer courte, thorow the dore of the south syde: whych he measured, & it had the measure afore sayd.
Ezekiel 40:29 In lyke maner, his chambres, pylers, & fore entries, had euen the fore sayde measure also. And he had with hys porches rounde aboute wyndowes of .L. cubytes heyght, and .xxv. cubytes brode.
Ezekiel 40:30 The porches rounde aboute were .xxv. cubytes longe, & .v. cubytes brode:
Ezekiel 40:31 and his porche reached vnto the vttermoste court: vpon his pylers there were date trees, and .viij. steppes to go vp vpon.
Ezekiel 40:32 He brought me also in to the ynmost courte vpon the east syde, and measured the dore, accordyng to the measure afore sayd.
Ezekiel 40:33 His chambers, pylers, and porches had euen the same measure, as the fyrst had: & with his porches he had wyndowes rounde aboute. The heigth was .l. cubytes, the bredth .xxv. cubytes:
Ezekiel 40:34 Hys porches reached vnto the vttermoste courte: his pilers also had date trees on eyther syde, & .viij. steppes to go vp vpon.
Ezekiel 40:35 And he brought me to the north dore, and measured it, which also had the fore sayde measure.
Ezekiel 40:36 His chambres, pylers and porches had wyndowes rounde aboute: whose heygth was .L. cubytes, & the bredth .xxv.
Ezekiel 40:37 His pylers stode towarde the vttermost courte, & vpon them both were date trees, and .viij. steppes to go vp vpon.
Ezekiel 40:38 There stode a chambre also, whose intraunce was at the dore pylers, and there the burntofferynges were wasihed.
Ezekiel 40:39 In the dore porche, there stode on ether syde two tables for the slaughtynge: to sleye the brentofferynges, synne offerynges and trespaceoffrynges ther vpon.
Ezekiel 40:40 And on the out syde as men go forth to the north dore, there stode two tables.
Ezekiel 40:41 Foure tables stode on ether syde of the dore, that is .viij. tables, whervpon they slaughted.
Ezekiel 40:42 Foure tables were of hewen stone for the burntofferynges, of a cubyte & a half longe and brode, and one cubyte hye: wher vpon were layed the vessels and ornamentes, whyche were vsed to the burnt and slayne offerynges, when they were slaughted.
Ezekiel 40:43 And within there were hokes foure fyngers brode, fastened rounde aboute, to hange flesh vpon, & vpon the tables was layed the offryng flesh.
Ezekiel 40:44 On the outsyde of the ynnermerdore were the syugers chambers in the inwarde courte besyde the North dore ouer agaynst the South. There stode one also, besyde the east dore northwarde.
Ezekiel 40:45 And he sayde vnto me: This chambre on the South syde belongeth to the prestes, that kepe the habytacyon:
Ezekiel 40:46 and thys towarde the North, is the Prestes that wayte vpon the aulter: which be the sonnes of Sadoch, that do seruyce before the Lorde in steade of the chyldren of Leui.
Ezekiel 40:47 So he measured the fore courte, whych had in length an .C. cubytes, and as moch in bredth by the foure corners. Now the aulter stode before the house:
Ezekiel 40:48 And he brought me to the fore entre of the house, and measured the walles by the entre dore: which were fyue cubytes longe on ether syde. The thicknesse also of the dore on ether syde, was thre cubytes.
Ezekiel 40:49 The length of the porche was .xx. cubytes, the bredth .xi. cubytes, and vpon steppes went men vp to it: by the walles also were pylers, on ether syde one.

CHAPTER: 41

Ezekiel 41:1 After this he brought me to the temple, and measured the postes: whyche were of both the sydes .vi. cubytes thicke, accordynge to the wydenesse of the tabernacle.
Ezekiel 41:2 The bredth of the dore was .x. cubytes and the walles of the dore on either syde fyue cubytes. He measured the length therof, which conteyned .xl. cubytes, and the bredth .xx.
Ezekiel 41:3 Then wente he in, and measured the dore postes, whyche were two cubytes thicke: but the dore it selfe was syxe cubytes, and the bredth of the dore was .xij. cubytes.
Ezekiel 41:4 He measure the length and bredth therof, whych were euery one .xx. cubytes, before the temple. And he sayde vnto me: thys is the holyest of all.
Ezekiel 41:5 He measured also the wall of the house which was syxe cubytes. The chambres that stode rounde aboute the house, were euery one foure cubytes wyde,
Ezekiel 41:6 & one stode harde vpon another, whereof there were .xxxiij. And there stode postes beneth by the walles rounde aboute the house, to beare them vp: but in the wall of the house they were not fastened:
Ezekiel 41:7 The syde chambres were the hyer the wyder, and had steppes thorow them rounde aboute the house. Thus was it wyder aboue, that from the lowest men might go to the hyest & mydd chambers.
Ezekiel 41:8 I sawe also that the house was very hye rounde aboute. The foundacyon of the syde chambres was a meterodde (that is syxe cubytes) brode.
Ezekiel 41:9 The thicknesse of the syde wall without, conteyned fyue cubytes, and so dyd the outwall of the chambres in the house.
Ezekiel 41:10 Betwene the chambers, was the wydenes .xx. cubytes rounde aboute the house.
Ezekiel 41:11 The chambre dores stode ouer agaynst the outwal, the one dore was towarde the north, the other towarde the South: and the thycknesse of the outwal was .v. cubytes rounde aboute.
Ezekiel 41:12 Now the buyldynge that was separated towarde the west, was .lxx. cubytes wyde: the wall of the buyldynge was .v. cubytes thicke rounde aboute, and the length foure score cubytes & ten.
Ezekiel 41:13 So he measured the house which was an .C. cubytes longe, & the separated buyldynge with the wall were an .C. cubytes longe also.
Ezekiel 41:14 The wydnesse before the house and of it that was separated towarde the East, was an .C. cubytes.
Ezekiel 41:15 And he measured the length of the buyldynge before and behynde wyth the chambers vpon both the sydes: and it conteyned an .C. cubites. The yunermer temple, the porch of the fore courte,
Ezekiel 41:16 the side postes, these thre had syde wyndowes, and pylers rounde aboute ouer agaynst the postes, from the grounde vp to the wyndowes: The wyndowes them selues were syled ouer with bordes:
Ezekiel 41:17 and thus was it aboue the dore, vnto the ynmost house & without also: Yee the whole wall on euery syde both within & without was syled ouer with greate bordes.
Ezekiel 41:18 There were Cherubins and date trees made also, so that one date tree stode euer bewixte two Cherubins: One Cherub had two faces,
Ezekiel 41:19 the face of a man lokyng a syde towarde the date tre, and a lyons face on the other syde. Thus was it made rounde aboute in al the house:
Ezekiel 41:20 Yee the Cherubins & date trees were made from the grounde vp aboue the dore, & so stode they also vpon the wall of the temple.
Ezekiel 41:21 The by postes of the temple were foure squared, and the fashion of the Sanctuarye was euen as it appared vnto me a fore in the vision.
Ezekiel 41:22 The table was of wodde, thre cubites hye and two cubytes longe: hys corners, the length and the walles were of wodde. And he sayde vnto me: This is the table, that shal stande before the Lorde.
Ezekiel 41:23 The temple and the holyest of all had ether of them two dores
Ezekiel 41:24 & euery dore had two lytle wyckettes whyche were folden in one vpon another, on euery syde two.
Ezekiel 41:25 And vpon the dores of the temple there were made Cherubins and date trees, lyke as vpon the walles: and a greate thicke balke of wodde was before on the out syde of the porche.
Ezekiel 41:26 Vpon both the sydes of the walles of the porche, there were made depe windowes and date trees, hauyng beames and balkes, lyke as the house had.

CHAPTER: 42

Ezekiel 42:1 Then caryed he me out in to the fore court towarde the north, & brought me in to the chambre that stode ouer agaynst the backebuyldynge north warde,
Ezekiel 42:2 which had the length of an .C. cubytes whose dore turned toward the north. The wydenesse conteyned .C. cubites:
Ezekiel 42:3 ouer agaynst the .xx. cubites of the ynnermer courte, and agaynst the paued worke that was in the fore court. Besyde all these thre, therestode pylers, one ouer agaynst another:
Ezekiel 42:4 And before thys chambre there was a walkynge place of .x. cubites wyde, and within was a waye of one cubite wyde, & their dores towarde the north.
Ezekiel 42:5 Thus the hyest chambres were allwaye narower then the loweste and myddell moste of the buylding:
Ezekiel 42:6 for they bare chambre vpon chambre, and stode thre together one vpon another not hauynge pilers lyke the fore courte: therfore were they smaller then those beneth and in the myddeste, to reken from the grounde vpwarde.
Ezekiel 42:7 The wall with out that stode by the chambres towarde the vtter moste courte vpon the fore syde of the chambres, was .C. cubytes longe:
Ezekiel 42:8 for the length of the vttemost chambres in the fore courte was .C. cubytes also: but the length therof before the temple was an .C. cubytes.
Ezekiel 42:9 These chambres had vnder them an intraunce of the east syde, wherby a man myght go in to them out of the fore courte,
Ezekiel 42:10 thorow the thicke wall of the fore courte towarde the east, right ouer agaynst the separated buyldinge.
Ezekiel 42:11 Before the same buyldynge vpon thys syde there were chambers also whych had awaye vnto them, lyke as the chambers on the north syde of the same length and wydenesse. Their intraunce, fashyon and dores were also of the same maner.
Ezekiel 42:12 Yee euen lyke as the other chamber dores were, so were those also of the south syd. And before the waye toward the fingers steppes on the east side, there stode a dore to go in at.
Ezekiel 42:13 Then sayde he vnto me: The chambers towarde the north and the south whych stande before the backe buyldynge: those be holye habitatyons, wheryn the prestes that do seruyce before the Lorde, muste eate the most holy offeringes: and there must they laye the most holye offerynges: meatofferinges, synne offringes & trespace offerynges, for it is an holy place.
Ezekiel 42:14 When the prestes come therin, they shall not go out in to the fore courte: but (seyenge they be holye) they shall leaue the clothes of their ministracyon, and put on other garmentes, when they haue eny thynge to do with the people.
Ezekiel 42:15 Now when he had measured al the ynnermer house, he brought me forth thorowe the east porte, & measured the same rounde aboute.
Ezekiel 42:16 He measured the east syde with the meterodde, whych rounde aboute conteyned .v.C. meteroddes.
Ezekiel 42:17 And the north syne measured he, whiche conteyned rounde aboute euen so much.
Ezekiel 42:18 The other two sydes also towarde the south
Ezekiel 42:19 and the west (which he measured) conteyned ether of them .v.C. meteroddes.
Ezekiel 42:20 So he measured all the foure sydes where there wente a wall rounde aboute .v.C. meteroddes long and as brode also whych separated the holye from the vnholy.

CHAPTER: 43

Ezekiel 43:1 So he brought me to the dore, the turneth towarde the east.
Ezekiel 43:2 Beholde, then came the glorye of the God of Israell from out of the east, whose voyce was lyke a greate noyse of waters, and the earth was lyghtened wyth hys glory.
Ezekiel 43:3 His syght to loke vpon was lyke the fyrst, that I sawe, when I wente in, what tyme as the cytye shulde haue bene destroyed: and lyke the vysyon that I sawe by the water of Cobar. Then fell I vpon my face,
Ezekiel 43:4 but the glory of the Lord came in to the house thorow the East dore.
Ezekiel 43:5 So a wyude toke me vp, and brought me into the ynnermer courte: and beholde, the house was full of the glory of the Lorde.
Ezekiel 43:6 I herde one speakyng vnto me out of the house, and there stode one by me,
Ezekiel 43:7 that sayde vnto me: O thou sonne of man, this rowme is my seate, and the place of my fotesteppes: where as I wyll dwell amonge the chyldren of Israell for euermore: so that the house of Israell shall nomore defyle my holye name: nether they, ner their kynges, thorowe their whordome, thorowe their hye places, and thorowe the deed bodyes of their Kynges:
Ezekiel 43:8 whych haue buylded their thresholdes in maner harde vpon my thresholdes, & their postes almoste at my postes: so that there is but a bare wall betwyxte me and them. Thus haue they defyled my holye name wyth their abhominacyons, that they haue commytted. Wherfore I haue destroyed them in my wrath:
Ezekiel 43:9 But now they shall put awaye their whordome and the deed bodyes of their kynges out of my syght, that I maye dwell amonge them for euermore.
Ezekiel 43:10 Therfore (O thou sonne of man) shewe thou the housholde of Israell a temple, that they maye be a shamed of their wickednesse, and measure them selues an example therat.
Ezekiel 43:11 And when they be ashamed of all their worckes, then shewe them the fourme and fashyon of the temple: the commynge in, the goynge oute, all the maner and descripcion therof, yee all the vses and ordynaunces of it that they maye kepe & fulfill all the fashions and customes therof.
Ezekiel 43:12 This is the descripcyon of the house: Aboue vpon the mount rounde aboute all the corners, it shalbe the holyest of all. Beholde, that is the descrypcyon and fashyon of the house.
Ezekiel 43:13 Thys is the measure of the aulter (after the true cubyte: whych is a spanne longer then another cubyte) hys botome in the myddeste was a cubyte longe and wyde, and the ledge that wente rounde aboute it, was a spanne brode. Thys is the heygth of the aulter:
Ezekiel 43:14 From the grounde to the lower steppes the length is two cubites, and the bredth one cubyte: and from the lower steppes to the higher are foure cubytes, and the bredth but one cubyte.
Ezekiel 43:15 The aulter was foure cubytes hye, & from the aulter vpwarde stode foure hornes,
Ezekiel 43:16 and it was .xij. cubytes longe and .xij. cubytes brode, vpon the foure corners:
Ezekiel 43:17 the couerynge of the aulter was .xiiij. cubytes longe & brode vpon the foure corners, and the ledge that wente rounde aboute, had half a cubite: and the botome therof rounde aboute one cubyte: hys steppes stode towarde the Easte.
Ezekiel 43:18 And he sayd vnto me: Thou sonne of man, thus saieth the Lorde God: these are the ordynaunces & lawes of the aulter, in the daye when it is made to offre burntoffrynges & to sprenckle bloude ther vpon.
Ezekiel 43:19 To the prestes, to the Leuites that be of the sede of Sadoch, & treade before me to do me seruyce, sayeth the Lorde God: Vnto these geue thou a yonge bullock, for a synofferynge:
Ezekiel 43:20 & take the bloude of hym and sprenckle hys foure hornes withall and the foure corners of the aulter couerynge, with the ledge that goeth rounde aboute: here with shalt thou clense it, & reconcyle it.
Ezekiel 43:21 Thou shalt take the bullock also of the synoffringe, and burne hym in a seuerall place wythout the Sanctuary.
Ezekiel 43:22 The nexte daye, take a gootbuck wythout blemish for a synofferynge, to reconcyle the aulter withall: lyke as it was reconcyled with the bullocke.
Ezekiel 43:23 Now when thou haste made it cleane, then offre a yonge bullocke without blemyshe, and a ramme out of the flocke wythout blemish also:
Ezekiel 43:24 Offre them before the Lorde, and let the prest caste salt thervpon, and geue, them so vnto the Lorde for a burntofferyng.
Ezekiel 43:25 Seuen dayes shalt thou bring, euery daye a gootbuck. A yonge bullocke & a ramme of the flocke (both wythout blemysh) shall they offre.
Ezekiel 43:26 Seuen dayes shall they reconcyle and clense the aulter, and offre vpon it.
Ezekiel 43:27 When these dayes are expired, then vpon the .viij. daye and so forth, the prestes shall offre their burntoffringes & he althoffrynges vpon the aulter: so wyll I be mercyfull vnto you, sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 44

Ezekiel 44:1 After thys, he brought me agayne to the outwarde dore of the Sanctuary on the East syde and that was shut.
Ezekiel 44:2 Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: This dore shall be styll shut, and not opened for enye man to go thorow it, but only for the Lorde God of Israell, yee he shall go thorowe it, els shal it be shut styll.
Ezekiel 44:3 The prynce hym selfe shall come thorow it, that he maye eate bread before the Lorde. At the porche shall he come in, and there shall he go out agayne.
Ezekiel 44:4 Then brought he me to the dore, vpon the North syde of the house. And as I loked aboute me, beholde, the glory of the Lord fylled the house: and I fell downe vpon my face.
Ezekiel 44:5 So the Lord spake vnto me: O thou sonne of man fasten this to thyne herte, beholde, and take dylygent hede to all that I wyll saye vnto the, concernyng all the ordynaunces of the Lord & all his lawes: pondre wel with thyne herte the commynge in of the house and the goinge forth of the Sanctuarye:
Ezekiel 44:6 and tell that obstynate housholde of Israell: Thus sayeth the Lorde God: O house of Israell, ye haue now done ynough withall youre abhomynacyons,
Ezekiel 44:7 seynge that ye haue brought in to my Sanctuary straungers, hauynge vncircumcysed hertes and fleshe, where thorow my Sanctuary is defyled, when ye offre me bred, fat, and bloude. Thus with all youre abhomynacyons ye haue broken my couenaunt,
Ezekiel 44:8 and not kepte the holy ordinaunces of my Sanctuarye: but set kepers of my Sanctuary, euen after your owne mynde.
Ezekiel 44:9 Therfore thus sayeth the Lord God: Of all the straungers that dwell amonge the chyldren of Israell, no straunger (whose herte & fleshe is not cyrcumcysed) shall come within my Sanctuarye:
Ezekiel 44:10 No ner the Leuites that be gone backe frome, and haue dysceyued the people of Israell wyth all erroures, goinge after their ydoles: therfore shall they beare their owne wyckednes.
Ezekiel 44:11 Shulde they be set & ordened to mynystre vnder the dores of the house of my Sanctuarye? And to do seruyce in the house: to slaye burntoffringes and sacrifyces for the people: to stande before them, and to serue them:
Ezekiel 44:12 seynge the seruyce that they do them, is before their Idoles, and cause the house of Israell to stomble thorowe the wyckednes? For the whych cause I haue pluckte out myne hande ouer them (sayeth the Lorde) so that now they must beare their owne iniquyte,
Ezekiel 44:13 and not to come nye me, to serue me with their presthode, in my Sanctuarye, and moost holyest of all: that they maye beare their owne shame & abhomynacyons, which they haue done.
Ezekiel 44:14 Shulde I vse them to be porters of the house, and to all the seruyce that is done therin?
Ezekiel 44:15 But the Prestes the Leuytes the sonnes of Sadoch, that kepte the holye ordynaunces of my Sanctuarye, when the chyldren of Israell were gone fro me: shall come to me, to do me seruyce, to stande before me, & to offre me the fat & the bloude, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 44:16 They shall go in to my Sanctuarye, and treade before my table, to do me seruice, and to wayte vpon myne ordynaunces.
Ezekiel 44:17 Now when they go in at the dores of the ynnermer court: they shal put on lynen clothes, so that no wollyne come vpon them: whyle they do seruyce vnder the dores of the ynnermer courte, and within.
Ezekiel 44:18 They shall haue fayre lynen bonettes vpon their heades, and lynen breches vpon their loynes, whyche in their laboure they shall not put about them:
Ezekiel 44:19 And when they go forth to the people in to the outward courte, they shall put of the clothes, wherin they haue mynystred, and laye them in the habytacyon of the Sanctuary, and put on other apparel, lest they vnhalowe the people wyth their clothes.
Ezekiel 44:20 They shall not shaue their heades, ner noryshe the bushe of their heare, but rounde their heades onlye.
Ezekiel 44:21 All the Prestes that go into the ynmost court, shall dryncke no wyne.
Ezekiel 44:22 They shall mary no wydow, nether one that is put from her husband: but a mayde of the sede of the house of Israel, or a wyddowe: that hath had a prest before.
Ezekiel 44:23 They shall shewe my people the dyfference betwene the holye and vnholye, betwyxte the clene and vnclene.
Ezekiel 44:24 If any discorde arise, they shall dyscerne it, and geue sentence after my iudgementes. My solempne feastes, my lawes and ordynaunces shall they kepe, and halowe my Sabbathes.
Ezekiel 44:25 They shall come at no deed persone, to defyle them selues (excepte it be father or mother, sonne or daughter, brother or syster that hath hadyet no husbande) in soch they maye be defyled.
Ezekiel 44:26 And when he is clensed, there shall be rekened vnto hym .vij. dayes:
Ezekiel 44:27 and yf he go in to the Sanctuary agayne to do seruyce, he shall bringe a synoffrynge sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 44:28 They shall haue an heretage, yee I my selfe wilbe their heretage: els shall ye geue them no possessyon in Israel, for I am their possessyon.
Ezekiel 44:29 The meatoffrynge, synoffrynge & trespaceoffrynge shall they eate, and euery dedycate thing in Israel, shalbe theirs.
Ezekiel 44:30 The firstlynges of all the first fruytes, & all fre wil offrynges shall be the prestes. Ye shal geue vnto the preste also the firstlynges of youre dowe, that God maye prospere the resydue.
Ezekiel 44:31 But no deed caryon shall that perst eate, ner soch as is deuoured of wylde beastes, foules or catell.

CHAPTER: 45

Ezekiel 45:1 When ye deuyde the lande by the lot, ye shal put a syde one parte for the Lorde, to be holy from other landes: namely .xxv.M. meteroddes longe, and .x.M. brode. This shalbe holye, as wyde as it is rounde aboute.
Ezekiel 45:2 Of thys parte there shall belonge vnto the Sanctuary .v.C. meteroddes in all the foure corners, and .l. cubytes wyde rounde aboute to the suburbes.
Ezekiel 45:3 And from this measure, namelye of .xxv.M. meteroddes longe, and .x.M. brode, thou shalt measure, wherin the Sanctuary and the holyest of all maye stande.
Ezekiel 45:4 The resydue of that holye grounde shall be the prestes, whiche do seruyce in the Sanctuarye of the Lorde, and goo in before the Lorde to serue hym, that they maye haue rowme to dwell in.
Ezekiel 45:5 As for the Sanctuarye, it shall stande for it selfe: and to the Leuites that serue in the house, there shalbe geuen .xx. habytacyons, of the .xxv.M. length and .x.M. bredth:
Ezekiel 45:6 ye shall geue also vnto the cytie a possessyon of .v.M. meteroddes brode, and .xxv.M. longe, besyde the parte of the Sanctuary: that shall be fore the whole house of Israell.
Ezekiel 45:7 Vpon both the sydes of the Sanctuarys parte, and by the cytye, there shalbe geuen vnto the prynce, whatsoeuer lieth ouer agaynst the cytyes, as farre as reacheth westwarde and eastwarde: whiche shalbe as longe as one parte, from the west vnto the east.
Ezekiel 45:8 This shalbe hys owne lande in Israell, that my prynces be no more chargeable vnto my people. And soch as remayneth yet ouer in the lande, shalbe geuen to the house of Israell accordynge to their trybes.
Ezekiel 45:9 Thus sayeth the Lord God: O ye prynces, ye haue now oppressed and destroyed ynough: now leaue of, handle now accordyng to the thing, that is equall and lauful: and thrust out my people nomore, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 45:10 Ye shall haue a true weyght, a true Ephah, and a true Bath.
Ezekiel 45:11 The Ephah and the Bath shalbe a like. One Bath shall conteyne the tenth parte of an Homer, and so shall one Ephah do: their measure shall be after the Homer.
Ezekiel 45:12 One Sycle maketh .xx. Geras. So .xx. Sicles, and .xxv. & .xv. Sycles make a pounde.
Ezekiel 45:13 This is the heaue offrynge, that ye shall geue to be heaued: namelye, that .xvi. parte of an Ephah, out of an Homer of wheate: and the .xvi. parte of an Ephah, out of an Homer of barly.
Ezekiel 45:14 The oyle shall be measured with the Bath: euen the tent parte of one Bath out of a Cor. Ten Bathes make one Homer: for one Homer sylleth ten Bathes.
Ezekiel 45:15 And one lambe from two hundreth shepe out of the pasture of Israel, for a meatoffringe, burntofferynge and healthoffryng, to reconcyle them, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 45:16 All the people of the lande shall geue thys heaue offerynge wyth a fre wyll.
Ezekiel 45:17 Agayne, it shall be the prynces parte to offre burntofferynges, meatofferynges and drynckoffrynges vnto the Lorde, in the holy dayes, new Moones, Sabbathes, and in all the hye feastes of the house of Israell. The synoffrynge, meatoffrynge, brentofferynge and healthoffrynge shall he geue, to reconcyle the house of Israell.
Ezekiel 45:18 Thus sayeth the Lord God: The first daye of the first moneth thou shalt take a yonge bullocke wythout blemyshe, and clense the Sanctuarye.
Ezekiel 45:19 So the preste shall take of the bloude of the synoffrynge, and sprenckle it vpon the postes of the house, and vpon the foure corners of the aulter, with the dore postes of the ynnermer courte.
Ezekiel 45:20 And thus shalt thou do also the seuenth daye of the moneth (for soche as haue synned of ygnoraunce, or beynge disceyued) to reconcyle the house withall.
Ezekiel 45:21 Vpon the .xiiij. daye of the fyrste moneth ye shall kepe. Easter. Seuen dayes shall the feast contynue wherin there shall no sower ner leuened bred be eaten.
Ezekiel 45:22 Vpon the same daye shall the prynce geue for hym selfe and all the people of the lande, a bullocke for a synoffrynge.
Ezekiel 45:23 And in the feast of the seuen dayes he shall offre euery daye a bullocke and a ram, that are without blemish for a burntoffrynge vnto the Lorde: and an he gaote daylye for a synofferynge.
Ezekiel 45:24 For the meatoffrynges, he shall geue euer an Ephah to a bullocke, an Ephah to a ram, and an Hin of oyle to an Ephah.
Ezekiel 45:25 Vpon the .xv. daye of the seuenth moneth, he shall kepe the seuen dayes holy one after another, euen as the other seuen dayes: with the synoffrynge, burntoffryng, meatoffrynge, and with the oyle.

CHAPTER: 46

Ezekiel 46:1 Thus sayeth the Lorde God: the dore of the ynnermer courte towarde the East, shall be shut the .vi. worcke dayes: but in the Sabboth & in daye of the newe Moone, it shalbe opened.
Ezekiel 46:2 Then shall that prynce come vnder the dore porche, and stande styll wythout by the dore cheke. So the prestes shall offre vp hys burnt and healthofferynges. And he shall worshyppe at the dore poste and go hys waye forth agayne: but the dore shall nomore be shut tyll the euenynge.
Ezekiel 46:3 On the same maner shall the people of the lande also do their worshipe before the Lord, wythout thys dore vpon the Sabbathes and new Moones.
Ezekiel 46:4 This is now the burntofferynge, that the prynce shall brynge vnto the Lorde vpon the Sabboth: syxe lambes without blemyshe, and a ram without blemyshe,
Ezekiel 46:5 and an Ephah for a meatoffrynge, wyth the ram. As for the lambes, he maye geue as many meatoffrynges to them, as he will, and an Hin of oyle to an Ephah.
Ezekiel 46:6 In the daye of the new moneth, it shall be a yong bullocke without blemysh, syxe lambes & a ram also wythout blemysh.
Ezekiel 46:7 With the bullocke he shall geue an Ephah, and wyth the ram an Ephah also for a meatofferynge: but to the lambes, what he maye come by: And euer an Hin of oyle to an Ephah.
Ezekiel 46:8 When the prynce commeth, he shal go vnder the dore porche, and euen there departe forth agayne.
Ezekiel 46:9 But when the people of the lande come before the Lorde in the hye solempne feaste, as many as come in by the North dore to do worshyppe, shall goo oute agayne at the South dore. And they that come in at the South dore, shall go forth agayne at the North dore. There shall none go oute at the dore where he came in, but shal goo forth ryght ouer on the other syde,
Ezekiel 46:10 & the prince shall go in and out amonge them.
Ezekiel 46:11 Vpon the solempne and hye feaste dayes, this shalbe the meatofferinge: An Epha to a bullock and an Epha to a ram, & to the lambes: as many as he wyll, but euer an Hin of oyle to an Epha.
Ezekiel 46:12 Now when the prynce bryngeth a burntofferynge or an healthofferynge wyth a fre wyll vnto the Lorde, the east dore shalbe opened vnto him, that he maye do with hys burnt and healthofferynges, as he doth vpon the Sabboth, and when he goeth forth, the dore shall be shutt after hym agayne.
Ezekiel 46:13 He shall daylie brynge vnto the Lorde a lambe of a yeare olde without blemyshe for a burntoffringe: this shall he do euerye mornynge.
Ezekiel 46:14 And for a meatofferynge he shall geue the syxte parte of an Epha, and the thyrde parte of an Hin of oyle (to myngle wyth the cakes) euery mournynge. Yee thys shalbe a daylye meatofferinge vnto the Lorde, for an euerlastynge ordynaunce:
Ezekiel 46:15 and thus shall the lambe, the meatofferynge and oyle be geuen euerye mornynge, for a daylie burntofferinge.
Ezekiel 46:16 Moreouer, thus sayeth the Lorde God: If the prynce geue a gyfte vnto eny of hys sonnes, then shall it be hys sonnes heretage perpetuall, that he maye possesse it.
Ezekiel 46:17 But If he wyll geue one of hys seruauntes some of his heretage, it shall be his to the fre yeare, and them to returne agayne vnto the prynce: for hys heretage shalbe hys sonnes ouelye.
Ezekiel 46:18 The prince also shall take none of the peoples enherytaunce, ner put them from their possessyon: but to his owne sonnes shall he geue hys possessyon, that my people be not scatred abrode, but that euerye man maye haue hys owne.
Ezekiel 46:19 And he brought me thorow the intraunce at the syde of the dore to the habytacyon of the Sanctuary, that be longeth to the prestes and stode towarde the north, & beholde, there was a place vpon the West syde,
Ezekiel 46:20 then sayde he vnto me: This is the place, where the prestes shall dight the trespace & synoffrynges and bake the meatofferinges: that they nede not beare them in to the outwarde courte, & so to vnhalowe the people.
Ezekiel 46:21 So he brought me in to the vttemost courte, rounde aboute all the foure corners. Beholde, in euery corner of the fore courte, there was yet a lytle courte.
Ezekiel 46:22 Yee in all the foure corners of the courte, there was made a lytle courte of .xl. cubytes long, and .xxx. cubytes brode: these foure lytle courtes were of one lyke measure,
Ezekiel 46:23 and there went a rygge wall rounde aboute them all foure, vnder the whych there were harthes made rounde aboute.
Ezekiel 46:24 Then sayd he vnto me: This is the kechin, where the mynisters of the house shall dyght the slayne offerynges of the people.

CHAPTER: 47

Ezekiel 47:1 After this he brought me agayne before the dore of the house: and beholde, there gushed out waters from vnder the postes of the house eastwarde (for the house stode towarde the east) that ranne downe vpon the ryght syde of the house, which lyeth to the aulter south ward.
Ezekiel 47:2 Then caried he me out to the north dore, and brought me forth there rounde aboute by the vttemost dore that turneth eastward. Beholde, there came forth the water vpon the right side.
Ezekiel 47:3 Now whan the man that had the meterodde in his hande wente vnto the east dore, he measured a .M. cubites, and then he brought me thorowe the water, euen to the ancles:
Ezekiel 47:4 so he measured yet a thousand, and brought me thorow the water agayne vnto the knees: yet measured he a thousande, and brought me thorowe the water vnto the loynes.
Ezekiel 47:5 After this he measured a thousande agayne, then was it soch a ryuer that I myght not wade thorow it: The water was so depe, that it was nedefull to haue swimmed, for it myght not be waded ouer.
Ezekiel 47:6 And he sayde vnto me: hast thou sene this, O thou sonne of man? and with that, he brought me to the ryuer banck agayne.
Ezekiel 47:7 Now when I came there, there stode many trees vpon ether syde of the ryuer bancke.
Ezekiel 47:8 Then sayde he vnto me: This water that floweth oute towarde the East, and runneth downe in to the playne felde, commeth in to the sea: and from the sea it runneth out, & maketh the waters whole,
Ezekiel 47:9 Yee all that lyue and moue, where vnto this ryuer commeth, shall recouer. And where thys water commeth, there shalbe moch fyshe. For all that commeth, this water, shalbe lusty and whole.
Ezekiel 47:10 By thys ryuer shall the fysshers stande from Engaddy vnto En Eglaim, and there sprede out their nettes: for there shalbe greate heapes of fish, lyke as in the mayne sea.
Ezekiel 47:11 As for hys claye & pyttes, they shall not be whole, for why, it shalbe occupyde for salt.
Ezekiel 47:12 By this ryuer vpon both the sydes of the shore, there shall growe al maner of fruiteful trees, whose leaues shall not fall of, nether shall their fruyte peryshe: but euer be rype at their monethes, for their water ronneth out of their Sanctuary. His fruite is good to eate and hys leaf profitable for medycyne.
Ezekiel 47:13 Thus sayeth the Lorde God: Let this be the border wherin ye shall deuyde the lande vnto the .xij. tribes of Israell, wyth the lyne.
Ezekiel 47:14 Parte it indyfferently vnto one as vnto another: of the which land I swore vnto youre fathers: that it shulde fall to youre enheritaunce.
Ezekiel 47:15 Thys is the broder of the lande vpon the northside, from the mayne sea, as men go to Zadada:
Ezekiel 47:16 namelye Hemath, Berotha, Sabarim: from the borders of Damascus and Hemath vnto Hazar Tichon, & that lyeth vpon the coastes of Haueran.
Ezekiel 47:17 Thus the borders from the sea forte, shalbe Hazar Euan, the border of Damascus the North, and the borders of Hemath: that is the North parte.
Ezekiel 47:18 The east syde shall ye measure from Haueran and Damascus, from Galead and the lande of Israell by Iordane and so forth, from the sea coast, that lyeth eastwarde: and this is the east parte.
Ezekiel 47:19 The southsyde is, from Thamar forth to the waters of stryfe vnto Cades, the ryuer, to the mayne sea: and that is the south parte.
Ezekiel 47:20 The west warte: namely the greate sea from the borders therof, tyll a man come vnto Hemath: this is the west parte.
Ezekiel 47:21 Thys lande shall ye parte amonge you, according to the tribes of Israell,
Ezekiel 47:22 & deuide it to be an heretage for you, & for the straungers that dwell amonge you, & begette chyldren. For ye shall take them amonge the chyldren of Israell, lyke as though they were of youre owne housholde and countre, and they shall haue heretage with you amonge the chyldren of Israell.
Ezekiel 47:23 Loke in what tribe the straunger dwelleth, in the same tribe shall ye geue hym hys heretage, sayeth the Lorde God.

CHAPTER: 48

Ezekiel 48:1 These are the names of the trybes that lye vpon the northsyde, by the waye of Hetlon, tyll thou commest vnto Hemath & Hazar Enam, the borders of Damascus towarde the north beside Hemath: Dan shall haue hys porcion from the east quarter vnto the west.
Ezekiel 48:2 Vpon the borders of Dan from the east syde vnto the west, shall Asser haue hys porcyon.
Ezekiel 48:3 Vpon the borders of Asser from the east parte vnto the west shall Nephthali haue hys porcyon.
Ezekiel 48:4 Vpon the borders of Nephthali from the east quarter vnto the west, shall Manasses haue his porcion.
Ezekiel 48:5 Vpon the borders of Manasses from the east syde vnto the west, shall Ephraim haue his porcyon.
Ezekiel 48:6 Vpon the borders of Ephraim from the east parte vnto the west, shall Ruben haue his porcyon.
Ezekiel 48:7 Vpon the borders of Ruben from the east quarter vnto the west shall Iuda haue hys porcyon:
Ezekiel 48:8 Vpon the borders of Iuda from the east parte vnto the west, ye shall set a syde one porcion of .xxv.M. meteroddes longe and brode (like as another porcyon from the east syde vnto the west) wherin the Sanctuary shall stande.
Ezekiel 48:9 As for the porcyon, that ye shall separate out for the Lorde: it shalbe .xxv.M. longe, & .x.M. brode.
Ezekiel 48:10 Which separated holy porcyon shall belonge vnto these: namelye to the prestes, towarde the north .xxv.M. and towarde the west .x.M. brode, towarde the east .x.M. brode also, & toward the south .xxv.M. longe wherin the Sanctuarye of the Lorde shall stande.
Ezekiel 48:11 Yee this same place shalbe the prestes that are of the children of Sadoch, and haue kepte my holy ordynaunce: which wente not astraye in the erroure of the chyldren of Israel lyke as the Leuites are gone astraye:
Ezekiel 48:12 and this separated pece that they haue of the lande shalbe the most holy, harde vpon the borders of the Leuites.
Ezekiel 48:13 And nexte vnto the prestes, shall the Leuites haue .xxv.M. longe. and .x.M. brode. This shalbe on euery syde .xxv.M. longe, and .x.M. brode.
Ezekiel 48:14 Of this porcyon they shall sell nothinge, ner make any permutacyon therof, lest the chefe of the lande fall vnto other, for it is halowed vnto the Lorde.
Ezekiel 48:15 The other .v.M. after the bredth that lyeth by the .xxv.M. shalbe comen: it shall belonge to the cyte and to the suburbes for habytacyons, & the cyte shall stande in the myddest therof.
Ezekiel 48:16 Let this be the measure: towarde the north parte .v.C. and .iiij.M. towarde the sout parte .v.C. and .iiij.M. towarde the east parte .v.C. & .iiij.M. towarde the west part .v.C. and .iiij.M.
Ezekiel 48:17 The suburbes harde vpon the cytye, shall haue towarde the north .L. and .ij.C. towarde the south .L. and .ij.C. towarde the east .L. & two .C. towarde the west also .L. and two .C.
Ezekiel 48:18 As for the resydue of the length, that lyeth harde vpon the separated holy grounde: namely .x. thousande towarde the east, & .x.M. towarde the west, nexte vnto the holye porcion: it and the increase therof shall serue for their meate, that laboure in the cytye.
Ezekiel 48:19 They that laboure for the welth of the cytye, shall manteyne this also, out of what tribe soeuer they be in Israel.
Ezekiel 48:20 All that is separated of the .xxv.M. longe and .xxv.M. brode on the foure partes, that shall ye put a syde for the separated porcyon of the Sanctuarye, & for the possessyon of the cyty.
Ezekiel 48:21 The resydue vpon both the sydes of the Sanctuary and possessyon of the cytye, shall belonge to the prince, before the place of the .xxv.M. vnto the east ende, & before the place of the .xxv.M. westwarde, vnto the borders of the cytye: this shalbe the princes porcion. Thys shalbe the holy place, and the house of the Sanctuarye shall stande in the myddest.
Ezekiel 48:22 Moreouer from the Leuites and the cytyes possession, that lye in the myddest of the princes parte: loke what remayneth betwixte the border of Iuda & the border of BenIamin, it shalbe the Princes.
Ezekiel 48:23 Now of the other trybes. From the east parte vnto the west, shall Beniamin haue hys porcion.
Ezekiel 48:24 Vpon the borders of BenIamin from the east syde vnto the west, shall Symeon haue his porcion.
Ezekiel 48:25 Vpon the borders of Symeon from the east parte vnto the west, shall Izakar haue hys porcyon.
Ezekiel 48:26 Vpon the borders of Izakar from the east syde vnto the west, shall Sabulon haue his porcion.
Ezekiel 48:27 Vpon the borders of Sabulon from the east parte vnto the west, shall Gad haue hys porcion.
Ezekiel 48:28 Vpon the borders of Gad southwarde, the coastes shall reach from Thamar forth vnto the waters of stryfe to Cades, and to the floude, euen vnto the many sea.
Ezekiel 48:29 This is the lande with his porcions, which ye shall dystribute vnto the trybes of Israel, sayeth the Lorde God.
Ezekiel 48:30 Thus wyde shall the cyte reach: vpon the north parte .v.C. & .iiij.M. measures.
Ezekiel 48:31 The portes of the cyte, shall haue the names of the tribes of Israel. Thre portes of the northside: one Ruben, another Iuda, the thyrde Leui.
Ezekiel 48:32 Vpon the east side .v.C. & .iiij.M. measures, with thre portes: the one Ioseph, another BenIamin, the thyrde Dan.
Ezekiel 48:33 Vpon the south syde .v.C. and .iiij.M. measures, wyth the thre portes: the one Symeon, another Izakar the thyrde Sabulon.
Ezekiel 48:34 And vpon the west side .v.C. and .iiij.M. measures, with thre portes also, that one Gad, another Asser, the thyrde Nephthali.
Ezekiel 48:35 Thus shall it haue .xviij.M. measures rounde about And from that tyme forth, the name of the cyte shalbe: the Lorde is there.

BOOK: Daniel

CHAPTER: 1

Daniel 1:1 In the thyrde yeare of the raygne of Iehoakim kinge of Iuda, came Nabuchodonosor kyng of Babylon vnto Ierusalem, & beseged it
Daniel 1:2 and the Lord deliuered Iehoakim the kinge of Iuda into his hande, with certayne ornamentes of the house of God, whiche he caryed awaye vnto the lande of Sennar, to the house of his God, and there he broughte them into hys Goddes treasurye.
Daniel 1:3 And the kyng spake vnto Asphanaz the chefe chamberlayne, that he shulde brynge hym certayne of the chyldren of Israel, that were come of the kynges sede & of prynces,
Daniel 1:4 yonge spryngaldes wythout anye blemyshe, but fayre & welfauoured, instructe in all wisdome, connyng and vnderstanding: whiche were able to stande in the kynges palace, to reade and to learne for to speake Caldeish.
Daniel 1:5 Vnto these the king appoynted a certayne porcyon of hys owne meate, and of the wyne, which he drancke hym selfe, so to noryshe them thre yeare: that afterwarde they myght stande before the kynge.
Daniel 1:6 Amonge these nowe were certayne of the chyldren of Iuda: namely Daniel, Ananias, Misael & Azarias.
Daniel 1:7 Vnto these the chefe chamberlayne gaue other names, & called Daniel, Balthazar: Ananias, Sidrach, Misael, Misach, and Asarias, Abednago.
Daniel 1:8 But Daniel was at a poynte wyth hym self, that he wolde not be defyled thorowe the kynges meate, nor the wyne whiche he droncke. And this he desyred of the chefe Chamberlaine, leste he shulde defyle hym selfe.
Daniel 1:9 So God gaue Daniel fauoure and grace before the chefe chamberlayne,
Daniel 1:10 that he said vnto hym: I am afraied of my Lorde the kynge, whiche hath appoynted you youre meate & drinck: lest he spye your faces to be worse lykyng then the other springaldes of youre age, and so ye shall make me lose my head vnto the kynge.
Daniel 1:11 Then Daniel aunswered Melassar, whom the chefe chamberlayne had set ouer Daniell, Ananias, Misael and Asarias, & sayde:
Daniel 1:12 O proue but ten dayes with thy seruauntes, and let vs haue potage to eate, & water to drincke:
Daniel 1:13 then loke vpon oure faces, & theyrs that eate of the kynges meate. And as thou seyst, so deale wyth thy seruauntes.
Daniel 1:14 So he consented to them in thys matter, and proued them .x. dayes.
Daniel 1:15 And after the ten dayes, theyr faces were better lykyng & fatter, then al the younge spryngaldes whiche ate of the kynges meate.
Daniel 1:16 Thus Melassar toke awaye theyr meate, and wyne, and gaue them potage therefore.
Daniel 1:17 God gaue nowe these foure spryngaldes connyng and learnyng in all scrypture and wysdome: but vnto Daniell specyally, he gaue vnderstandynge of all vysyons and dreames.
Daniel 1:18 Nowe when the tyme was expyred, that the kynge hath appoynted to bryng in these yonge spryngaldes vnto hym: the chefe chamberlain broughte them before Nabuchodonosor,
Daniel 1:19 and the kynge communed with them. But among them all were founde none suche as Daniel, Ananias, Misael, and Asarias. Therfor stode they before the kynge,
Daniel 1:20 whiche in all wysdome and matters of vnderstandynge, that he enquered of them, founde them ten tymes better then all the sothsayers and charmers, that were in all hys realme.
Daniel 1:21 And Daniel abode styl, vnto the fyrste yeare of kynge Cyrus.

CHAPTER: 2

Daniel 2:1 In the seconde yeare of the raigne of Nabuchodonosor, had Nabuchodonosor a dreame, wherethorow his sprete was vexed, & hys slepe brake from him.
Daniel 2:2 Then the kyng commaunded to cal together all the sothsayers, charmers, witches & Caldees, for to shew the king his dreame. So they came & stode before the king.
Daniel 2:3 And the king sayd vnto them: I haue dreamed a dreame, and my sprete was so troubled therewith, that I haue clene forgotten, what I dreamed.
Daniel 2:4 Vpon thys the Caldees aunswered the kynge in the Syrians speach: O king, God saue thy lyfe for euer. Shew thy seruauntes the dreame, and we shal shewe the, what it meaneth.
Daniel 2:5 The kynge gaue the Caldees theyr aunswere, & said: It is gone fro me: Yf ye wyl not make me vnderstande the dreame wyth the interpretacyon thereof, ye shall dye, & youre houses shalbe prysed.
Daniel 2:6 But yf ye tell me the dreame & the meanynge therof, ye shall haue of me gyftes, rewardes & greate honoure: onely, shew me the dreame and the sygnifycacyon of it.
Daniel 2:7 They aunswered agayne, and sayde: the kynge must shewe his seruauntes the dreame, & so shall we declare what it meaneth.
Daniel 2:8 Then the kinge auswered, sayinge: I perceyue of a trueth, that ye do but prolonge the tyme: for so muche as ye se, that the thing is gone fro me.
Daniel 2:9 Therfore ye wil not tell me the dreame, ye shall all haue one iudgement. But ye fayne & dyssemble with vayne wordes, which ye speake before me, to put of the tyme. Therfore tel me the dreame, & so shal I know yf ye can shewe me, what it meaneth.
Daniel 2:10 Vpon this, the Caldees gaue answere before the king, and sayde: there is no man vpon earthe, that can tell the thynge, whiche the kyng speaketh of, yea there is neyther kyng, prynce nor lord, that euer asked suche thynges at a sothsayer, charmer or Caldeer:
Daniel 2:11 for it is a very hard matter, that the kynge requyreth. Neither is there any, that can certyfye the kynge therof, except the Goddes: whose dwellyng is not among the creatures.
Daniel 2:12 For the whiche cause the kyng was wroth with greate indignacyon, and commaunded to destroye all the wyse men at Babylon:
Daniel 2:13 and the proclamacyon wente forthe, that the wyse men shuld be slayne, They sought also to slay Daniel with hys companions.
Daniel 2:14 Then Daniel enquered Arioh the kynges stewarde, of the iudgement and sentence, that was gone forth already to kyll soche as were wyse at Babilon.
Daniel 2:15 He aunswered and sayde vnto Arioh brynge then the Kynges debyte: Why hath the kyng proclamed so cruell a sentence? So Arioh tolde Daniel the matter.
Daniel 2:16 Vpon this, wente Daniel vp, and desyred the kynge, that he might haue leysoure, to shewe the kynge the interpretacyon:
Daniel 2:17 and then came he home agayne, & shewed the thynge vnto Ananias, Misael & Asarias hys companyons:
Daniel 2:18 that they shulde beseche the God of heauen for grace in thys secrete, that Daniel and hys felowes wyth other soch as were wyse in Babylon, peryshed not.
Daniel 2:19 Then was the mysterye shewed vnto Daniel in a vysyon by nyght And Daniel praysed the god of heauen.
Daniel 2:20 Daniel also cryed loude, and sayd: O that the name of God myghte be praysed for euer and euer, for wysdome and strengthe are hys owne:
Daniel 2:21 he chaunged the tymes & ages: he putteth doune kynges, he setteth vp kinges he geueth wysdome vnto the wyse, & vnderstandynge to those that vnderstande,
Daniel 2:22 he openeth the depe secretes, he knoweth the thynge that lyeth in darckenesse, for the lyghte dwelleth wyth hym.
Daniel 2:23 I thanke the, and prayse the (O thou God of my fathers) that thou haste lente me wysdom and strength, & hast shewed me the thyng, that we desyred of the, for thou haste opened the kynges matter vnto me.
Daniel 2:24 Vpon this went Daniel in vnto Arioh, whome the kynge had ordeyned to destroye the wyse at Babylon: he went vnto hym, & sayde: destroye not suche as are wyse in Babylon, but brynge me in vnto the kynge, and I shall shewe the kynge the interpretacyon.
Daniel 2:25 Then Arioch broughte Daniel in to the kyng in all the haste, and sayde vnto hym: I haue founde a man amonge the presoners of Iuda, that shall shewe the kyng the interpretacyon.
Daniel 2:26 Then aunswered the kynge, and sayde vnto Daniel, whose name was Balthasar: Arte thou he, that canste shewe me the dreame, whiche I haue sene, & the interpretacyon therof?
Daniel 2:27 Daniel aunswered the kynge to hys face, and sayd: As for this secrete, for the whiche the kynge maketh inquisicion: it is neyther the wyse, the sorcerer, the charmer nor the deuyll coniurer, that can certyfye the kynge of it:
Daniel 2:28 Onely God in heauen can open secretes, and he it is, that sheweth the kynge Nabuchodonosor, what is for to come in the latter dayes. Thy dreame, & that whiche thou hast sene in thyne heade vpon thy bed, is thys:
Daniel 2:29 O kyng thou dyddest caste in thy mynde, what shulde come hereafter: So he that is the opener of misteryes, telleth the, what is for to come.
Daniel 2:30 As for me, thys secrete is not shewed me, for anye wysdome that I haue, more then anye other lyuynge: but onelye that I myghte shewe the kynge the interpretacyon, and that he myghte know the thoughtes of his owne herte.
Daniel 2:31 Thou kynge sawest, & behold, there stode before the a greate Image, whose fygure was marueylous greate, and hys vysage grymme.
Daniel 2:32 The Image head was of fyne golde, hys breste & armes of siluer, his body and loynes were of copper,
Daniel 2:33 his legges were of yron, his fete were parte of yron, and parte of earthe.
Daniel 2:34 Tis thou sawest, tyll the tyme that (wyth oute any handes) there was hewen of a stone whiche smote the Image vpon the fete, that were both of yron and earth, and brake them to poulder:
Daniel 2:35 then was the yron, the earthe, the copper, the syluer and gold broken altogether in peces: and be came lyke the chaffe of corne, that the wynde bloweth awaye from the somer floores, that they can no more be founde. But the stone that smote the Image, became a greate mountayne, whiche fulfilleth the whole earthe:
Daniel 2:36 Thys is the dreame. And nowe wyll we shewe before the kynge, what it meaneth.
Daniel 2:37 O kynge, thou arte a kynge of kynges: For the God of heauen hath geuen the a kyngdome, ryches, strengthe and maiestye:
Daniel 2:38 & hathe delyuered the all thynges, that are amonge the children of men: the beastes of the feld, and the foules vnder the heauen, and geuen the dominyon ouer them al. Thou arte that golden head.
Daniel 2:39 After the there shall aryse another kyngdome, whiche shall be lesse then thyne. The thyrde kyngedome shalbe lyke copper, & haue dominacyon in all landes.
Daniel 2:40 The fourthe kyngdome shalbe as stronge as yron. For lyke as yron broseth and breaketh all thynges: Yea euen as yron beateth euery thynge doune, so shall it beate doune and destroye.
Daniel 2:41 Where as thou sawest the fete and toes, parte of earthe, and parte of yron: that is a deuyded kyngedome, whiche neuertheles shall haue some of the yron grounde myxte with it, for so muche as thou haste sene the yron mixte with the claye.
Daniel 2:42 The toes of the fete that were parte of yron and parte of claye, sygnifyeth, that it shalbe a kyngdome partely stronge and partly weake.
Daniel 2:43 And where as thou sawest yron myxte wyth claye: they shall myngle them selues wyth the sede of symple people, & yet not contynue one wyth another, lyke as yron wyll not be souldered with a potsherde.
Daniel 2:44 In the dayes of these kinges shall the God of heauen set vp an euerlastynge kyngdome whiche shall not peryshe, and hys kyngdome shall not be geuen ouer to another people: yea the same shal breake and destroy al these kingdomes, but it shall endure foreuer.
Daniel 2:45 And where as thou saweste, that withoute any handes there was cut oute of the mounte a stone, whiche brake the yron, the copper, the earthe, the syluer and golde in peces: by that hath the greate God shewed the kynge, what wyll come after thys. This is a true dreame, and the interpretacyon of it is sure.
Daniel 2:46 Then the kynge Nabuchodonosor fell doune vpon hys face, and bowed hym self vnto Daniel, and commaunded that they shuld offre meate offerynges and swete odours vnto hym.
Daniel 2:47 The kynge aunswered Daniel, and sayde: yea of a trueth your God is a GOD aboue all Goddes, a Lorde aboue all kynges and an opener of secretes: seynge thou canste dyscouer thys mysterye.
Daniel 2:48 So the kynge made Daniel a greate man, and gaue hym many & greate gyftes. He made hym ruler of all the countrees of Babylon, and Lorde of all the nobles, that were at Babylon.
Daniel 2:49 Now Daniel intreated the kynge so: Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, so that he made them rulers ouer all the offyces in the lande of Babylon: But Danyel hymselfe remayned styll in the courte by the kynge.

CHAPTER: 3

Daniel 3:1 Nabuchodonosor the kynge caused a golden Image to be made whiche was .lx. cubytes hye, & sixe cubytes thycke. This he made to be set vp in the feld of Dura in the lande of Babylon,
Daniel 3:2 and sent out to gather together the dukes, lordes and nobles, the iudges and offycers, the debytes, & shreues, with all the rulers of the lande, that they mighte come to the dedicacyon of the Image whiche Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set vp.
Daniel 3:3 So the dukes, lordes and nobles, the iudges and offycers, debytes and shreues with all the rulers of the land gathered them together, and came vnto the dedycatynge of the Image, that Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set vp. Now when they stode before the Image, whiche Nabuchodonosor set vp,
Daniel 3:4 the bedel cryed out with al his might: O ye people, kynredes and tunges, to you be it sayde:
Daniel 3:5 that when ye heare the noyse of the trompettes, whiche shalbe blowen, wyth the harpes, shawmes, Psalteryes, Symphonyes and all maner of Musick: ye fall doune and worshyp ye the golden Image, that Nabuchodonosor the kynge hath set vp.
Daniel 3:6 Who so then falleth not downe & boweth hym selfe, shall euen the same houre be caste into an hote burnynge ouen.
Daniel 3:7 Therfor when all the folcke hearde the noyse of the trompettes that were blowen, with the harpes, shawmes, Psalteryes, Simphonyes and all kynde of Melody: then all the people, kynredes and nacyons fell doune, and bowed them selues vnto the golden Image, that Nabuchodonosor the kynge had set vp.
Daniel 3:8 Now were there certayne men of the Caldees, that wente euen then, and accused the Iewes,
Daniel 3:9 and sayde vnto the kynge Nabuchodonosor: O kyng, God saue thy lyfe for euer.
Daniel 3:10 Thou beynge kynge, haste geuen a commaundement, that all men when they heare noyse of the trompettes, harpes, shawmes, psalteryes, symphonyes and all the other melodyes: shall fall downe, and bowe them selues towarde the golden Image:
Daniel 3:11 who so then fel not doune, and worshypped not, that he shulde be caste into an hote burnynge ouen.
Daniel 3:12 Now are there certayne Iewes, whome thou haste set ouer the offyces of the lande of Babylon, namely, Sydrach, Mysach & Abednago. These men (O kynge) regarde not thy commaundement, yea they wyll not serue thy Goddes, nor bowe them selues to the golden Image, that thou haste set vp.
Daniel 3:13 Then Nabuchodonosor in a cruell wrathe, and displeasur, commaunded that Sidrach, Misach and Abednago shulde be broughte vnto hym. So these men were broughte before the kynge.
Daniel 3:14 Then Nabuchodonosor spake vnto them, and sayde: what? O Sidrach Misach and Abednago, wyll not ye serue my Goddes, nor bowe youre selues to the golden Image, that I haue set vp?
Daniel 3:15 well, be readye here after, when ye heare the noyse of the trompettes blowe wyth the harpes, shawmes, psalteryes, symphonyes and all the other melodyes: that ye fall doune, and worshyppe the Image whiche I haue made. But yf ye worshyppe it not, ye shall be caste immedyatly into an hote burnynge ouen. Let se, what God is there, that maye delyuer you oute of my handes?
Daniel 3:16 Sidrach, Misach and Abednago aunswered the kynge, and sayde: O Nabuchodonosor, we oughte not to consente vnto the in this matter, for why:
Daniel 3:17 oure GOD whome we serue, is able to kepe vs from the hote burnynge ouen (O kynge) and can right well delyuer vs oute of thy handes.
Daniel 3:18 And thoughe he wyll not, yet shalte thou knowe (O kynge) that we wil not serue thy Goddes, nor do reuerence to the Image, whiche thou haste set vp.
Daniel 3:19 Then was Nabuchodonosor full of indignacyon, so that the countenaunce of hys face chaunged vpon Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago. Therfor he charged and commaunded, that the ouen shuld be made seuen tymes hoter, then it was wonte to be,
Daniel 3:20 and spake vnto the strongeste worthyes that were in hys hoste, for to bynde Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, & to cast them into the hote burnynge ouen.
Daniel 3:21 So these men were bounde in theyr cotes hosen, shues with theyr other garmentes, and caste into the hote burnynge ouen:
Daniel 3:22 for the kynges commaundemente was so strate, and the ouen was exceadynge hote. As for the men that put in Sydrach, Mysach & Abednago, the flamme of the fyre destroyed them.
Daniel 3:23 And these thre men Sidrach, Misah & Abednago fell doune in the hote burnynge ouen, beinge fast bound.
Daniel 3:24 Then Nabuchodonosor the kyng marueyled, & stode vp in al haste: he spake vnto hys councell, and sayde: dyd not ye caste these thre men bounde into the fyre? They aunswered, and sayde vnto the kynge: Yea O kynge.
Daniel 3:25 He aunswered and sayde: lo, for all that, yet do I se foure men goynge lowse in the myddeste of the fyre, and nothynge corrupte: and the fourthe is lyke an angell to loke vpon.
Daniel 3:26 Vpon thys wente Nabuchodonosor vnto the mouth of the hote burnynge ouen: he spake also, and sayde: O Sydrach, Mysach & Abednago, ye seruauntes of the hye God: go forthe, & come hyther. And so Sydrach, Mysach, and Abednago wente oute of the fyre.
Daniel 3:27 Then the dukes lordes and nobles, and the kynges councell came together to se these men, vpon whom the fyre had no maner of power in theyr bodyes: In so much that the very hearre of theyr head was not burnte, & theyr clothes vnchaunged: Yea there was no smel of fyre felt vpon them.
Daniel 3:28 Then spake Nabuchodonosor, and sayde: Blessed be the God of Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, whiche hath sente his aungel, & defended hys seruauntes, that put their trust in him: that haue altered the kynges commaundement: and yeoparde theyr bodyes thervpon, rather then they wolde serue or worshyp any other God, excepte theyr owne God onelye.
Daniel 3:29 Therfore I wyll, and commaund, that al people, kynredes and tunges, whiche speake any blasphemye agaynst the God of Sidrach, Misach and Abednago, shall dye, and theyr houses shalbe prysed: Because there is no God that maye saue, as thys.
Daniel 3:30 So the kynge promoted Sidrach, Misach, and Abednago, in the land of Babylon.

CHAPTER: 4

Daniel 4:1 Nabuchodonosor Kynge vnto all people, kynreddes and tunges that dwell vpon the whole earthe: peace be multiplyed among you,
Daniel 4:2 I thoughte it good to shew the tokens and meruelous worckes, that the hye God hath wrought vpon me.
Daniel 4:3 O how greate are hys tokens, and howe myghtie are hys wonders? His kyngedome is an euerlastynge kyngedome, and hys power lasteth for euer & euer.
Daniel 4:4 I Nabuchodonosor beynge at rest in minehouse, and floryshynge in my palace,
Daniel 4:5 sawe a dreame, which made me afraied: & the thoughtes that I had vpon my bed, wyth the vysyons of myne heade, troubled me.
Daniel 4:6 Then sente I oute a commyssyon, that all they which were of wysdome at Babylon, shulde be broughte before me, to tell me the interpretacyon of the dreame.
Daniel 4:7 So there came the sothsayers, charmers, Caldees and coniurers of Deuyls, to whome I tolde the dreame, but what it be tokened, they coulde not shewe me:
Daniel 4:8 tyll at the laste, there came one Daniel (otherwyse called Balthazar, accordynge to the name of my God) whiche hath the sprete of the holy Goddes in hym: to whom I tolde the dreame, saying:
Daniel 4:9 O Balthasar, thou prince of southsayers: For so muche as I knowe, that thou haste the spryte of the holy Goddes, and no secrete is hyd from the: tell me therfore, what the vysyon of my dreame (that I haue sene) maye sygnifye.
Daniel 4:10 I sawe a vysyon in my heade vpon my bed: and beholde, there stode a tre vpon the grounde,
Daniel 4:11 whiche was verye hye, greate and myghtye: the heygth reached vnto the heauen, and the bredth extended to all the endes of the earthe,
Daniel 4:12 hys leaues were fayre, he had verye muche frute, so that euerye man had ynough to eate therein. The beastes of the feld had shadowes vnder it, and the foules of the ayre dwelte in the bowes therof. Shortly, all creatures fed of it.
Daniel 4:13 I sawe in my heade a vysyon vpon my bed: & beholde, a watcher came doune from heauen,
Daniel 4:14 & cryed myghtely, sayinge. Hew doune the tre, breake of hys braunches, shake of hys leaues, and scatre hys frute abroade: that all the beastes maye get them awaye from vnder hym, and the foules from his braunches.
Daniel 4:15 Neuertheles leaue the grounde of hys rote styll in the earthe, and bynde hym vpon the playne feld, with cheynes of yron and stele. With the dewe of heauen shall he be wet, and he shall haue hys parte in the herbes of the grounde wyth other wylde beastes.
Daniel 4:16 That mans herte of his shal be taken from him, and a beastes herte shall be geuen hym, tyll seuen yeares be come and gone vpon hym.
Daniel 4:17 This erande of the watcher is a commaundement grounded and sought oute in the councell of him, that is most holye, to learne men for to vnderstande, that the hyest hath power, ouer the kyngedomes of men, and geueth them, to whome it lyketh hym, & bryngeth the very oute castes of men ouer them.
Daniel 4:18 Thys is the dreame, that I kynge Nabuchodonosor haue sene. Therfore O Balthasar, tell thou me, what it sygnyfyeth: for so muche as the wyse men of my kyngdome are not able to shewe me, what it meaneth. But thou canst do it, for the spryte of the holy Goddes is in the.
Daniel 4:19 Then Daniel (whose name was Balthasar) helde hys peace by the space of an houre, and hys thoughtes troubled hym. So the kynge spake, and sayd: O Balthasar, let neyther the dreame nor the interpretacyon therof feare the. Balthazar aunswered, saying: O my Lorde, this dreame happen to thyne enemyes, & the interpretacyon to thyne aduersaryes.
Daniel 4:20 As for the tre, that thou sawest, whiche was so great & mighty, whose height reached vnto the heauen, and hys bredth into all the worlde,
Daniel 4:21 whose leues were fayre, and the frute muche, vnder the whiche the beastes of the feld had theyr habitacion, and vpon whose braunches the foules of the ayre dyd syt.
Daniel 4:22 Euen thou (O kynge) arte the tre, great & stronge. Thy greatnesse increaseth, and reacheth vnto the heauen, so doth thy power to the endes of the earthe.
Daniel 4:23 But where as the kynge sawe a watcher euen an holye aungel, that came downe from heauen, and sayde: hewe doune the tre, and destroye it: yet leaue the grounde of the rote in the earthe, and brynge hym vpon the playne felde with cheynes of yron & stele: He shall be wet with the dewe of heauen, and hys parte shalbe with the beastes of the felde, tyll seuen yeares be come and gone vpon him:
Daniel 4:24 This (O Kynge) is the interpretacyon, yea it is the very deuyce of him, that is hyest of all, and it toucheth my Lorde the kynge.
Daniel 4:25 Thou shalte be caste oute from men, & thy dwellyng shalbe with the beastes of the feld: with grasse shalte thou be fed lyke an oxe. Thou must be wet with the dewe of the heauen, yea seuen yeares shall come, and go vpon the, tyll thou know, that the hyest hath power vpon the kingedomes of men, & geueth them to whome he lyst.
Daniel 4:26 Moreouer, where as it was sayde, that the rote of the tree shulde be lefte styll in the grounde: it betokeneth, that thy kyngedome shall remayne whole vnto the, after thou hast learned to know, that the power commeth from heauen.
Daniel 4:27 Wherfore, O Kyng, be content with my councel, that thou mayeste lowse thy synnes wyth ryghtuousnesse, and thyne offences with mercye to poore people: for suche thynges shall prolonge thy peace.
Daniel 4:28 All these thynges touche the kynge Nabuchodonosor.
Daniel 4:29 So after .xij. monethes, the kynge walked vp & doune in the palace of the kyngedome of Babylon,
Daniel 4:30 and sayde: Thys is the greate cytye of Babilon, which I my selfe (wyth my power & strengthe) haue made a kynges courte, for the honour of my magestye.
Daniel 4:31 Whyle these wordes were yet in the kynges mouthe, there fell a voyce from heauen, saying: O king Nabuchodonosor, to the be it spoken: Thy kingdom shall departe from the,
Daniel 4:32 thou shalte be cast oute of mens companye: thy dwelling shalbe with the beastes of the felde, so that thou shalte eate grasse lyke as an oxe, tyll seuen yeares be come & gone ouer the: euen vntill thou knoweste, that the hyest hath power vpon the kyngdoms of men, and that he may geue them, vnto whom it pleaseth hym.
Daniel 4:33 The very same houre was this matter fulfylled vpon Nabuchodonosor: so that he was cast oute of mens companye, & ate grasse like an oxe. His body was wet with the dewe of heauen, tyll hys hearres were as greate as Aegles fethers, & hys nales like byrdes clawes.
Daniel 4:34 When this tyme was passed, I Nabuchodonosor lyfte vp myne eyes vnto heauen, and myne vnderstandynge was restored vnto me agayne. Then gaue I thanckes vnto the hyghest. I magnifyed and praysed hym that lyueth for euermore, whose power endureth alwaye, and his kingdome from one generacion to another:
Daniel 4:35 in comparison of whom al they that dwel vpon the earth, are to be reputed as nothinge. He handleth accordinge to hys wyl, among the powers of heauen & amonge the inhabytours of the earthe: and there is none that maye resyste hys hande, or say: what doest thou?
Daniel 4:36 At the same tyme was myne vnderstandyng geuen me agayne, and I was restored to the honoure of my kingedome, to my dignite, & to myne owne shappe agayne. My greate estates and princes soughte vnto me, and I was set in my kyngdome agayn, so that I had yet greater worshyppe.
Daniel 4:37 Then dyd I Nabuchodonosor loue, magnifye and prayse the kynge of heauen: for all hys worckes are true, and hys wayes righte. As for those that go on proudely, he is able to brynge them doune.

CHAPTER: 5

Daniel 5:1 Kynge Balthazar made a greate bancket to his thousand Lordes: with all these thousand he made great chere,
Daniel 5:2 & when he was droncken with wyne, he commaunded to brynge hym the golden and syluer vessels, whiche his father Nabuchodonosor had taken oute of the temple at Ierusalem, that the king and hys lordes with hys quene and concubynes might drincke thereoute.
Daniel 5:3 So they broughte the golden vessell, that was taken oute of the temple of the Lordes house at Ierusalem. Then the kynge and hys lordes with his quene & concubynes droncke oute of them.
Daniel 5:4 They droncke wyne, and praysed theyr Idoles of golde, syluer, copper, yron woodde and stone.
Daniel 5:5 In the very same houre there apeared fyngers, as it had bene of a mannes hande wrytynge, ryght ouer agaynst the candelstycke vpon the playne wall in the kynges palace, & the kynge sawe the palme of the hande that wrote.
Daniel 5:6 Then chaunged the kynge hys countenaunce, and hys thoughtes troubled hym, so that the ioyntes of hys bodye shoke, and hys knees smote one against the other.
Daniel 5:7 Wherfore the kynge cryed myghtelye, that they shulde brynge hym the charmers, Caldees and coniurers of deuyls. The kynge spake also to the wyse men of Babylon, and sayde: Who so can rede thys wrytynge, and shew me the playne meanyng therof, shalbe clothed wyth purple, haue a cheyne of golde aboute hys necke, and rule the thyrde parte of my kyngedome.
Daniel 5:8 Vpon this, came al the kynges wyse men: but they coulde neyther reade the wrytynge, nor shewe the kinge what it signifyed.
Daniel 5:9 Then was the kynge sore afrayed in so muche, that his colour chaunged, and his lordes were sore vexed.
Daniel 5:10 So by reason of thys matter, that had happened to the kyng and his lordes, the quene wente vp her selfe into the banckethouse, and spake vnto the kynge, sayinge: O kyng, God saue thy lyfe for euer: Let not the thoughtes trouble the, and let not thy countenaunce be chaunged.
Daniel 5:11 For why? there is a man in thy kingdome, that hath the spryte of the holy Goddes within him, as it was sene in thy fathers dayes. He hath vnderstandynge and wysdome like the Goddes. Yea the kynge Nabuchodonosor thy father made thys man chefe of the sothsayers, charmers, Caldees, and deuilconiurers,
Daniel 5:12 because that suche an aboundaunt spryte knowledge & wysdome (to expound dreames, to open secretes, and to declare harde dowtes) was founde in hym: yea euen in Daniel whom the kynge named Balthazar. Let thys same Daniel be sente for, and he shall tell, what it meaneth.
Daniel 5:13 Then was Daniel broughte before the kynge. So the kynge spake vnto Daniel, and sayde: Arte thou that Daniel, one of the presoners of Iuda, whome my father the kynge broughte oute of Iewry?
Daniel 5:14 I haue heard speake of the, that thou haste the spryte of the holye Goddes, experience and vnderstandyng, and that there hath bene greate wysdome founde in the.
Daniel 5:15 Now haue there ben brought me, wyse & conning charmers, to reade thys wrytyng, and to shewe me the meanynge thereof: But they coulde not tell me, what this matter sygnyfyed.
Daniel 5:16 Then heard I saye, that thou canste expounde darcke thynges, and declare harde doutes. Well then, yf thou canst reade thys wrytynge, and shewe me the meanynge therof: thou shalte be clothed with purple, haue a cheyne of golde aboute thy necke, and rule the thyrde parte of my kyngdome.
Daniel 5:17 Daniel aunswered, and sayde before the kynge. As for thy rewardes, kepe them to thy selfe, or geue thy ryche gyftes to another: yet not the lesse, I wyll rede the wrytynge vnto the kynge, and shewe hym the interpretacion therof.
Daniel 5:18 O kynge, God the hyest gaue vnto Nabuchodonosor thy father, the dignite of a kynge with worshippe and honoure,
Daniel 5:19 so that al people, kynredes and tunge stode in awe & feare of him, by reason of the hye estate, that he had lente him. For why, he slewe whom he wold: he smote, whom it pleased hym. Agayne, whom he wolde, he set vp: and whome he lyst, he put doune.
Daniel 5:20 But because hys herte was so proude, and hys stomacke set so fast vnto wilfulnesse: he was deposed from hys kingly trone, & his magesty was taken from hym.
Daniel 5:21 He was shote oute from amonge men, his herte was lyke a beastes herte, and hys dwellynge was wyth the wylde asses: he was fayne to eate grasse lyke an oxe, and hys body was wet with the dewe of the heauen: tyll he knewe, that the hyest had power vpon the kingdomes of men, and setteth ouer them, whome he lyst.
Daniel 5:22 And thou hys sonne (O Balthazar) for al this, hast not submytted thyne herte, thoughe thou knewest all these thynges,
Daniel 5:23 but hast magnyfyed thy selfe aboue the Lorde of heauen, so that the vessels of hys house were broughte before the, that thou, and thy Lordes, with thy quene and concubynes, myght drincke wyne thereoute: And hast praysed the Idoles of syluer and golde, copper and yron, of wode and stone: As for the God in whose hande consysteth thy breth and all thy wayes: thou haste not loaued hym.
Daniel 5:24 Therfore is the palme of thys hande sente hyther from hym, to token vp thys writinge.
Daniel 5:25 And thys is the scrypture, that is wryten vp: Mane, Thetel, Phares.
Daniel 5:26 Nowe the interpretacyon of the thynge is thys: Mane, God hath nombred the kyngdome, and brought it to an ende:
Daniel 5:27 Thetel, thou arte weyed in the balaunce and arte founde to lyghte:
Daniel 5:28 Phares, thy kyngdome is delte in partes, and geuen to the Medes and Perses.
Daniel 5:29 Then commaunded Balthazar, to clothe Daniel wyth purple, to hange a cheyne of golde aboute hys necke, and to make a proclamacyon concerning him: that he shulde be the ruler of the thyrde parte of hys kyngedome.
Daniel 5:30 The very same nyghte was Balthazar the kynge of the Caldees slayne,
Daniel 5:31 and Darius out of Medea toke in the kyngedome, beyng .lxij. yeare of age.

CHAPTER: 6

Daniel 6:1 It pleased Darius to set ouer hys kingedome an .C. and .xx. Lordes, whiche shulde be in all hys kyngdome aboute.
Daniel 6:2 Aboue these he set thre princes (of whom Daniel was one) that the Lordes myghte geue accomptes vnto them, and the Kyng to be vndiseased.
Daniel 6:3 But Daniel exceaded al these Princes and Lordes, for the sprete of God was plenteous in him: so that the Kynge was mynded to set hym ouer the whole realme.
Daniel 6:4 Wherfore the Prynces and Lordes soughte, to pycke oute in Danyel some quarell agaynst the kyngdom: yet coulde they fynde none occasyon nor faute vpon hym. For why? he was so faythful, that there was no blame nor dyshonestye founde in hym.
Daniel 6:5 Then sayde these men: we wil get no quarell agaynste thys Daniel, excepte it be in the lawe of hys God.
Daniel 6:6 Vpon this, wente the princes and Lordes together vnto the kynge, and sayde thus vnto him: king Darius God saue thy lyfe for euer.
Daniel 6:7 All the greate estates of the realme: as the princes, Dukes, Senatours, and iudges, are determed to put oute a commaundement of the kinge, and to make a sure statute: namely, that who so desireth any peticyon, ether of any god, or man (within this .xxx. dayes) excepte it be onlye of the, O kinge: the same person may be cast into the lions denne.
Daniel 6:8 Wherfore, O kynge, confirme thou this statute, and make a wryttynge, that the thynge which the Medes and Perses haue ordeyned be not altered nor broken.
Daniel 6:9 So Darius made the writtinge, and confirmed it.
Daniel 6:10 Now when Daniel vnderstode that the writtinge was made, he wente into hys house: and the windowes of hys hall toward Ierusalem stode open. There kneled he doune vpon his knees, thre tymes a daye: there he made his peticion, and praysed his God, like as hys maner was to do afore tyme.
Daniel 6:11 Then these men made searche, and founde Daniel makinge his petycyon and prayinge vnto his God.
Daniel 6:12 So they came to the kynge, & spake before him concerninge his commaundement sayinge: O kinge, hast thou not subscribed the statute, that within .xxx. daies who so requireth hys petycyon of any God or man but onely of thy selfe, O kinge: he shalbe cast into the denne of the lyons? The kinge answered, and sayd: ye, it is true. It must be as a lawe of the Medes and Perses, that maye not be broken.
Daniel 6:13 Then answered they, and sayde vnto the kynge: Daniel one of the presoners of Iuda, O kynge, regardeth neyther the, nor thy statute, that thou hast made, but maketh his peticion thre tymes a day.
Daniel 6:14 When the king heard these wordes, he was sore greued, and would haue excused Daniel, to deliuer him, and put of the matter, vnto the Sunne wente doune to the intent that he myght saue hym.
Daniel 6:15 These men perceyuinge the kinges mind sayde vnto him: knowe thys (O Kinge) that the lawe of the Medes and Perses is, that the commaundement & statute, whiche the kinge maketh, may not be altered.
Daniel 6:16 Then the kynge had them bringe Daniel, and they caste hym into the Lyons denne. The kynge also spake vnto Daniel, & sayde: thy God, whom thou alwaye seruest, euen he shall defende the.
Daniel 6:17 And there was broughte a stone, & layed vpon the hole of the denne: this the kinge sealed with his owne ringe, & wyth the signet of his prynces: that the kinges commaundemente concerninge Daniel, shoulde not be broken.
Daniel 6:18 So the kinge wente into his palace, & kepte him sober al night, so that there was no table spred before him, neyther coulde he take any slepe.
Daniel 6:19 But by tymes in the morninge at the breake of the day, the kinge arose, and wente in all haste vnto the denne of the Lyons.
Daniel 6:20 Now as he came nye vnto the denne, he cried with a pyteous voyce vnto Daniell: yea the Kinge spake, and sayde vnto Daniel: O Daniel, thou seruaunt of the lyuynge God, is not thy God (whom thou alwaye seruest) able to deliuer the from the Lyons?
Daniel 6:21 Daniel sayde vnto the Kinge: O King, God saue thy lyfe for euer.
Daniel 6:22 My God hath sent his aungell whiche hath shut the lyons mouthes, so that they might not hurte me. For why? myne vngiltinesse is founde oute before him. And as for the, O Kinge, I neuer offended the.
Daniel 6:23 Then was the kinge exceadinge glad, and commaunded to take Daniel out of the denne. So Daniel was broughte oute of the denne, and no maner of hurte was found vpon him. For he put his trust in his God.
Daniel 6:24 And as for those men which had accused Daniel, the king commaunded to bringe them, and to cast them in the lyons denne: them, their children and their wiues. So the Lyons had the maystry of them, and brake all their bones a sonder, or euer they came at the grounde.
Daniel 6:25 After thys, wrote the Kinge Darius vnto all people kinreddes, and tunges, that dwelt in al landes: peace be multiplyed wt you.
Daniel 6:26 My commaundement is, in al my dominion & kingedome, that men feare and stande in awe of Daniels God. For he is the liuinge God, whiche abydeth euer: his kingedome shall not fayle, and hys power is euerlasting.
Daniel 6:27 It is he that delyuereth and saueth: he doeth wonders & maruelous worckes, in heauen and in earth: he hath preserued Daniel from the power of the Lyons.
Daniel 6:28 This Daniell prospered in the raigne of Darius and Cirus of Persia.

CHAPTER: 7

Daniel 7:1 In the firste yeare of Balthazar kinge of Babylon, saw Daniel a dreame, and a visyon was in his head vpon his bed. Whiche dreame he wrote, and the summe of the matter is this:
Daniel 7:2 Daniel spake, and sayd: I sawe in my vision by nyght, and beholde: the foure wyndes of the heauen stroue vpon the sea,
Daniel 7:3 and foure great beastes came vp from the sea one vnlyke another.
Daniel 7:4 The fyrste was a lion, and yet had he Aegles winges. I sawe, that hys wynges were plucte from him, and he taken awaye from the earth: that he stode vpon hys fete as a man, and that there was geuen him a mans herte.
Daniel 7:5 Beholde, the seconde beaste was lyke a beer & stode vpon the one syde. Amonge his teeth in his mouth he had .iij. greate longe teeth, & it was sayde vnto him: Aryse: eate vp, much fleshe.
Daniel 7:6 Then I loked, and beholde, there was another lyke vnto a leoparde: thys had wynges as a foule, euen four vpon the backe. This beaste had foure heades, and there was power geuen him.
Daniel 7:7 After this I sawe in a vision by night, and beholde, the fourthe beast was grymme and horrible, and maruelous strong. It had great yron teeth, it deuoured and destroyed, and stamped the resydue vnder hys fete. It was farre vnlyke the other beastes, that were before it: for it had ten hornes, whereof I toke good hede.
Daniel 7:8 And beholde, there came vp amonge them another lyke horne, before whom there were thre of the fyrste hornes pluckte awaye. Beholde, thys horne had eyes lyke a man, and a mouth speakynge presumptuous thynges.
Daniel 7:9 I loked tyl the seates were prepared, and tyll the olde aged sat hym doune. His clothynge was as whyte as snowe, and the hearres of hys heade, lyke the pure woll. His trone was lyke the fyrye flamme, and his wheles as the burnynge fyre.
Daniel 7:10 There drewe forthe a fyrye streame, and wente out from him. A thousande tymes a thousande serued him .x.M. tymes ten thousande stode before him. The iudgement was set, and the bokes opened.
Daniel 7:11 Then toke I hede therunto, because of the voyce of the proude wordes, whyche the horne spake. I behelde, tyll the beaste was slayne, and his bodye destroyed, and geuen ouer to be brent in the fire.
Daniel 7:12 As for the power of the other beastes also it was taken awaye, but their lyues were prolonged for a tyme and season.
Daniel 7:13 I sawe in a vision by nyght, and beholde, there came one in the cloudes of heauen lyke the sonne of a man, whyche went vnto the olde aged, before whome they broughte hym.
Daniel 7:14 Then gaue he hym power and dignitie regal, that al people trybes and tunges shoulde serue him. Hys power is an euerlastynge power, whych shal neuer be put doune, and his kingdome endureth vncorrupte.
Daniel 7:15 My herte was vexed, and I Daniel had a troubled spirite within me, and the visions of my heade made me afrayed:
Daniel 7:16 til I gat me vnto one of them that stode by, to knowe the trueth, concernynge all these thynges. So he tolde me, and made me vnderstand the interpretacion of these thinges.
Daniel 7:17 These foure greate beastes, are foure kynges, whiche shal arise out of the earth.
Daniel 7:18 These shall take in the kingedome of the sayntes of the most hyest, and possesse it still more and more for a longe season.
Daniel 7:19 After this I requyred diligently to knowe the trueth, concerning the fourth beast, whiche was so farre vnlyke the other beastes, and so horrible: whose teeth were of yron, and his nayles of brasse: which deuoured and destroyed, and stamped the residue vnder his fete.
Daniel 7:20 I desired also to knowe the trueth, as touching the ten hornes that he had vpon hys heade, and thys other, whiche came vp afterwarde, before whose face there fell doune thre: whyche horne had eyes, and a mouthe that spake presumptuous thynges, and loked with a grymmer vysage, then his felowes.
Daniel 7:21 I behelde, and the same horne made battaile againste the saintes, yea and gat the victorie of them,
Daniel 7:22 vntill the tyme that the olde aged came, that the iudgemente was geuen to the chefest sayntes: and till the tyme that the saintes hath the kingedome in possession.
Daniel 7:23 He gaue me this answere: That fourthe beast shalbe the fourth kingedome vpon earth: it shalbe more then all other kingedomes, it shall deuoure, treade doune, and destroye all other landes.
Daniel 7:24 The ten hornes are ten kinges, that shall aryse out of the kingedom, after whom there shall stande vp another, whiche shalbe greater then the fyrste.
Daniel 7:25 He shall subdue thre Kynges, and shal speake wordes against the hyest of all: he shall destroy the saintes of the most hyest, and thincke, that he may chaunge tymes and lawes. They shalbe geuen vnder his power, vntill a time, two tymes, and half a tyme.
Daniel 7:26 But the iudgemente shalbe kepte, so that his power shalbe taken from him, for he shall be destroyed, and perishe at the laste.
Daniel 7:27 As for the kingedome, power and all might that is vnder the heauen, it shalbe geuen to the holy people of the most hyest, whose kingedome is euerlastinge, yea all powers shall serue & obeye him.
Daniel 7:28 Thus farre extende the wordes. Neuertheles I Daniel was so vexed in my thoughtes, that my countenaunce chaunced, but the wordes I kepte styl in my herte.

CHAPTER: 8

Daniel 8:1 In the thirde year of the raigne of kinge Balthazar, there apeared a vision vnto me Daniel, after that I had sene the fyrste.
Daniel 8:2 I saw in vision (& when I saw it, I was at Susis in the chefe citie, whyche lyeth in the lande of Elam) and in the vision, me thought I was by the ryuer of Vlai.
Daniel 8:3 Then I loked vp, and sawe, and beholde there stode before in the riuer, a ramme, whiche had hornes: and these hornes were hye, but one was hyer then another, & the hyest came vp last.
Daniel 8:4 I sawe that this ramme pushed with his hornes againste the west, agaynste the north, and againste the south: so that no beastes might stande before him, nor defende them from his power: but he did as him lysted, & waxed greatly.
Daniel 8:5 I toke hede vnto this, & then came there an hegoate from the west ouer the whole earthe, and touched not the grounde. This goate had a maruelous goodly horne betwixte his eyes,
Daniel 8:6 and came vnto the ramme that had the two hornes (whome I had sene afore by the ryuer syde) and ranne fearcelye vpon him with his might.
Daniel 8:7 I sawe him drawe nye vnto the ramme, beynge very fearce vpon him, yea he gaue him suche a stroke, that he brake his two hornes: Neyther had the ramme so much strength as to stande before him: but he cast him doune, trodde him vnder his fete: and no man was able to delyuer the ramme out of his power.
Daniel 8:8 The goate waxed exceadinge greate, & when he was at the strongest, his great horne was broken also. Then grewe there other foure suche lyke in the steade, toward the .iiij. windes of the heauen.
Daniel 8:9 Yea oute of one of the least of these hornes, there came vp yet another horne, whiche waxed maruelous greate: towarde the southe, towarde the east, and towarde the fayre pleasaunt lande.
Daniel 8:10 It grew vp to the host of heauen, wherof it did cast some doune to the grounde, & of the starres also, & trode them vnder fete.
Daniel 8:11 Yea it grewe vp vnto the prince of the host from whom the dayly offeringe was taken, & the place of his Sanctuary casten doune:
Daniel 8:12 & a certayne ceason was geuen vnto it, against the daylye offeringe (because of wickednesse) that it might cast doune the verite to the ground and so to prospere in all thynges, that it went aboute.
Daniel 8:13 Vpon this I heard one of the sayntes speakinge, whiche saynte sayde vnto one that asked this questyon: How longe shall this vysion of the daylye sacrifice and of the wasting abhominacion endure: that the Sanctuarye and the power shall so be troden vnder fote?
Daniel 8:14 And he answered him: Vnto the eueninge & the mornynge, euen two thousand and thre hundreth dayes: then shall the Sanctuarye be clensed againe.
Daniel 8:15 Now when I Daniel had sene this vision, and sought for the vnderstandinge of it: beholde, there stode before me a thynge like vnto a man,
Daniel 8:16 and I hearde a mans voyce in the ryuer of Vlai, which cryed and sayd: O Gabriel, make this man vnderstande the vysion.
Daniel 8:17 So he came, and stode by me. But I was afrayed at his commynge, and fell doune vpon my face. Then he sayde vnto me: O thou sonne of man, marcke well, for in the last tyme shall this vision be fulfylled.
Daniel 8:18 Nowe as he was speakynge vnto me, I waxed faynte, so that I suncke doune to the ground. But he toke hold vpon me, and set me vp agayne,
Daniel 8:19 sayinge: Beholde, I wyl shewe the, what shall happen in the last wrath, for in the tyme appoynted it shalbe fulfylled.
Daniel 8:20 The ramme whyche thou sawest with the two hornes, is the kiuge of the Medes and Perses:
Daniel 8:21 but the goate is the king of the Greke lande: the greate horne that stode betwyxte his eyes, that is the pryncypall kynge.
Daniel 8:22 But where as it brake, and foure other rose vp in the steade: it sygnifyeth, that out of thys people shall stande vp four kyngdomes, but not so mighty as it.
Daniel 8:23 After these kyngedomes (whyle vngodlynes is a growynge) there shall aryse a kynge of an vnshamefast face, whiche shalbe wyse in darcke speakinges.
Daniel 8:24 He shalbe myghty and stronge, but not in his owne strength. He shall destroye aboue measure, and all that he goeth aboute shall prospere: he shall slaye the stronge and holye people.
Daniel 8:25 And thorowe his craftynes, falshed shall prospere in his hande, hys herte shalbe proude, and many one shall be put to deathe in his welthinesse. He shall stand vp against the Prince of Princes, but he shalbe destroyed wythoute hande.
Daniel 8:26 And this vysyon that is shewed vnto the, is as sure as the euenynge & the morninge. Therfore wryte thou vp this sighte, for it wilbe longe, or it come to passe.
Daniel 8:27 Vpon this was I Daniel very fainte, so that I lay sicke certayne dayes: but when I rose vp, I wente aboute the kinges busynes, and marueled at the vision, neuertheles no man knewe of it.

CHAPTER: 9

Daniel 9:1 In the fyrst yeare of Darius the sonne of Ahasuerus, whyche was the sede of the Medes, & was made king ouer the realm of the Caldees:
Daniel 9:2 yea euen in the fyrst yeare of his raygne, I Daniel desyred to knowe the yearly nombre oute of the bokes, whereof the Lorde spake vnto Ieremye the Prophete: that Ierusalem shoulde lye waste .lxx. yeares:
Daniel 9:3 and I turned me vnto god the Lorde, for to praye and make myne intercession, with fastinge, sackcloth & ashes,
Daniel 9:4 I prayed before the Lorde my God, and knowledged, sayinge: O Lorde, thou greate and fearfull God, thou that kepest couenaunt and mercye wyth them, whiche loue the, and do thy commaundementes.
Daniel 9:5 We haue synned, we haue offended, we haue ben disobedient and gone back: yea we haue departed from all thy preceptes and iudgementes.
Daniel 9:6 We woulde neuer folowe thy seruauntes the Prophetes, that spake in thy name to our kinges and princes, to oure forefathers, and to all the people of the lande.
Daniel 9:7 O Lorde, ryghteousnesse belongeth vnto the, vnto vs pertayneth nothynge but open shame, as it is come to passe this day vnto euery man of Iuda and to them that dwell at Ierusalem: Yea, vnto all Israell, whether they be farre or nye thorow out all landes: wherin thou haste strowed them, because of the offences that they had done agaynst the.
Daniel 9:8 Yea O Lorde, vnto vs, to our kinges and princes, to oure forefathers: euen to vs all, that haue offended the, belongeth open shame.
Daniel 9:9 But vnto the, O Lorde oure God, pertayneth mercye and forgeuenesse. As for vs, we are gone backe from him,
Daniel 9:10 and haue not obeyed the voyce of the Lorde oure God, to walke in his lawes, which he layed before vs by his seruauntes the prophetes:
Daniel 9:11 yea all Israel haue transgressed, & gone back from thy law, so that they haue not herckened vnto thy voyce. Wherfore the cursse & othe, that is written in the lawe of Moses the seruaunte of God (agaynst whom we haue offended) is poured vpon vs.
Daniel 9:12 And he hath perfourmed his wordes, whiche he spake against vs, and against oure iudges that iudged vs: to brynge vpon vs suche a greate plage, as neuer was vnder heauen, lyke as it is now come to passe in Ierusalem.
Daniel 9:13 Yea all this plage, as it is wrytten in the lawe of Moses, is come vpon vs. Yet made we not our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turne agayne from our wickednesse, and to be learned in thy verite.
Daniel 9:14 Therefore hathe the Lorde made haste, to brynge this plage vpon vs, for the Lorde our God is ryghteous, in all his worckes which he doeth: for why, we woulde not herken vnto his voyce.
Daniel 9:15 And now, O Lorde oure God, thou that with a myghty hande haste brought thy people oute of Egipte, to get thy selfe a name, whiche remayneth this day: we haue synned
Daniel 9:16 O Lorde, and done wyckedly agaynste all thy ryghteousnes: yet let thy wrothfull displeasure be turned awaye (I beseche the) from thy cytye Ierusalem thy holy hill. And why? for oure synnes sake, and for the wickednesse of oure forefathers is Ierusalem and thy people abhorred, of all them that are aboute vs.
Daniel 9:17 Now therefore, O oure God, heare the prayer of thy seruaunte, and his intercession. O let not thy face shyne ouer thy Sanctuary that lyeth waste.
Daniel 9:18 O my God, enclyne thine eare, and herken (at the leaste for thine owne sake) open thyne eyes: beholde, how we be desolated, yea and the cytye also, whiche is called after thy name: for we do not cast oure prayers before the in oure owne righteousnesse, no: but onely in thy greate mercyes.
Daniel 9:19 O Lorde, heare. O forgeue Lorde. O Lorde consydre, tarye not ouer longe: but for thyne owne sake do it. O my God: for the citie and thy people is called after thy name.
Daniel 9:20 As I was yet speakinge at my prayers, knoweledginge myne owne sinnes, and the synnes of my people, makinge so mine intercession before the Lorde my God, for the holye hils sake of my God:
Daniel 9:21 yea, whyle I was yet speakinge in my prayer, beholde the man Gabrel (whome I had sene afore in the vision) came flying to me, and touched me about the offeringe time in the eueninge.
Daniel 9:22 He infourmed me, and spake vnto me: O Daniel sayde he, I am now come to make the vnderstande it:
Daniel 9:23 For as sone as thou begannest to make thy prayer, it was so diuised, and therfore am I come to shewe the. And why? For thou arte a man greatly beloued. Wherfore, pondre the matter well, that thou mayest learne, to vnderstande the vision.
Daniel 9:24 .Lxx. weakes are determed ouer thy people, and ouer the holy citie: that the wickednesse maye be consumed, that the sinne maye haue an ende, that the offence may be reconcyled, and to bringe in euerlastinge righteousnesse, to fulfill the visions and the Prophetes, and to annoynte the most holy one.
Daniel 9:25 Vnderstande this then, and marcke it well, that from the tyme it shalbe concluded, to go and repayre Ierusalem againe, vnto Christ (or the annointed) prince: there shalbe seuen weakes. Then shal the stretes and walles be buylded again .lxij. weakes, but wyth harde troublous time.
Daniel 9:26 After these .lxii. weakes shall Christ be slaine and they shall haue no pleasure in hym. Then shall there come a people with the Prince, and destroye the cytie and the Sanctuarye: & his ende shall come as the water floude. But the desolacion shall continue till the ende of the battell.
Daniel 9:27 He shall make a stronge bonde with many, for the space of a weke: and when the weke is halfe gone, he shall put doune the slayne and meateofferinge. And in the temple there shalbe an abhominable desolacion, till it haue destroyed all. And it is concluded, that thys wasting shall continue vnto the ende.

CHAPTER: 10

Daniel 10:1 In the thirde yeare of king Cirus of Persia, there was shewed vnto Daniel (otherwyse called Balthazar) a matter, yea a true matter, but it is yet a longe tyme vnto it. He vnderstode the matter well, and perceyued what the vision was.
Daniel 10:2 At the same time I Daniel mourned for the space of thre weakes,
Daniel 10:3 so that I had no lust to eate bread: as for fleshe and wine there came none within my mouth: No, I dyd not ones annoynte my selfe, till the whole thre weakes were oute.
Daniel 10:4 Upon the .xxiiii. daye of the first Moneth, I was by the great floude, called Tigris:
Daniel 10:5 I lift vp mine eyes, and loked: and beholde, a man clothed in linen, whose loynes were girded vp with fyne goulde of Araby:
Daniel 10:6 his body was like the Chrisolite stone, his face (to loke vpon) was like lighteninge, his eyes as the flamme of fyre, his armes and fete were lyke fayre glysterynge metall, but the voyce of his wordes was like the voyce of a multitude.
Daniel 10:7 I Daniel alone sawe this vision, the men that were with me, sawe it not: but a greate fearfulnesse fell vpon them, so that they fled away & hid them selues.
Daniel 10:8 I was left there my selfe alone, and sawe this greate vision, so longe till there remayned no more strengthe within me: yea I lost my coloure cleane, I waited awaye, and my strength was gone.
Daniel 10:9 Yet hearde I the voyce of his wordes: and as sone as I hearde it, fayntnesse came vpon me, and I fell doune flat to the grounde vpon my face.
Daniel 10:10 And beholde, an hande touched me, whyche set me vpon my knees, and vpon the palmes of my handes,
Daniel 10:11 sayinge vnto me: O Daniel, thou well beloued man: take good hede of the wordes, that I shal say vnto the, and stande ryght, for vnto the am I now sent. And when he had sayde these wordes, I stode vp tremblinge.
Daniel 10:12 Then he sayd vnto me: feare not Daniel: for why sence the fyrst day that thou set thyne herte to vnderstande, and diddest chasten thy selfe before thy God: thy wordes haue bene hearde. And I had come vnto the, when thou begannest to speake
Daniel 10:13 bad nor the prynce ouer the kingedom of the Perses withstand me .xxi. dayes. But lo, Michael one of the chefe Princes, came to helpe me, hym haue I left by the kyng of Persia,
Daniel 10:14 & am come to shewe the, what shall happen vnto thy people in the latter dayes. For it wilbe longe yet or the vision be fulfilled.
Daniel 10:15 Nowe when he had spoken these wordes vnto me, I cast doune my head to the ground and helde my tunge.
Daniel 10:16 Beholde, there touched my lippes one very lyke vnto a man. Then opened I my mouthe, & sayde vnto him, that stode before me: O my Lorde, my pointes are lowsed in the vision, and there is no more strength within me:
Daniel 10:17 Howe may my Lordes seruaunt then talke with my Lorde? seynge there is no strength in me: so that I can not take my breth?
Daniel 10:18 Vpon this there touched me agayne, one muche lyke a man, and comforted me,
Daniel 10:19 saying: O thou man so well beloued feare not: be content, take a good herte vnto the, & be strong. So when he had spoken vnto me, I recouered and sayd: Speake on my Lorde, for thou haste refreshed me.
Daniel 10:20 Then sayde he: knowest thou wherfore I am came vnto the? now wyl I go again to fyght with the prince of the Perses. As sone as I go forth, lo, the prince of Grekelande shall come.
Daniel 10:21 Neuertheles I will shew the the thinge, that is fast noted in the scripture of truethe. And as for all yonder matters, there is none that helpeth me in them, but Michael youre prynce.

CHAPTER: 11

Daniel 11:1 And in the first yeare of Darius of Medea, I stode by him, to comforte him, & to strength him,
Daniel 11:2 and nowe wil I shew the the trueth. Beholde, there shall stande vp yet thre kynges in Persia, but the fourth shal be farre rycher then they all. And when he is in the chefest power of his ryches, he shall prouoke euery man against the realme of Grekelande.
Daniel 11:3 Then shall there aryse yet a myghty kinge, that shall rule with greate dominion, and do what him lyst.
Daniel 11:4 And as sone as his kingedome cometh vp, it shalbe destroyed, and deuyded toward the foure windes of the heauen. They that come after hym, shall not haue suche power and domynyon as he: but hys kyngedome shalbe scatred, yea euen amonge other then those.
Daniel 11:5 And the kyng of the south shal be myghtyer, then his other princes. Agaynste him there shall one make hymselfe stronge, and shal rule his dominyon wt greate power.
Daniel 11:6 But after certayne yeares they shalbe ioyned together, and the kinges doughter of the south shall come to the kynge of the Northe, for to make frendshyp, but she shall not obtayne the power of that arme, neyther shall she be able to endure thorow his myght: but she, and such as brought her (yea and he that begat her, & comforted her for hys tyme) shalbe delyuered vp.
Daniel 11:7 Oute of the braunches of her rote, there shall one stande vp in his steade: whiche with power of armes shal go thorow the kinges lande of the North, & handle hym according to his strength. As for their Idols & princes, with their costly Iewels of goulde & syluer,
Daniel 11:8 he shal carye them awaye captiues into Egipte, & he shall preuayle agaynste the kyng of the north certayne yeares.
Daniel 11:9 And when he is come into the kinges realm of the south he shalbe fayne to turne agayne into hys owne lande.
Daniel 11:10 Wherfore hys sonnes shalbe displeased, and shall gather together a myghtye greate hoste of people: and one of them shall come, and go thorowe lyke a waterflowed: then shall he returne, and go forth with defyinge and boastinge vnto his owne lande.
Daniel 11:11 Then the kynge of the south shalbe angry and shall come forthe to fyght agaynste the kinge of the north: yea he shal brynge a great multitude of people together, & a great heape shalbe geuen into hys hande:
Daniel 11:12 these shall he cary awaye with greate pryde, for so muche as he hath cast doune so many thousandes, neuertheles he shall not preuayle.
Daniel 11:13 For the king of the north shal gather (of the new) a greater heape of people then afore, & come forth (after a certayne tyme & yeares) wyth a mighty hoste and exceadinge greate good.
Daniel 11:14 At the same tyme there shall manye stande vp agaynst the kynge of the south, so that the wycked children of thy people also shall exalte them selues (to fulfyll the vysyon) & then fall.
Daniel 11:15 So the kynge of the North shall come to laye sege, & to take the stronge fensed cytyes: And the power of them of the south shal not be able to abyde him, and the best men of the people shal not be so stronge, as to resist him.
Daniel 11:16 Shortely, when he commeth, he shall handle him as he list, & no man shalbe so hardy as to stande agaynst hym. He shall stand in the pleasaunt countreye, whiche thorow him shalbe destroyed.
Daniel 11:17 He shal set his face wt al his power to obtayne his kyngedome, and to be lyke it. Yea that shall he do, and geue hym vnto the doughters amonge wemen, to destroye hym. But he shall fayle, neyther shall he obtayne his purpose.
Daniel 11:18 After this shall he set hys face vnto the Iles, & take many of them. A prynce shal stoppe him, to do hym a shame, besyde the confusyon that els shall come vnto hym.
Daniel 11:19 Thus shall he tourne agayne to hys owne lande, stomble, & fall, and be no more founde:
Daniel 11:20 so he that came vpon him & did him violence, shal stande in his place, & haue a pleasaunte kingedom: and after few dayes he shalbe destroyed, and that neyther in wrath, nor in battell.
Daniel 11:21 In his steade there shal aryse a vyle person, not holden worthy of a kinges dygnitie: this shal come in craftely, & obtayne the kingedome with fayre wordes:
Daniel 11:22 he shall fyghte agaynste the armes of the myghtye (and destroye them) yea and agaynste the prynce of the couenaunte.
Daniel 11:23 So after that he hath taken truce with him, he shal handle disceytfully, that he maye get vp, and ouercome him with a small flocke:
Daniel 11:24 & so with craftynesse to get him to the fattest place of the lande, and to deale otherwyse, then ether his fathers or graundfathers dyd. For he shall destroy the thinge, that they had robbed and spoiled, yea & al their substaunce: ymageninge thoughtes agaynst the stronge holdes, and that for a tyme.
Daniel 11:25 His power, and herte shalbe sterred vp with a great armye agaynst the kinge of the south: where thorow the king of the south shalbe moued then vnto battell with a great and mighty host also. Neuertheles he shal not be able to stand, for they shal conspire against hym.
Daniel 11:26 Yea, they that eat of hys meate, shal hurte him: so that his hoste shall fall, and many be slayne donne.
Daniel 11:27 These two kinges shalbe mynded to do myschefe, and talke of disceyte at one table, but they shall not prospere: for why, the ende shal not come yet, vnto the tyme appoynted.
Daniel 11:28 Then shal he go home agayne into his owne lande with great good, & set his herte against the holy couenaunt, he shalbe busye againste it, and then returne home.
Daniel 11:29 At the time appointed, he shall come agayne, and go toward the south. So shall it happen otherwyse then at the first, yet ones agayn.
Daniel 11:30 And why? the shippes of Lithim shall come vpon him, that he may be smytten and turne again: that he may take indignacyon agaynste the couenaunte of holynesse, to medle agaynste it. Yea he shall turne him, and drawe suche vnto hym, as leaue the holy couenaunte.
Daniel 11:31 He shall set myghty men to vnhalowe the Sanctuary of strength, to put doune the daylye offerynge, and to set vp the abhomynable desolacyon.
Daniel 11:32 And suche as breake the couenaunt shal he flattre wyth fayre wordes. But the people that wyll know their God, shal haue the ouerhand, and prospere.
Daniel 11:33 Those also that haue vnderstandyng among the people shall enfourme the multitude: and for a long season, they shalbe persecuted with swerde, with fyre, with captyuyte and with the takinge awaye of their goodes.
Daniel 11:34 Nowe when they fall they shalbe set vp with a litle helpe: but many shall clene vnto them faynedly.
Daniel 11:35 Yea, some of those whyth haue vnderstandinge shalbe persecuted also: that they maye be tryed, purifyed and clensed, tyll the tyme be oute: for there is yet another tyme appointed.
Daniel 11:36 The kinge shal do what him lyst, he shal exalte and magnifye him selfe agaynste all, that is God. Yea he shall speake maruelous thinges against the God of al goddes, wherin he shall prospere, so longe till the wrathe be fulfilled, for the conclusyon is deuysed alredy.
Daniel 11:37 He shal not regarde the God of hys fathers, but his lust shalbe vpon wemen: Yea, he shal not care for any God, for he shall magnifye him selfe aboue al.
Daniel 11:38 In his place shall he worshippe the mighty Idols: and the god whome his fathers knewe not, shall he honoure with goulde and syluer, with precious stones and pleasaunt Iewels.
Daniel 11:39 This shal he do, sekyng helpe and succour at the myghtye Idols and straunge goddes. Suche as wil receyue him, and take him for God, he shall geue them greate worshippe, & power: yea and make them lordes of the multitude, and geue them the lande with rewardes.
Daniel 11:40 In the latter tyme shall the kinge of the south stryue with him: & the king of the north in like maner shall come agaynste him wyth charettes, horsemen and wyth a greate nauy of shippes. He shall come into the landes, destroye and go thorowe,
Daniel 11:41 he shall entre also into the fayre pleasaunt lande. Manye cytyes and countreyes shall decaye, excepte Edom, Moab & the best of the children of Ammon, whyche shall escape from hys hande.
Daniel 11:42 He shal stretch forth his handes vpon the countreyes & the lande of Egipte shall not escape him.
Daniel 11:43 For thorowe his goynge in, he shal haue dominion ouer the treasures of siluer and gold & ouer al the precyous Iewels of Egypt, Lybia and Ethiopia.
Daniel 11:44 Neuerthelesse the tidinges oute of the easte and north shal trouble hym, for the whiche cause he shall go forthe to destroye & curse a greate multitude.
Daniel 11:45 The tentes of his palace shall be pytch betwyxte the two seas, vpon the hill of the noble Sanctuarye, for he shall come to the ende of it, & then shal no man helpe him.

CHAPTER: 12

Daniel 12:1 The tyme wil come also, that the greate Prince Michael, which standeth on thy people syde, shal aryse vp, for there shall come a tyme of trouble, such as neuer was, sens there beganne to be any people, vnto that same time. Then shal thy people be deliuered, yea, al those that be found written in the boke.
Daniel 12:2 Many of them that slepe in the dust of the earth, shal awake: some to euerlastinge lyfe, some to perpetual shame and reprofe.
Daniel 12:3 The wyse (suche as haue taught other) shall glyster, as the shynninge of heauen: and those that haue instructe the multitude vnto godlynesse, shall be as the starres, worlde without ende.
Daniel 12:4 And thou O Daniel, shut vp these wordes, & seale the boke til the last time. Manye shal go aboute here & there, & then shal knowledge encrease.
Daniel 12:5 So I Daniel loked, & beholde there stode other two, one vpon thys shore of the water, the other vpon yonder syde.
Daniel 12:6 And one of them sayde vnto him, whiche was clothed in lynen, and stode aboue vpon the waters of the floud: How longe shall it be to the ende of the wonderous worckes?
Daniel 12:7 Then hearde I the man with the lynen clothes, whiche stode aboue vpon the waters of the floude: when he helde vp his right and lefte hande vnto heauen, and sware, by hym whyche liueth for euer: that it shall tary for a tyme, two tymes and halfe a tyme: & when the power of the holy people is cleane scatred abroade, then shal al these thinges be fulfilled.
Daniel 12:8 I hearde it well, but I vnderstode it not. Then sayde I: O my Lord, what shall happen after that?
Daniel 12:9 He answered: Go thy waye Daniel, for these wordes shalbe closed vp, & sealed, till the last tyme:
Daniel 12:10 & many shalbe purifyed, clensed and tryed. But the vngodly shal lyue wickedly, and those wicked (as many of them as they be) shall haue no vnderstanding. As for suche as haue vnderstandynge, they shall regarde it.
Daniel 12:11 And from the time forth that the dayly offeringe shalbe put doune & the abhominable desolacyon set vp, there shalbe a thousande two hundreth & .xc. dayes.
Daniel 12:12 O well is him, that wayteth, & commeth to the thousande .iij.C. & .xxxv. dayes.
Daniel 12:13 Go thou thy way now, till it be ended: take thy rest, and byde in thy lot, till the dayes haue an ende.

BOOK: Hosea

CHAPTER: 1

Hosea 1:1 This is the worde of of the Lord, that came vnto Oseas the sonne of Beery, in the dayes of Oseas, Ioathan, Ahaz and Iezekiah kinges of Iuda: and in the tyme of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas kynge of Israel.
Hosea 1:2 First when the Lorde spake vnto Oseas, he sayde vnto him: Go thy waye, take an harlot to thy wyfe, and get chyldren by her: for the lande hath committed greate whordome agaynst the Lorde.
Hosea 1:3 So he wente, and toke Gomer the doughter of Deblaim: whiche conceyued, and brought forth a sonne.
Hosea 1:4 And the Lorde sayde vnto him: call his name Iesraell, for I wyll shortly auenge the bloude of Iesrael, vpon the house of Iehu, and wyll brynge the kingedome of the house of Israel to an ende.
Hosea 1:5 Then wyl I breake the bowe of Israel, in the valley of Iesrael.
Hosea 1:6 She conceyued yet again, and bare a doughter. And he sayde vnto him: Call her name Loruhamah (that is, not obtayninge mercy) for I wyl haue no pyte vpon the house of Israell, but forget them, and put them cleane oute of remembraunce.
Hosea 1:7 Neuerthelesse I wyll haue mercy vpon the house of Iuda, and will saue them, euen thorow the Lord their God. But I wyll not delyuer them thorowe anye bowe, swearde, battel, horses, or horsemen.
Hosea 1:8 Now when she had weaned Loruhamah, she conceyued agayne, and bare a sonne.
Hosea 1:9 Then sayd he: cal his name Lo amy. For why? ye are not my people, therfore wyll I not be youres.
Hosea 1:10 And thoughe the nombre of the chyldren of Israel be as the sand of the sea, which can neyther be measured nor tolde: yet in the place where it is sayde vnto them, ye be not my people, euen there shal it be thus reported of them: they be the chyldren of the lyuynge God.
Hosea 1:11 Then shal the chyldren of Iuda & the children of Israel be gathered together again, & chose them selues one heade, and then depart oute of the lande: for great shalbe the daye of Israel.

CHAPTER: 2

Hosea 2:1 Tell youre brethren, that they are my people: and your sisteren that they haue obtayned mercye.
Hosea 2:2 As for youre mother, ye shal chyde with her, & reproue her, for she is not my wyfe, neyther am I her husbande, vnlesse she put awaye her whordom out of my syght, and her aduoutry from her brestes.
Hosea 2:3 Yf no I shal strype her naked and sette her, euen as she came into the worlde: yea, I shall lay her waste, and make her like a wildernesse, and slay her for thirst.
Hosea 2:4 I shal haue no pyte also vpon her children, for they be the children of fornicacyon.
Hosea 2:5 Their mother hath broken their wedlocke, and she that bare them, is come to confusyon. For she sayd: I will go after my louers, that geue me my water and bread, my woll and flax, my oyle and my drincke.
Hosea 2:6 But I wyll hedge her awaye wyth thornes, and stoppe it that she shall not fynde her fotesteppes:
Hosea 2:7 and thoughe she runne after her louers, yet shall she not get them: she shall seke them, but not fynde them. Then shall she saye: wel I wyll go turne agayne to my firste housbande, for at that tyme was I better at ease, then nowe.
Hosea 2:8 But this woulde she not knowe, where as I yet gaue her corne, wyne, oyle, syluer & gold, whiche she hath hangeth vpon Baal.
Hosea 2:9 Wherfore now will I go take my corne & wine againe in their season, and set agayne my woll and my flax, whyche I gaue her, to couer her shame.
Hosea 2:10 And nowe will I discouer her folyshenesse, euen in the syghte of her louers, and no man shal deliuer her oute of my handes.
Hosea 2:11 Moreouer, I wil take awaye all her myrthe, her holye dayes, her newmones, her Sabbothes, and all her solempne feastes?
Hosea 2:12 I wil destroy her vyneyardes and figge trees, though she sayeth: lo, here are my rewardes that my louers haue geuen me. I wyll make it a woode, and the wilde beastes shall eate it vp.
Hosea 2:13 I will punysh her also for the dayes of Baal, wherin she censed him, deckinge hym with her earynges and cheynes: when she folowed her louers, and forgat me, sayeth the Lorde.
Hosea 2:14 Wherfore beholde, I will cal her agayne: bring her into a wildernes, and speake frendly vnto her:
Hosea 2:15 there wil I geue her her vineiardes agayne: yea and the valleye of Achor also to shewe her hope and comforte. Then shall she singe there as in the time of her youthe, & lyke as in the day when she came oute of the lande of Egipte.
Hosea 2:16 Then (sayeth the Lorde) she shall saye vnto me: O my husbande, and shal call me no more Baal,
Hosea 2:17 for I will take awaye those names of Baal from her mouthe, yea, she shal neuer remembre their names anye more.
Hosea 2:18 Then will I make a couenaunte with them, with the wilde beastes, with the foules of the ayre, and with euery thinge that crepeth vpon the earth. As for bowe, swerde and battel, I will destroye suche out of the lande, & will make them to slepe safely.
Hosea 2:19 Thus will I marye the vnto myne owne selfe for euermore: yea, euen to my selfe wil I marye the, in righteousnesse, in equyte, in louinge kindnesse and mercye.
Hosea 2:20 In fayth also will I mary the vnto my selfe, and thou shalt know the Lorde.
Hosea 2:21 At the same tyme will I shewe my selfe frendlye and gracious vnto the heauens, sayeth the Lorde, & the heauens shal helpe the earth,
Hosea 2:22 and the earth shall helpe the corne, wyne and oyle, and they shall helpe Iesrael.
Hosea 2:23 I will sowe them vpon earth, for a sede to mine owne selfe, & will haue mercye vpon her, that was without mercy. And to them, which were not my people, I wil say: thou arte my people: and he shal say: thou art my God.

CHAPTER: 3

Hosea 3:1 Then sayde the Lorde to me: Go yet thy waye, & vowe an aduouterous woman, whom thy neyghboure loueth, as the Lord doeth the children of Israell: how be it they haue respecte to straunge Goddes, and loue the wine kannes.
Hosea 3:2 So I gat her for .xv. syluerlinges, & for an Homer & an halt of barley,
Hosea 3:3 & sayde vnto her: Thou shalt bide wt me a long season: but se that thou playest not the harlot, and loke thou medle not with none other man, & then wyll I kepe my selfe for the.
Hosea 3:4 Thus the children of Israell shall syt a great whyle without king and Prince, withoute offeringe and aulter, without prest and reuelacion.
Hosea 3:5 But afterwarde shall the children of Israell conuerte, and seke the Lorde their God: and Dauid their kinge: & in the latter dayes, they shall worshyppe the Lorde, and hys louynge kindnesse.

CHAPTER: 4

Hosea 4:1 Heare the word of the lorde o ye children of Israel. For the lord must punish them, that dwel in the land. And why? There is no faithfulnes, there is no mercy there is no knoweledge of God in the lande:
Hosea 4:2 but swearing, lyinge, manslaughter, theft, & aduoutry haue gotten the ouerhande, & one bloudgilthinesse foloweth another.
Hosea 4:3 Therfore shall the land be in a miserable case, & al they that dwel therin, shall mourne: the beastes in the felde, the foules in the ayr, & the fishes in the sea shal dye.
Hosea 4:4 Yet is there none, the wyl chasten nor reproue another. The priestes which shoulde refourme other men, are become like the people.
Hosea 4:5 Therfore stomblest thou in the day tyme & the prophet wt the in the night. I wil bringe thy mother to silence, & why?
Hosea 4:6 my people perish, because they haue no knowledge. Seing then that thou hast refused vnderstanding, therfore wil I refuse the also: so that thou shalt no more be my preste. And for so muche as thou hast forgotten the lawe of thy God, I wil also forget thy children.
Hosea 4:7 The more they increased in the multitude, the more they sinned against me, therfore will I chaunge their honoure into shame.
Hosea 4:8 They eat vp the synnes of my people, and corage them in their wyckednesse.
Hosea 4:9 Thus the prest is become lyke the people. Wherefore I wil punysh them for their wicked wayes & rewarde them accordinge to their owne ymagynacions.
Hosea 4:10 They shall eate and not haue ynoughe: They haue vsed whordome, therfore shall they not prospere, and why? they haue forsaken the Lorde, and not regarded hym.
Hosea 4:11 Whordome, wine and drockennesse take the herte away.
Hosea 4:12 My people aske councell at their stockes, their staffes must tell them. For an whoryshe minde hath disceyued them, so that they committe fornycacyon agaynst their God.
Hosea 4:13 They make sacrifices vpon the hye mountaynes, and burne their incense vpon the hylles, yea, amonge the okes, groues & bushes, for there are good shadowes Therfore your doughters are become harlottes, and youre spouses haue broken their wedlocke,
Hosea 4:14 I wyll not punishe youre doughters for beynge defyled, & youre brydes that became whores: seinge the fathers them selues haue medled wt harlottes & offered wt vnthriftes: but the people that will not vnderstand, must be punished.
Hosea 4:15 Though thou Israel art disposed to play the harlot, yet shouldest not thou haue offended, O Iuda: thou shouldest not haue runne to Galgala, nor haue gone vp to Bethauen, nor haue sworne, the Lord lyueth.
Hosea 4:16 For Israel is gone backe like a wanton cow The Lord therfore shall make her fede, as the lambe that goeth astray.
Hosea 4:17 And where as Ephraim is become partaker of Idols, wel, let him go.
Hosea 4:18 Their dronckennes hath put them backe, and brought them to whordome. Their rulers loue rewardes, bring (say they) to their owne shame.
Hosea 4:19 A wind shal take hold of their fethers & they shalbe confounded in their offeringes.

CHAPTER: 5

Hosea 5:1 O ye priestes: hear this, take hede o thou houshold of Israel: geue eare, O thou kyngly house: for thys punyshemente will come vpon you, that are become a snare vnto Myzphah, and a spred net to the mount of Thabor.
Hosea 5:2 They kyl sacryfyces by heapes to begyle the people therwith: therfore wyll I punyshe them al.
Hosea 5:3 I know Ephraim well ynough, and Israel is not hyd from me: for Ephraim is become an harlot: and Israel is defiled.
Hosea 5:4 They are not minded to turne vnto their God, for they haue an whoryshe herte, so that they can not know the Lorde.
Hosea 5:5 But the pryde of Israell will be rewarded him in his fate, yea bothe Israel & Ephraim shal fal for their wyckednesse, and Iuda with them also.
Hosea 5:6 They shall come with their shepe & bullockes to seke the Lorde, but they shall not fynde him, for he is gone from them.
Hosea 5:7 As for the Lorde, they haue refused him, & broughte vp bastarde children: a moneth: therfore shall deuoure them wt their porcyons.
Hosea 5:8 Blowe wt the shawmes at Gabea, & with the trompet in Ramah, crye out at Bethaueu vpon the yonsyde of BenIamin.
Hosea 5:9 In the tyme of the plage shall Ephraim be layd wast, therfore did I faythfully warne the trybes of Israell.
Hosea 5:10 Yet are the princes of Iuda become lyke them, that remoue the landemarckes, therfore will I poure oute my wrath vpon them lyke water.
Hosea 5:11 Ephraim is oppressed, and can haue no right of the lawe: for why? they folowe the doctrynes of men.
Hosea 5:12 Therfore wyl I be vnto Ephraim as a moth and to the house of Iuda as a caterpyller.
Hosea 5:13 When Ephraim saw his syckenesse, and Iuda hys dysease: Ephraim wente vnto Assur, and sent vnto kinge Iareb: yet coulde not he helpe you, nor ease you of youre payne.
Hosea 5:14 I am vnto Ephraim as a lyon, and as a lyons whelpe to the house of Iuda. Euen I, I wyll spoyle them, and go my way. I will take them with me, & no man shall rescue them.
Hosea 5:15 I wyll go, and returne to my place, tyll they waxe faynt and seke my.

CHAPTER: 6

Hosea 6:1 In their aduersite they shal seke me, and said: come, let vs turne againe to the lord: for he hathe smyten vs, & he shall heale vs:
Hosea 6:2 He hath wounde vs, & he shall bind vs vp agayne after two dayes shall he quicken vs, in the thirde day he shal rayse vs vp, so that we shal lyue in his sight.
Hosea 6:3 Then shall we haue vnderstanding, and endeuoure oure selues to knowe the Lorde. He shall go forth as the springe of the daye, & come vnto vs as the eueninge and morninge rayne vpon the earth.
Hosea 6:4 O Ephraim, what shal I do vnto the? O Iuda, how shall I entreate the? seynge youre loue is like a morning cloude, and lyke a dew that goeth early awaye.
Hosea 6:5 Therfore haue I cut doune the Prophetes, and let them be slayne for my wordes sake: so that thy punyshment shall come to lyghte.
Hosea 6:6 For I haue pleasure in louinge kindnesse, and not in offerynge: yea, in the knoweledge of God, more then in burnt sacryfyce.
Hosea 6:7 But euen like as Adam did, so haue they broken my couenaunt, & set me at naught.
Hosea 6:8 Galaad is a city of wycked doers, of malycious people and bloudshedders.
Hosea 6:9 The multytude of the priestes is lyke an heape of theues murtherers and bloudthursty: for they haue wroughte abhomynacyon.
Hosea 6:10 Horryble thinges haue I sene in the house of Israel, there playeth Ephraim the Harlot, and Israel is defyled:
Hosea 6:11 but Iuda shall haue an haruest for hym selfe, when I returne the captyuyte of my people.

CHAPTER: 7

Hosea 7:1 When I vndertake to make Israel whole, then the vngracyousnes of Ephraim and the wickednes of Samaria commeth to lyght: then go they aboute with lyes. At home, they be theues: & withoute they fall to robbinge.
Hosea 7:2 They consydre not in their hertes that I remembre all their wickednes. They go aboute with their owne inuencions, but I se them wel ynough.
Hosea 7:3 They make the kinge & the princes, to haue pleasure in their wickednes and lyes.
Hosea 7:4 All these burne in aduoutrye, as it were an ouen that the baker heateth, when he hath lefte kneadynge, till the dowe be leuended.
Hosea 7:5 Euen so goeth it thys day with oure kinges & princes, for they beginne to be wodde droncken thorowe wine, they vse familarite with suche as disceyue him.
Hosea 7:6 They with the ymaginacyon of their herte are lyke an ouen, their slepe is all the nyghte lyke the slepe of a baker, in the morninge is he as hote as the flamme of fyre,
Hosea 7:7 they are altogether as hote as an ouen. They haue deuoured their owne iudges, all their kinges are fallen: yet is there none of them that calleth vpon me.
Hosea 7:8 Therfore must Ephraim be mirte amonge the heathen. Ephraim is become lyke a cake, that no man turneth:
Hosea 7:9 straungers haue deuoured his strength, yet he regardeth it not: he waxeth ful of gray hearres: yet will he not know it,
Hosea 7:10 and the pryd of Israell is caste doune before their fare, yet wil they not turne to the Lord their God, nor seke him for all this.
Hosea 7:11 Ephraim is lyke a doue, that is begyled, and hathe no herte. Nowe call they vpon the Egipcians, nowe go they to the Assyryans,
Hosea 7:12 but whyle they be goynge here and there, I shall sprede my net ouer them, and draw them doune as the foules of the ayre: & accordinge as they haue bene warned, so will I punyshe them.
Hosea 7:13 Wo be vnto them, for they haue forsaken me. They must be destroyed, for they haue set me at naught. I am he that haue redemed them, and yet they dissemble with me.
Hosea 7:14 They call not vpon me with their hertes, but lye houlinge vpon their beddes. Where as they come together; it is but for meate and drincke, and me wil they not obeye.
Hosea 7:15 I haue taught them, and defended their arme, yet do they ymagin mischefe agaynst me.
Hosea 7:16 They turne them selues, but not a right, and are becomen as a broken bowe. Their pryntes shal be slaine with the swerde, for the malyce of their tunges, such blasphemies haue they learned in the lande of Egipte.

CHAPTER: 8

Hosea 8:1 Set the horne to thy mouthe, & blowe: get the swyftly (as an Aegle) vnto the house of the Lorde: for they haue broken my couenaunt, & transgressed my law.
Hosea 8:2 Israel can say vnto me thou art my God, we know the,
Hosea 8:3 but he hathe refused the thinge that is good, therfore shall the enemy folow vpon him.
Hosea 8:4 They haue ordeyned kinges, but not thorowe me: they haue made princes, and I must not know of it. Of their siluer and golde haue they made them Images, to bringe them selues to destruccion.
Hosea 8:5 Thy calf, O Samaria, shall be taken away. for my wrothfull indignacion is gone forthe agaynst the. How longe will it be, or they can be clensed?
Hosea 8:6 For the calfe came from Israel, the worcke man made it, therfore can it be no God but euen to a spyders webbe shall the calfe of Samaria be turned.
Hosea 8:7 They haue sown wind therfore shall they reape a storme. Their sede shal beare no corne, there shal no meel be made of their increase: thoughe they reape, yet shall straungers deuoure it vp.
Hosea 8:8 Israel shal peryshe, the Gentyles shall intreate him as a foule vessel.
Hosea 8:9 Sence they wente vp to the Assirians, they are become lyke a wylde asse in the deserte. Ephraim geueth rewardes to get louers,
Hosea 8:10 therfore are they scatred amonge the Heathen, there will I gather them vp. They shall sone be wery of the burthen of kinges & prynces.
Hosea 8:11 Ephraim hath made many aulters to do wickednes, therfore shall the aulters turne to his sinne.
Hosea 8:12 Thoughe I shew them my lawe, neuer so muche, they count it but straunge doctrine.
Hosea 8:13 Whereas they do sacryfice, offeringe the fleshe and eatinge it: the Lorde wyll haue no pleasure therin: but wyll remembre their wickednes, and punyshe their sinnes. Israel turneth agayne into Egipte,
Hosea 8:14 they haue forgotten him that made them, they buylde churches, and Iuda maketh manye stronge cities: therfore will I sende a fyre into their cities, and it shall consume their places.

CHAPTER: 9

Hosea 9:1 Do not thou tryumphe, O Israel, make no boastinge more then the Heathen, for thou hast committed aduoutrye againste thy God: straung rewardes hast thou loued more then al the corneflores.
Hosea 9:2 Therfore shal they no more enioy the corneflores & winepresses, & their swete wine shall fayle them.
Hosea 9:3 They will not dwell in the Lordes lande, but Ephraim turneth agayne into Egypte, and eateth vncleane thinges amonge the Assirians.
Hosea 9:4 They poure oute no wyne for a drinckofferinge vnto the Lord, neyther geue they him their flain offeringes: but they be vnto them as mourners meates, wherin all they that eate them, are defyled. For the breade that they haue suche luste vnto, shall not come into the house of the Lorde.
Hosea 9:5 What wyl ye do then in the solempne daies, and in the feaste of the Lorde?
Hosea 9:6 Lo, they shall get them awaye for the destruccyon: Egipte shal receyue them, & Noph shall bury them. The netles shal ouergrowe their pleasaunt goodes, and burres shalbe in their tabernacles.
Hosea 9:7 Be ye sure (O Israel) the tyme of visitacyon is come, the dayes of recompensynge are at hande. As for the Prophete, ye holde hym for a foole: and him that is ryche in the spyrite for a mad man: so great is youre wickednes and malice.
Hosea 9:8 Ephraim hath made him selfe a watchman of my God, a prophet that is become a snare to do hurte in euery strete and abhomynacyon in the house of his God.
Hosea 9:9 They be gone to farre, & haue destroyed themselues, like as they dyd afore tyme at Gabaa. Therfore their wyckednes shalbe remembred, and their synnes punyshed.
Hosea 9:10 I founde Israel lyke the grapes in the wildernes, & saw their fathers as the fyrst figges in the top of the fygge tre. But they are gone to Baal Peor, & runne away from me to that shamefull Idoll, and are become as abhominable as their louers.
Hosea 9:11 Ephraim flyeth lyke a byrde, so shall their glory also. In so muche, that they shall neyther beget, conceyue nor beare children.
Hosea 9:12 And though they bring vp any yet wyll I make them chyldelesse among men. Yea, wo shall come to them, when I departe from them.
Hosea 9:13 Ephraim (as me thyncke) is planted in welthynesse, lyke as Tirus, but nowe must she bring her owne children forth to the manslayer.
Hosea 9:14 O Lorde thou shalt geue them: what shalte thou geue them? geue them an vnfrutefull wombe and drye brestes.
Hosea 9:15 All their wyckednesse is done at Galgal, there do I abhorre them. For the vngracyousnes of their owne inuencyons. I will driue them oute of my house. I will loue them no more, for all their princes are vnfaythfull.
Hosea 9:16 Ephraim is hewen doune, their rote is dryed vp, so that they shal brynge no more frute: yea and thoughe they brynge forth any, yet will I slaye euen the best beloued frute of their body.
Hosea 9:17 My god shal cast them awaye, for they haue not bene obedient vnto hym, therefore shal they go astray amonge the Heathen.

CHAPTER: 10

Hosea 10:1 Israel was a goodly vyne, but he hath brought forth vnprofytable frute: yea, the more frute he had, the mo aulters he made: the more good I dyd to their lande, the more frendshyppe shewed they to their Images.
Hosea 10:2 Their herte is deuyded, therfore wyll they be destroyed. The Lorde shall breake doune their Images, he shall destroye their aulters.
Hosea 10:3 Then shall they saye: we haue no kinge, for why? we haue not feared the Lorde. And what shall then the kinge do to vs?
Hosea 10:4 They comen together, and sweare vayn othes: they be confederate together, therefore groweth their punyshement, as the wedes in the forowes of the lande.
Hosea 10:5 They that dwell in Samaria haue worshipped the calfe of Bethauen: therfore shall the people mourne ouer them: yea, and the priestes also, that in their welthynesse reioysed wyth them: and why? it shall passe awaye from them.
Hosea 10:6 It shalbe brougthe to the Assyryans, for a present vnto kinge Iareb. Ephraim shal receyue full punishement: Israel shalbe confounded for his owne ymaginacyons.
Hosea 10:7 Samaria with his kynge shall vanyshe awaye as the scomme in the water.
Hosea 10:8 The hye places of Auen where Israel do synne, shalbe caste doune: thystles and thornes shall growe vpon their aulters. Then shall they saye to the mountaynes: couer vs, and to the hylles, fall vpon vs.
Hosea 10:9 O Israel, thou hast synned as Gabaa did afore tyme, where they remayneth, shoulde not the battel then come vpon the wicked children, as wel as vpon the Gabaonites?
Hosea 10:10 I wyl chasten them, euen after myne owne desyre, the people shalbe gathered together ouer them, when I punishe them for their greate wyckednesse.
Hosea 10:11 Ephraim was vnto me, as a cowe that is vsed to go to plowe, therfore I loued him, & fel vpon his fayre neck, I droue Ephraim, Iuda plowed, and Iacob played the husbande man,
Hosea 10:12 that they myght sowe vnto righteousnes, and reape the frutes of weldoynge that they might plowe vp their fresh lande, & seke the Lorde, tyll he came, and learned them ryghteousnes.
Hosea 10:13 But nowe they haue plowed them wyckednesse, therfore shall they reape synne, & eat the frute of lyes. Seynge thou puttest thy confydence in thyne owne wayes, and leanest to the multitude of thy worthyes:
Hosea 10:14 there shall growe a sedicion amonge thy people. All thy stronge cities shalbe layd waste, euen as Salmana was destroyed with his familiers, thorow him that was auenged of Arbell, in the day of batell, where the mother peryshed wt her children.
Hosea 10:15 Euen so shall it go with you (O Bethel) because of youre malicious wickednes. Lyke as the morninge goeth awaye, so shall the kinge of Israel passe.

CHAPTER: 11

Hosea 11:1 When Israel was younge, I loued him: & called him my sonne out of the lande of Egipte.
Hosea 11:2 But the more they were called the more they went backe, offeringe vnto Idols, and ceasinge Images.
Hosea 11:3 I learned Ephraim to go, & bare them in mine armes, but they regarded not me, that would haue helped them.
Hosea 11:4 I led them with coardes of frendshyppe, and bandes of loue. I was euen he, that layed the yocke vpon their neckes. I gaue them my foder my self,
Hosea 11:5 that they should not go againe into Egipt. And nowe is Assur their kinge: For they woulde not turne vnto me.
Hosea 11:6 Therfore shall the swerde beginne in their cities, the stoare that they haue laied vp, shalbe destroyed and eaten: and that because of their own ymaginacyons.
Hosea 11:7 My people had no lust to turne vnto me, their prophetes laye the yocke vpon them, but they ease them not of their burthen.
Hosea 11:8 What greate thinges haue I geuen the, O Ephraim? how faythfully haue I defended the, O Israel? haue I dealt wt the as with Adama? or haue I entreated the lyke Seboim? No, my herte is otherwyse minded. Yea, my mercye is to feruent:
Hosea 11:9 therfore haue I not turned me to destroye Ephraim in my wrothfull displeasure. For I am God and no man, I am euen that holy one in the middest of the, thoughe I came not within the cyty.
Hosea 11:10 The Lorde roareth lyke a Lyon, that they maye folowe him: yea as a lyon roareth he, that they may be afrayed like the children of the sea:
Hosea 11:11 that they may be scatred away from Egipt, as men scarre byrdes: & frayed away (as doues vse to be) from the Assirians lande: & that because I woulde haue them to tary at home, sayeth the Lorde.
Hosea 11:12 But Ephraim goeth about me with lyes, & the house of Israel dissembleth. Onelye Iuda beholdeth him with God, and with the true holy thinges.

CHAPTER: 12

Hosea 12:1 Ephraim kepeth the ayre, and folowed after the east winde: he is euer increasinge lyes & destruccyon. They be confederate with the Assirians, their oyle is caried into Egypte.
Hosea 12:2 The Lorde hath a courte to holde with Iuda, and wil punishe Iacob. After their owne wayes and accordinge to their owne inuencyons shall he recompence them.
Hosea 12:3 He toke his brother by the hele, when he was yet in his mothers wombe: & in his strengthe he wrestled with God.
Hosea 12:4 He stroue with the Aungel, and gat the victorye, so that he praid and desyred hym. He founde him at Bethel, & there he talked with vs.
Hosea 12:5 Yet the Lorde God of Hostes, euen the Lorde hym selfe remembred him.
Hosea 12:6 Then turne to thy God, kepe mercye and equyte, and hope still in thy God.
Hosea 12:7 But the marchaunte hath a false weyght in his hande, he hath a pleasure to occupye extorsion.
Hosea 12:8 Ephraim thinketh thus: Tush, I am ryche, I haue good ynoughe. In all my worckes shall not one fawte be founde, that I haue offended.
Hosea 12:9 Yet am I the Lorde thy God, euen as when I brought the oute of the lande of Egipte, and fet the in thy tentes, & as in the hye feaste dayes.
Hosea 12:10 I haue spoken thorow the prophetes, and shewed diuerse visions, and declared my self by the ministracyon of the prophetes.
Hosea 12:11 But at Galaad is the abhominacyon, they are fallen to vanitye. At Galgal they haue slayne oxen: and as many heapes of stones as they had in their lande forowes, so manye aulters haue they made.
Hosea 12:12 Iacob fled into the lande of Siria, and Israel serued for a wyfe, and for a wyfe he kepte shepe.
Hosea 12:13 By a prophete the Lorde brought them oute of Egipt, and by a prophet he preserued them.
Hosea 12:14 But Ephraim hathe prouoked hym to displeasure thorow his obhominacious, therfore shall his bloude be poured vpon him self and the Lord his God shall rewarde him his blasphemies.

CHAPTER: 13

Hosea 13:1 The abhominacion of Ephraim is come also into Israel: he is gone backe to Baal, therfore must he dye.
Hosea 13:2 And now they synne more and more: of their syluer, they make them molten Images, lyke the Idoles of the Heathen, and yet al is nothinge but the worcke of the craftesmre. Notwithstandinge they preach of the same: who so wil kisse the calues, offreth to men.
Hosea 13:3 Therfore they shalbe as the morning cloud, & as the dew that early passeth away, & lyke as dust that the wynde taketh awaye from the floure, and as smoke that goeth oute of the chymney.
Hosea 13:4 I am the Lorde thy God, whiche broughte the out of the land of Egypte: that thou shouldest know no God, but me onely, & that thou shouldest haue no Sauiour but onlye me.
Hosea 13:5 I toke diligent hede of the in the wildernesse that drye land.
Hosea 13:6 But when they were wel fedde & had ynough, they waxed proude, and forgat me.
Hosea 13:7 Therfore wyll I be vnto them as a lyon, & as a leoparde in the waye to the Assirians.
Hosea 13:8 I wil come vpon them as a she beer, that is robbed of her whelpes, & I will breake that stubburne herte of theirs. There wyll I deuoure them as a lyon: yea the wilde beastes shall teare them.
Hosea 13:9 O Israel, thou doest but destroye thy selfe, in me onely is thy helpe.
Hosea 13:10 Where are thy kinges now, that shoulde helpe the in all thy cyties? Yea, and thy iudges, of whom thou saydest: geue me a kynge and prynces?
Hosea 13:11 well I gaue the a king in my wrath, & in my dyspleasure will I take him from the agayne.
Hosea 13:12 The wyckednesse of Ephraim is bounde together and hys sinne lyed hid.
Hosea 13:13 Therfore shall sorowes come vpon him, as vpon a woman that trauayleth. An vndyscrete sonne is he: for he consydreth not, that he shoulde not haue bene able to haue endured in the tyme of hys byrth,
Hosea 13:14 had not I defended hym from the graue, and delyuered hym from deathe. O death, I wyl be thy death: O hel, I wil be thy stynge.
Hosea 13:15 Yet can I se no comforte, for when he is nowe the goodlyest among the brethren, the East wynde (euen the wynd of the Lorde) shall come doune from the wyldernesse, and drye vp hys condytes, and drincke vp hys welles: he shall spoyle the treasure of all pleasaunte vessels.
Hosea 13:16 As for Samaria, they shalbe made waste, and why? they are disobedient vnto their god. They shal perysh with the sweard, their children shalbe slayne, and theyr wemen greate with chylde shalbe rypt vp.

CHAPTER: 14

Hosea 14:1 O Israel, turne the nowe, vnto the Lorde thy God, for thou hast taken a greate fall thorow thy wickednes.
Hosea 14:2 Take these wordes with you, when ye turne to the Lorde, & saye vnto him: O forgeue vs all our sinnes, receyue vs gracyouslye, and then wyl we offre the bullockes of oure lyppes vnto the.
Hosea 14:3 Assur shalbe no more oure helper, nether wyl we ryde vpon horses any more. As for the worckes of our handes, we wil no more cal vpon them: For it is thou that arte oure God, thou shewest euer mercye vnto the fatherlesse.
Hosea 14:4 O (yf they wolde do thys) I shulde heale theyr sores: yea wyth al my herte wolde I loue them: so that my wrath shuld cleane be turned awaye from them.
Hosea 14:5 Yea, I wolde be vnto Israel as the dewe, and he shulde growe as the lylye, and hys rote shulde breake oute as Lybanus.
Hosea 14:6 His braunches shulde sprede oute abroade, and be as fayre as the olyue tre, and smell sa Lybanus.
Hosea 14:7 They that dwell vnder hys shadowe, shulde come agayne, and grow vp as the corne, and floryshe as the vyne: he shulde haue as good a name, as the wyne of Lybanus.
Hosea 14:8 O Ephraim what haue I to do wt Idols anye more? I wyll graciously heare him, and lede hym forthe. I will be vnto the as a grene Fyrre tre, vpon me shalt thou find thy trute.
Hosea 14:9 Who so is wyse, shall vnderstande thys: & he that is ryght instructe, wyll regarde it. For the wayes of the Lorde are ryghteous, suche as be Godlye wil walcke in them: As for the wicked, they wyll stomble therin.

BOOK: Joel

CHAPTER: 1

Joel 1:1 Thys is the worde of the lorde that came vnto Ioel the sonne of Phatuel:
Joel 1:2 Heare O ye elders, pondre this well, al ye that dwell in the lande, yf euer there happened suche a thynge in youre dayes, or in the dayes of youre fathers.
Joel 1:3 Tell youre chyldren of it, and let them shew it vnto theyr chyldren, & so they to certifye their posteryte there of.
Joel 1:4 Loke what the caterpyller hath lefte, that hath the greshopper eaten vp: what the greshopper lefte, that hath the locuste eaten vp: & what the locuste hath lefte, that hath the blastyng consumed.
Joel 1:5 Wake vp ye dronkardes, & wepe: mourne all ye wynesuppers, because of youre swete wyne, for it shall be taken away from your mouth.
Joel 1:6 Yea, a myghtye and an innumerable people shal come vp into my lande: these haue teeth lyke the teethe of Lyons, and chaftbones lyke the lyonesses.
Joel 1:7 They shal make my vyneyarde waste, they shall pyll of the barckes of my fygge trees, strype them bare, cast them away, & make the braunches whyt.
Joel 1:8 Make thy mone as a virgyne doth the gyrdes her selfe with sacke, because of her brydegrome,
Joel 1:9 For the meat and drinckofferyng shal be taken awaye from the house of the Lorde: and the priestes the Lordes mynysters shall mourne.
Joel 1:10 The felde shalbe wasted, the lande shalbe in a myserable case: for the corne shalbe destroyed, the swete wyne shall come to confusyon, and the oyle vtterlye desolate.
Joel 1:11 The husband men and the wyne gardeners shall loke pyteously & make lamentacyon, for the wheat wyne, and barley & because the haruest vpon the felde is so cleane destroyed.
Joel 1:12 The grape gatherers shall make greate mone, when the vyneyard & figgetrees be so vtterly wasted. Yea all the pomgarnettes, palmetrees, appeltrees & the other trees of the felde shall wyther awaye. Thus the mery cheare of the chyldren of men, shall come to confusyon.
Joel 1:13 Gyrde you, & make youre mone, O ye prestes: mourne ye mynysters of the aulter: go youre way in, and slepe in sackcloth, O ye offycers of my God: for the meate and drinckofferynge shall be taken awaye from the house of youre God.
Joel 1:14 Proclame a fastynge, call the congregacyon, gather the elders & all the inhabiters of the lande together into the house of the Lord your God, & crye vnto the Lorde:
Joel 1:15 alas, alas, for thys daye. And why? the daye of the Lorde is at hand, and commeth as a destroyer from the almighty.
Joel 1:16 Shall not the meates be taken awaye before oure eyes, the myrthe also & ioye from the house of oure God?
Joel 1:17 The sede shall peryshe in the grounde, the garners shal lye waste, the floures shalbe broken doune for the corne shalbe destroyed.
Joel 1:18 O what a fyghynge make the cattell? the bullockes are very euyll lykynge, because they haue no pasture: and the shepe are famyshed awaye.
Joel 1:19 O Lord, to the will I crye: for the fyre hath consumed the goodly pastures of the wildernesse, and the flamme hath brente vp all the trees of the felde.
Joel 1:20 Yea, the wylde beastes crye also vnto the: for the water ryuers are dryed vp and the fyre hath consumed the pastures of the wyldernes.

CHAPTER: 2

Joel 2:1 Blowe oute the trompet in Sion, & crye vpon my holy hyl, that al suche as dwell in the land, may tremble at it, for the daye of the Lorde commeth, and is harde at hande:
Joel 2:2 a darcke daye, a gloomynge daye, a cloudye daye, yea & a stormy daye, lyke as the mornynge spredeth oute vpon the hylles: Namely, a great and myghtye people; suche as haue not bene sence the begynnynge, neither shal be after them for euer more.
Joel 2:3 Before hym shall be a consumynge fyre, and behynde him a burnyng flamme. The land shal be as a garden of pleasure before him, but behynde hym shall it be a very waste wyldernes, and there is no man, that shall escape hym.
Joel 2:4 They are to loke vpon lyke barded horses, and runne lyke horse men.
Joel 2:5 They skyppe vp vpon the hylles, as it were the sounde of charettes, as the flamme of fyre that consumeth the strawe, and as a myghtye people ready to the battell.
Joel 2:6 The folcke shalbe afrayed of hym, all faces shalbe as blacke as a pot.
Joel 2:7 These shal runne lyke gyauntes, and leape ouer the walles lyke men of warre. Euerye man in hys goynge shall kepe hys araye, and not go oute of hys Path.
Joel 2:8 There shall not one dryue another, but eche shall kepe hys owne waye. They shall breake in at the wyndowes, and not be hurte.
Joel 2:9 They shall come into the cytye, and runne vpon the walles: They shal clymme vp vpon the houses, & slyppe in at the wyndowes lyke a thefe.
Joel 2:10 The earth shall quake before him, yea, the heauens shalbe moued: The sunne & moue shall be darckened, and the starres shal wythdraw theyr shyne,
Joel 2:11 The Lorde shall shewe his voyce before hys hoste, for hys hoste is greate, strong and myghtye to fulfyll hys commaundement. This is that greate and merueylous fearefull daye of the Lorde: And who is able to abyde it.
Joel 2:12 Now therfore sayeth the Lorde: Turne you vnto me wyth all youre hertes, wyth fastynge, wepynge and mournynge,
Joel 2:13 rente your hertes & not youre clothes. Turne you vnto the Lorde youre God, for he is gracyons and mercyfull, longe sufferyng and of great compassyon, & ready to pardone wickednes.
Joel 2:14 Then (no doute) he also shall turne, & forgeue: and after hys chasteninge, he shall let youre increase remayne, for meat & drynckeofferinges vnto the Lorde youre God?
Joel 2:15 Blowe oute with the trompet in Syon, proclame a fastynge, cal the congregacyon,
Joel 2:16 and gather the people together: warne the congregacyon, gather the elders, brynge the chyldren & suckelynges together. Let the brydgrome go forth of his chambre, & the bryde oute of her closet.
Joel 2:17 Let the prestes serue the Lorde betwixte the porche & the aulter, weping and saying: be fauourable (O Lorde) be fauourable vnto thy people: let not thyne herytage be broughte to suche confusyon, leste the Heathen be Lordes therof. Wherfore shulde they saye amonge the Heathen: where is nowe theyr God?
Joel 2:18 Then shall the Lorde be gelous ouer hys lande, & spare his people:
Joel 2:19 yea, the Lorde shall aunswere, and say vnto his people: Behold, I will sende you corne, wyne & oyle, so that ye shall haue plentye of them: & I wyll no more geue you ouer to be a reprofe amonge the heathen.
Joel 2:20 Agayne, as for hym of the Norh, I shal dryue hym farre from you: & shute him out into a drye and waste lande, hys face towarde the east sea, and hys hynder partes towarde the vtmost sea. The styncke of hym shall go vp, and his fylthy corrupcyon shall fal vpon himselfe, because he hath dealte so proudelye.
Joel 2:21 Feare not (O lande) but be glad, and reioyse, for the Lorde wyll do greate thynges.
Joel 2:22 Be not ye afrayed nether (O ye beastes of the felde) for the pastures shalbe greue, and the trees shall beare theyr frute: the fyggetrees & vyneyardes shall geue theyr encrease.
Joel 2:23 Be glad then (O ye chyldren of Syon) & reioyse in the Lorde youre God, for he hathe geuen you a teacher of ryghtuousnes: and he it is that shall sende you doune shuwers of rayne, early and late in the fyrste moueth,
Joel 2:24 so that the garners shalbe full of corne, and the presses plenteous in wyne and oyle.
Joel 2:25 And as for the yeares that the greshopper, locuste, blastynge, & caterpyller (my greate hoste, whiche I sente amonge you) haue eaten vp, I shal restore them to you agayne,
Joel 2:26 so that ye shall haue ynoughe to eate, and be satisfyed, and prayse the name of the Lorde youre God, that so meruelouslye hath dealte wyth you. And my people shal neuer be confounded anye more.
Joel 2:27 Ye shall well knowe, that I am in the myddeste of Israel, and that I am youre God: yea, & that there is none other, & my people shal no more be broughte to confusyon.
Joel 2:28 After this, wil I poure out my sprete vpon all fleshe: and your sonnes & your doughters shall prophecye: youre olde men shall dreame dreames, & youre yong men shal se visyons
Joel 2:29 yea in those dayes I wyll poure out my sprite vpon seruauntes and maydens.
Joel 2:30 I wyll shewe wonders in heauen aboue, and tokens in the earth beneth: bloude and fyre, and the vapour of smoke.
Joel 2:31 The sunne shalbe turned into darcknes, & the mone into bloude: before the greate & notable daye of the Lorde come.
Joel 2:32 And the time shal come, that whosoeuer calleth on the name of the Lorde, shalbe saued. For vpon the mount Syon & at Ierusalem, there shalbe a saluacion, lyke as the Lorde hath promysed, yea & among the other remnaunte, whome the Lorde shall call.

CHAPTER: 3

Joel 3:1 For take hede: in those dayes & at the same tyme, when I turne agayne the captyuyte of Iuda & Ierusalem:
Joel 3:2 I shal gather al people together, & brynge them in the valleye of Iosaphat: and there wyl I reason with them: because of my people & herytage of Israel, whom they haue scatred aboute in the nacyons, and parted my lande,
Joel 3:3 yea they haue cast lottes for my people the yonge men haue they set in the bordell house, and solde the Damsels for wine, that they myghte haue to drincke.
Joel 3:4 Thou Tyrus & Sidon and all ye borders of the Philistines: what haue ye to do with me? Wil ye defye me? wel yf ye wil nedes defye me, I shal recompence you, euen vpon youre head, & that right shortly:
Joel 3:5 for ye haue taken awaye my syluer and gold, my fayre & goodly Iewels, & brought them into youre goddes houses.
Joel 3:6 The children also of Iuda and Ierusalem haue ye solde vnto the Grekes, that ye myght brynge them farre from the borders of theyr owne countrees.
Joel 3:7 Beholde therfore, I wyll rayse them oute of the place, where ye haue solde them, & wyl rewarde you euen vpon youre heade.
Joel 3:8 Youre sonnes & your doughters wyll I sell thorowe the handes of the chyldren of Iuda, & so they shal geue them forth to sel, vnto them of Saba, a people of a farre countre, for the Lorde hym selfe hath sayde it.
Joel 3:9 Crye out these thinges among the Gentiles, proclame warre, wake vp the gyauntes, let them drawe nye, let them come vp all the lustye warryours of them.
Joel 3:10 Make you sweardes of youre plowshares, and speares of youre sycles & sythes. Let the weake man saye: I am stronge.
Joel 3:11 Mustre you, and come, all ye heathen round about: gather you together, there shall the Lorde laye all thy gyauntes to the grounde.
Joel 3:12 Let the people aryse, & get them to the valleye of Iosaphat, for there wyll I sit, & iudge all Heathen rounde about.
Joel 3:13 Laye to youre sythes, for the haruest is rype: come, get you doune: the winepresse is ful, yea the wynepresses runne ouer, for theyr wickednesse is waxen greate.
Joel 3:14 In the valleye appoynted, there shalbe many, many people: for the daye of the Lorde is nye in the valleye appoynted.
Joel 3:15 The sunne and mone shalbe darkened, & the starres shal withdrawe theyr light.
Joel 3:16 The Lorde shal roare oute of Syon, and crye oute of Ierusalem, that the heauens & the earthe shall quake wythal. But the Lorde shalbe a defence vnto his owne people, & a refuge for the chyldren of Israel.
Joel 3:17 Thus shall ye knowe, that I the Lorde youre God dwell vpon my holy mounte of Syon. Then shall Ierusalem be holy, and there shall no straungers go thorowe her any more.
Joel 3:18 Then shall the mountaines droppe swete wyne, and the hylles shall flowe with mylcke. All the ryuers of Iuda shall haue water ynough, & out of the Lordes house there shal flowe a spryng to water the broke of Sitim:
Joel 3:19 but Egipt shalbe layed waste, and Edom shalbe desolate: because they haue dealte so cruelly with the chyldren of Iuda, and shed innocente bloude in theyr lande.
Joel 3:20 Agayne, Iuda shalbe inhabyted for euermore, and Ierusalem from generacion to generacyon:
Joel 3:21 for I wil not leaue theyr bloud vnauenged. And the Lorde shal dwel in Syon.

BOOK: Amos

CHAPTER: 1

Amos 1:1 These are the sermons that were shewed vnto Amos (whiche was one of the shepeherdes at Thecua) vpon Israel, in the tyme of Osiah kynge of Iuda, and in the tyme of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioah kynge of Israel, two yeare before the earthquake.
Amos 1:2 And he sayde: The Lorde shall roare oute of Syon, and shewe hys voyce from Ierusalem: so that the pastures of the shepherdes shalbe in a myserable case, and the tope of Charmell dryed vp.
Amos 1:3 Thus sayth the Lord: for thre & foure wyckednesses of Damascus, I wil not spare her, because they haue throshed Galaad with yron flales:
Amos 1:4 But I wyll sende a fyre into the house of Hazael, the same shal consume the palaces of Benadab.
Amos 1:5 Thus wyll I breake the barres of Damascus, and rote out the inhabyter from the felde of Auen, & hym that holdeth the scepter, out of the pleasaunt house: so that the people shalbe dryuen oute of fayre Syrya, sayeth the Lord.
Amos 1:6 Thus saith the Lord: For thre and foure wyckednesses of Gaza, I wyll not spare her: because they make the presoners yet more captyue, & haue driue them into the lande of Edom.
Amos 1:7 Therfore wyl I send a fyre into the walles of Gaza, whiche shall deuoure her houses.
Amos 1:8 I wyl rote out them the dwel at Asood & hym the holdeth the scepter of Ascalon, and stretche oute myne hande ouer Accaron, that the remnaunte of the Phylystines shal peryshe sayth the Lorde.
Amos 1:9 Thus sayeth the Lorde: For thre and foure wyckednesses of the cytye of Tyre, I wil not spare her, because they haue increased the captyuite of the Edomytes, and haue not remembred the brotherly couenaunt.
Amos 1:10 Therfore wil I sende a fyre into the walles of Tyre, that shal consume her palaces.
Amos 1:11 Thus sayth the Lorde: For thre and foure wickednesses of Edom I wyl not spare him, because he persecuted hys brother wyth the swearde, destroyed his mothers wombe, bare hatred very longe, and so kepte indignacyon alwaye by hym.
Amos 1:12 Therfore wyll I sende a fyre into Theman, which shal deuoure the palaces of Bosra.
Amos 1:13 Thus sayeth the Lorde: For thre and foure wyckednesses of the children of Ammon I wil not spare them, because they rypte vp the wemen greate with childe in Galaad, to make the borders of theyr landes the wyder.
Amos 1:14 Therefore I wyl kyndle a fyre in the walles of Rabbath that shal consume her palaces: with a great crie, in the daye of batel, in tempest & in the daye of storme,
Amos 1:15 so that their kinge shall go into captyuyte he and hys prynces together, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 2

Amos 2:1 Thus sayeth the Lorde: For thre & foure wyckednesses of Moab, I wil not spare him: because he brente the bones of the kyng of Edom to ashes.
Amos 2:2 Therfor wil I sende a fyre into Moab, which shal consume the palaces of Carioth, so that Moab shal perysh with a noyse, & the sounde of a shawme.
Amos 2:3 I wyl rote oute the iudge from amonge them, & slaye all hys prynces with him, sayeth the lord.
Amos 2:4 Thus sayth the Lorde: for thre and foure wickednesses of Iuda, I wil not spare hym: because he hath cast a syde the lawe of the Lord, & not kepte his commaundementes: for why, they wolde nedes be disceyued with the lyes, that theyr forefathers folowed.
Amos 2:5 Therfore wyl I sende a fyre into Iuda, whiche shall consume the palaces of Ierusalem.
Amos 2:6 Thus sayth the Lorde: For thre and foure wickednesses of Israel, I wyl not spare hym: because he hath solde the ryghteous for money, and the poore for shues.
Amos 2:7 They treade vpon poore mens heades, in the duste of the earthe, & croke the wayes of the meke. The sonne and the father go to the harlot, to dyshonoure thy holye name,
Amos 2:8 they lye besyde euery aulter vpon clothes taken to pledge, and in the house of theyr Goddes they drincke the wyne of the oppressed.
Amos 2:9 Yet destroyed I the Amorite before them, that was as hye as the Cedre trees, and as stronge as the okes: notwithstandynge I destroied his frute from aboue, and his rote from vnder.
Amos 2:10 Agayne: I broughte you oute of the lande of Egypte, and led you .xl. yeares thorowe the wyldernesse, that ye myghte haue the Amorytes lande in possession.
Amos 2:11 I raysed vp prophetes amonge your children, and absteyners among youre younge men. Is it not so. O ye chyldren of Israel, sayeth the Lorde?
Amos 2:12 But ye gaue the abstayners wyne to drincke, yea ye commaunded the Prophetes, sayinge: Prophecye not.
Amos 2:13 Beholde, I will crashe you in sonder, lyke as a wayne crassheth, that is full of sheaues,
Amos 2:14 so that the swifte shall not escape, nether the strong be able to do anye thynge: no, the gyaunt shal not saue hys owne lyfe.
Amos 2:15 The archer shal not abyde, and the swyfte of fote shall not escape. The horsman shal not saue hys lyfe
Amos 2:16 & he that is as manlye of stomacke as a gyaunte, shall in that day be fayne to runne hys waye naked, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 3

Amos 3:1 Heare, what the Lorde speaketh vnto you (O ye chyldren of Israel) namely, vnto all the tribes whome I broughte oute of Egypte, and sayd:
Amos 3:2 you only haue I accepted from all the generacyons of the earthe: therfore wyl I vyset you in all youre wickednesses.
Amos 3:3 Maye twayne walke together, excepte they be agreed amonge them selues?
Amos 3:4 Doth a lyon roare in the woodde, excepte he haue a praye? Or cryeth a lyons whelpe oute of hys denne, excepte he haue gotten somthing?
Amos 3:5 Doth a byrde fall in a snare vpon the earthe, where no fouler is? Taketh a man hys snare vp from the grounde, afore he catche somwhat?
Amos 3:6 Crye they oute alarum wyth the trompet in the cytye, and the people not afrayed? Commeth there anye plage in a cytye withoute it be the Lordes doynge?
Amos 3:7 Nowe doth the Lorde God no maner of thynge, but he telleth hys secrete before vnto hys seruauntes the Prophetes.
Amos 3:8 When a lyon roareth, who wyll not be afrayed? Seynge then that the Lord God him selfe speaketh, who wyll not prophecye?
Amos 3:9 Preache in the palaces at Asdod, and in the palaces of the lande of Egypte, and saye: gather you together vpon the mountaynes of Samaria, so shall ye se greate murther and vyolente oppressyon amonge them, for why, they regarde not the thyng that is ryght
Amos 3:10 saith the Lorde: they gather together euyll gotten goodes, and laye vp robbery in theyr houses.
Amos 3:11 Therfore thus sayth the Lorde God. This lande shalbe troubled and beseged rounde aboute, thy strength shalbe plucte from the, & thy palaces robbed.
Amos 3:12 Thus sayeth the Lorde lyke as an hyrdeman taketh two legges or a pece of an eare oute of the lions mouth: Euen so the chyldren of Israel (that dwell in Samaria, hauynge theyr couches in the corner, and theyr beddes at Damascus) shalbe plucte awaye.
Amos 3:13 Heare, and beare recorde in the house of Iacob (sayeth the Lorde GOD of hostes)
Amos 3:14 that when I begynne to vyset the wickednes of Israel, I wyll viset the aulters at Bethell also, so that the hornes of the aulter shalbe broken of, and fall to the grounde.
Amos 3:15 As for the wynter house and sommer house I wyll smyte them doune, and the houses of Iuery, yea, & many other houses shal perysh, and be destroyed, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 4

Amos 4:1 O heare thys worde ye fat kyne, that be vpon the hil of Samaria: ye that do poore men wronge, and oppresse the nedy: ye that saye to your Lordes: bring hyther, let vs drincke.
Amos 4:2 Therfore the Lorde hath sworne by his holinesse. The dayes shal come vpon you, that ye shalbe lyft vp vpon speares, & your posteryte caryed away in fyshers panyers.
Amos 4:3 Ye shall get you out at the gappes one after another, and in Armon shall ye be caste awaye, sayeth the Lorde.
Amos 4:4 Ye came to Bethell for to worke vngracyousnes, and haue increased youre synnes at Galgal: ye broughte youre sacryfyces in the mornynge, and youre tythes vnto the thyrde daye.
Amos 4:5 Ye made a thanke offerynge of leuen, ye promysed, fre wyl offerynges, and proclamed them. Suche luste had ye, O ye chyldren of Israel, sayeth the Lorde God.
Amos 4:6 Therfore haue I geuen you ydle teeth in all youre cytyes, and carnesse of bread in all your places, yet wil ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
Amos 4:7 When here were but thre monethes vnto the haruest I wythhelde the rayne from you: yea I rayned vpon one cytye, and not vpon another, one pece of grounde was moystured wyth rayne, and the grounde that I rayned not vpon was drye.
Amos 4:8 Wherfore two, yea thre cytes came vnto one to dryncke water: but they were not satisfyed, yet wyll ye not, turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
Amos 4:9 I haue smiten you with drouth & blasting: and loke howe manye orchardes, vineyardes, fyggetrees & olyue trees ye had: the caterpyller hath eaten them vp. But yet wil ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
Amos 4:10 Pestylence haue I sente amonge you, as I dyd in Egipt: youre yong men haue I slayne with the swerd, and caused youre horses be taken captyue: I made the stynkynge sauoure of youre tentes to come vp into youre nostrels: Yet wyll ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
Amos 4:11 Some of you haue I ouerthrowen, as I ouerthrew Sodome and Gomorre, so that ye were as brand plucte oute of the fyre. Yet wyll ye not turne vnto me, sayeth the Lorde.
Amos 4:12 Therfore thus wyl I handle the agayn, O Israel, yea, euen thus wyl I handle the. Make the ready then to mete thy God, O Israel.
Amos 4:13 For lo, he maketh the mountaynes, he ordeyneth the wynde, he sheweth man what he is aboute to do: he maketh the mornynge & the darcknesse: he treadeth vpon the hye places of the earthe: the Lorde God of hostes is hys name.

CHAPTER: 5

Amos 5:1 Heare thys worde, O ye house of Israel, & why I must make thys moue for you:
Amos 5:2 The vyrgyn Israel shall fal, and neuer ryse vp agayne: she shalbe cast donne vpon her owne grounde, and no man shall helpe her vp.
Amos 5:3 For thus sayth the Lorde God: Where as there dwelt a .M. in one citie there shalbe lefte scarce an hundreth therein: & where there dwelt an .C. there shal scarce ten be left for the house of Israel.
Amos 5:4 Neuerthelesse, thus sayth the Lorde vnto the house of Israel: Seke after me, and ye shall lyue,
Amos 5:5 but seke not after Bethel. Come not at Galgal, & go not to Bersaba, for Galgal shalbe caryed awaye captyue, & Bethel shal come to naught.
Amos 5:6 Seke the Lorde, that ye maye lyue, leste the house of Ioseph be brente with fyre, and consumed, & lest there be none to quenche Bethel.
Amos 5:7 Ye turne the lawe to worm wode, and caste doune ryghtuousnes vnto the grounde.
Amos 5:8 The Lorde maketh the seuen starres and the Dryons, he turneth the nighte into daye, and of the daye he maketh darcknesse. He calleth the waters of the sea, and poureth them oute vpon the playne grounde: the Lorde is hys name:
Amos 5:9 He rayseth destruccyon vpon the myghty people, and bringeth doune the stronge hold:
Amos 5:10 but they owe hym euill wil, that reproueth them openly, and who so telleth them the playn truth they abhorre hi
Amos 5:11 For so muche then as ye oppresse the poore, & robbe him of his best sustenaunce: therfore, where as ye haue buylded houses of square stone, ye shall not dwel in them. Maruelous pleasaunt vyneyardes shal ye plante, but the wyne of them shall ye not drynck: and why?
Amos 5:12 as for the multitude of your wickednesses and your stout synnes, I know them ryghte well. Euemyes are ye of the ryghtuous, ye take rewardes, ye oppresse the poore in iudgement.
Amos 5:13 Therfore the wyse muste nowe be fayne to holde hys tunge, so wicked a time is it.
Amos 5:14 Seke after the thynge that is good, & not euill, so shall ye lyue: yea the Lorde God of hostes shall be wyth you, accordyng to your owne desyre.
Amos 5:15 Hate the euil, and loue the good: set vp right agayne in the porte: & (no doute) the Lorde God of hostes shal be mercyful vnto the remnaunt of Ioseph,
Amos 5:16 If no (sayeth the Lorde God, the God of hostes) there shal be mournynge in all stretes, yea they shal say in euerye strete: alas, alas. They shal cal the husband man to lamentacyon, and suche as can mourne to mournynge.
Amos 5:17 In all vyneiardes there shall be heuynesse, for I wil come among you, sayeth the Lorde.
Amos 5:18 Wo be vnto them that desyre the daye of the Lorde, Wherfore wold ye haue it? As for the daye of the Lorde, it shal be darcke and not cleare:
Amos 5:19 Yea lyke as when a man runneth from a lyon, and a beer meteth with him: or when he commeth into the house, and leaneth hys hande vpon the wall, a serpent diteth hym.
Amos 5:20 Shall not the daye of the Lord be darcke, and not cleare? shall it not be cloudye, and no shyne in it?
Amos 5:21 I hate and abhorre youre holye dayes, & where as ye cense me when ye come together I wyll not accepte it:
Amos 5:22 And though ye offre me brentofferynges, and meateofferynges, yet haue I no pleasure therein. As for youre fat thanckeofferinges, I wil not loke vpon them.
Amos 5:23 Awaye with that noyse of thy songes, I wyl not heare thy playes of musycke:
Amos 5:24 but se that equite flowe as the water, and ryghtuousnesse as a mightie streame.
Amos 5:25 O ye house of Israell, gaue ye me offeringes and sacrifyces those .xl. yeares long in the wyldernes?
Amos 5:26 yet haue ye set vp tabernacles to your Moloch, and Images of youre Idols, yea, and the starre of youre God Rempha, figures which ye made to worshyppe them.
Amos 5:27 Therfore will I cause you be caryed awaye beyonde Damascus, sayeth the Lorde, whose name is the God of hostes.

CHAPTER: 6

Amos 6:1 O wo be to the proude welthy in Syon to suche as thincke them so sure vpon the mounte of Samaria? which holde them selues for the beste of the worlde, and rule the house of Israel, euen as they lyst.
Amos 6:2 Go vnto Calne, and se: & from thence get you to Hemath the greate cytye, and so go doune to Gath of the Philistines: be they better at ease then these kyngedomes, or the border of theyr lande wyder then yours?
Amos 6:3 Ye are taken out for the euyll daye, euen ye that syt in the stole of wilfulnesse:
Amos 6:4 Ye that lye vpon beddes of Iuerye, and vse your wantonnesse vpon your rouches: ye that eate the beste lambes of the flocke, and the fattest calues of the droaue:
Amos 6:5 ye that singe to the lute, & in playenge of instrumentes compare youre selues vnto Dauid:
Amos 6:6 ye that drincke wyne oute of goblettes, and annoynte youre selues with the best oyle, but no man is sorye for Iosephs hurte.
Amos 6:7 Therfor now shal ye be the fyrst of them, that shal be led awaye captyue, and the lusty chere of the wylfull shal come to an ende.
Amos 6:8 The Lorde God hath sworne euen by himselfe (sayeth the Lorde God of hostes) I hate the pryde of Iacob, and I abhorre his palaces and I wyll geue ouer the cytie, with all that is therein:
Amos 6:9 so that thoughe there remayne ten men in one house, they shal dye.
Amos 6:10 So their next kynsfolkes and the dead buryers shall take them, and carye awaye theyr bones, and saye vnto hym, that is in the ynnermer house: is there yet any mo by the? And he shal answere: they are al gone, holde thy tunge (shal he say) for they wolde not remembre the name of the Lorde.
Amos 6:11 Beholde, the Lorde is mynded to smyte the greate houses, so that they shall decaye: & the lytle houses, that they shall cleue a sunder.
Amos 6:12 Who can runne with horses, or plow with oxen vpon the herde rockes of stone? For why? ye haue turned true iudgement into bytternesse, & the frute of ryghtuousnesse into worm wood:
Amos 6:13 Yea, euen ye, that reioyse in vayne thinges, ye that say: haue not we obtayned hornes in oure owne strength?
Amos 6:14 Wel, take hede, O ye house of Israel, sayeth the Lorde God of hostes: I wyll brynge a people vpon you, which shall trouble you, from the waye that goeth towarde Hemath, vnto the broke in the medowe.

CHAPTER: 7

Amos 7:1 The Lorde God shewed me such a vysyon: beholde, there stode one that made gresshoppers, euen when the corne was shuting forth, after the kinge had clypte hys shepe.
Amos 7:2 Nowe when they vndertoke to eat vp all the greue thynges in the lande, I sayd: O Lorde God, be mercyfull, I beseche the: who shuld els help vp Iacob, that is brought so lowe?
Amos 7:3 So the Lorde was gracyons therin, and the Lorde sayde: well, it shal not be.
Amos 7:4 Agayne the Lorde shewed me thys vysyon: beholde, the Lorde God called the fyre to punish withal, and it deuoured the greate depe: yea it consumed a parte already.
Amos 7:5 Then sayd I Lord God, holde thyne hande: for who shulde els helpe vp Iacob, that is brought so lowe?
Amos 7:6 So the Lorde was mercyfull therein, and the Lord God sayde: well, it shall not be.
Amos 7:7 Moreouer, he shewed me thys vysyon: beholde, the Lorde stode vpon a plastered wall, and a masons trowel in hys lande.
Amos 7:8 And the Lorde sayd vnto me: Amos, what seyst thou? I aunswered: a masons trowel. Then sayde the Lorde: Beholde, I wyl laye the trowel among my people of Israel, and wyll no more ouerse them:
Amos 7:9 but the hye hylchapels of Isaac must be layed waste, and the churches of Israell made desolate: and as for the house of Ieroboam, I wyl stand vp agaynst with the swerd.
Amos 7:10 Vpon this sent Amasiah the prest to Bethell vnto Ieroboam the kynge of Israel, sayinge: Amos maketh the house of Israel to rebell agaynst the, the lande can not awaye with his wordes.
Amos 7:11 For Amos sayeth, Ieroboam shall dye with the swearde, and Israel shall be led awaye captyue oute of theyr owne land.
Amos 7:12 And Amasiah sayde vnto Amos: Get the hence (thou that caust se so well) & fle into the lande of Iuda: get the there thy lyuynge, and prophecye there:
Amos 7:13 and prophecye no more at Bethell, for it is the kynges chapell, and the kynges courte.
Amos 7:14 Amos aunswered, and sayde to Amasiah: As for me I am neyther Prophet, nor prophetes sonne: but a keper of catell. Now as I was breakinge downe molberies, and goyng after the catell,
Amos 7:15 the Lorde toke me, and sayde vnto me: Go thy waye, and prophecye vnto my people of Israel.
Amos 7:16 And therfore, heare thou now the word of the Lorde: Thou sayest: prophecye not agaynst Israell, & speake nothing agaynst the house of Isaac.
Amos 7:17 Wherfore thus sayeth the Lord: Thy wyfe shalbe defyled in the cytye, thy sonnes and daughters shall be slayne with the swearde, & thy lande shalbe measured out with the lyne. Thou thy selfe shalt dye in an vnclene lande, & Israel shalbe dryuen out of hys owne countre.

CHAPTER: 8

Amos 8:1 The Lorde God shewed me this vysyon: and beholde, there was a maunde wyth somer fruyte.
Amos 8:2 And he sayde: Amos, what seist thou? I answered: a maunde wyth sommer fruyte. Then sayde the Lorde vnto me: the ende commeth vpon my people of Israell, I wyll no more ouerse them.
Amos 8:3 In that daye shall the songes of the temple be turned in to sorowe, sayeth the Lorde God. Many deed bodyes shall lye in euery place, and be caste forth secretelye.
Amos 8:4 Heare this, O ye that oppresse the poore, and destroye the nedy in the lande, saying:
Amos 8:5 When wil the new moneth be gone, that we maye sell vytale, & the Sabboth, that we maye haue scarcenesse of corne: to make the busshell lesse, and the Sycle greater?
Amos 8:6 We shal set vp false waightes that we maye gett the poore vnder vs wyth their money, and the nedy also for shues: yee let vs sell the chaffe for corne.
Amos 8:7 The Lorde hath sworne agaynst the pride of Iacob: these workes of theirs wyl I neuer forget.
Amos 8:8 Shall not the lande tremble, and all they that dwell therin, mourne for thys? Shall not their destruccyon come vpon them lyke a water streame, and flowe ouer them, as the floude of Egypte?
Amos 8:9 At the same tyme (sayeth the Lorde God) I shall cause the Sunne to go downe at none, and the land to be darcke in the cleare daye.
Amos 8:10 Youre hye feastes wyll I turne to sorowe, and youre songes to mournynge: I wyll bringe sack cloth vpon al backes, and baldnes vpon euery head: yee soch a mournynge wyll I sende them, as is made vpon an only begotten sonne, and they shall haue a miserable ende.
Amos 8:11 Beholde, the tyme commeth (sayeth the Lord God) that I shal sende an hunger in to the earth: not the hunger of bread, ner the thyrst of water: but an hunger to heare the worde of the Lorde:
Amos 8:12 so that they shall go from the one sea to the other yee from the north vnto the east, runnyng aboute to seke the worde of the Lorde, and shall not fynde it.
Amos 8:13 In that tyme, shall the fayre virgins and the yonge men perysh for thyrst,
Amos 8:14 yee euen they that sweare in the offence of Samaria, and saye: as trulye as thy God lyueth at Dan, and as trulye as thy God lyueth at Bersaba. These shall fall, and neuer ryse vp agayne.

CHAPTER: 9

Amos 9:1 I sawe the Lord standynge vpon the aulter, and he sayde; smyte the dore cheke, that the postes maye shake withall. For theyr couetousnesse shal fall vpon al their heades, and their posterite shalbe slayne wyth the swerde. They shall not fle awaye, there shall not one of them escape, ner be delyuered.
Amos 9:2 Though they were buryed in the hell, my hande shall fetch them from thence: though they clymme vp to heauen, yet shall I cast them downe:
Amos 9:3 though they hyde them selues vpon the toppe of Carmell, yet shall I seke them out, and brynge them from thence: Though they crepe downe from my syght into the depe of the sea, I shall commaunde the serpente, euen there to byte them.
Amos 9:4 If they goo awaye before their enemyes in to captyuite, then shall I commaunde the swerde, there to slayue them. Thus wyll I sett myne eyes vpon them, for their harme, & not for their wealth.
Amos 9:5 For when the Lorde God of hoostes toucheth a lande, it consumeth awaye, and all they that dwell therin, muste nedes mourne: And why? theyr destruccyon shall aryse as euery streame and runne ouer them, as the floude in Egipte.
Amos 9:6 He that hath hys dwellynge in heauen, & groundeth hys tabernacle in the earth: He that calleth the waters of the sea, and poureth them out vpon the playne grounde: hys name is the Lorde.
Amos 9:7 O ye chyldren of Israell, are ye not vnto me, euen as the Moryans, sayeth the Lorde? haue not I brought Israell out of the land of Egypte, the Philystues from Capthor, and the Sirians from Cyr?
Amos 9:8 Beholde, the eyes of the Lorde are vpon the realme that synneth, to rote it clene out of the earth: Neuertheles, I wyll not vtterly destroye the house of Iacob, sayeth the Lorde.
Amos 9:9 For lo thys I promyse: though I syfte the house of Israell amonge all nacyons (like as they vse to lyfte in a syue) yet shall not the smallest grauell stone fall vpon the earth:
Amos 9:10 But all the wicked doers of my people, that saye: Tush, the plage is not so nye, to come so hastely vpon vs: those shall perish with the swerde.
Amos 9:11 At that tyme wyll I buylde agayne the tabernacle of Dauid, that is fallen downe and hedge vp hys gappes: and loke what is broken, I shall repayre it: Yee I shall buylde it agayne, as it was a fore tyme,
Amos 9:12 that they maye possesse the remnaunt of Edom, yee & all soch people as call vpon my name wyth them sayeth the Lorde, whyche doeth these thynges.
Amos 9:13 Beholde, the tyme commeth (sayeth the Lorde) that plowman shall ouer take the mower, & the treader of grappes, hym that soweth sede. The mountaynes shall droppe swete wyne, and the hylles shalbe fruyteful,
Amos 9:14 and I will turne the captyuyte of my people of Israell: they shall repayre the waste cytyes, and haue them in possession: they shal plante vynyardes, and drinke the wine therof: they shal make gardens, & enioye the fruytes of them.
Amos 9:15 And I wyll plante them vpon their owne grounde, so that I wyll neuer rote them out agayne from their lande which I haue geuen them sayeth the Lorde thy God.

BOOK: Obadiah

CHAPTER: 1

Obadiah 1:1 Thys is the vysyon that was shewed vnto Abdy: Thus hath the Lorde God spoken vpon Edom: We haue hearde of the Lord that there is an embassage sent amonge the Heathen: Vp, let vs aryse, and fyght agaynst them.
Obadiah 1:2 Beholde, I wyll make the small amonge the Heathen, so that thou shalt be vtterly despysed.
Obadiah 1:3 The pryde of thyne herte hath lyft the vp, thou that dwellest in the stronge holdes of stone, & haste made the an hye seate: Thou sayest in thyne hert: who shall cast me downe to the grounde?
Obadiah 1:4 But though thou wentest vp as hye as the Aegle, and maydest thy nest aboue amonge the starres: yet wylde I plucke the downe from thence.
Obadiah 1:5 Yf the theues and robbers came to the by nyght, thou takinge thy reste: shulde they not steale, tyll they had ynough? Yf the grape gatherers came vpon the, wolde they not leaue the some grapes?
Obadiah 1:6 But how shall they rype Esau, and seke out hys treasures?
Obadiah 1:7 Yee the men that were sworne vnto the, shall dryue the out of the borders of thyne owne lande. They that be now at one wyth the, shall dysceyue the, & ouercome the: Euen they that eate thy bread, shall betraye the, or euer thou perceyue it.
Obadiah 1:8 Shall not I at the same tyme destroye the wyse men of Edom, & those that haue vnderstandynge, from the mount of Esau?
Obadiah 1:9 Thy gyauntes (O Theman) shalbe afrayed, for thorow the slaughter they shalbe all ouerthrowne vpon the mount of Esau.
Obadiah 1:10 Shame shall come vpon the, for the malyce that thou shewedest to thy brother Iacob: yee for euermore shalt thou perysh,
Obadiah 1:11 and that because of the tyme: when thou dydest set thy selfe agaynst hym, euen when the enemyes caryed awaye his hooste, and when the aleauntes came in at hys portes, and cast lottes vpon Ierusalem, and thou thy selfe wast as one of them.
Obadiah 1:12 Thou shalt nomore se the daye of thy brother, thou shalt nomore beholde the tyme of hys captiuite: thou shalt nomore reioyse ouer the chyldren of Iuda, in the daye of their destruccyon, thou shalt tryumphe nomore in the tyme of their trouble.
Obadiah 1:13 Thou shalt no more come in at the gates of my people, in the tyme of their decaye: thou shalt no se their mysery in the daye of their fall. Thou shalt sende out no man agaynst their hooste, in the daye of their aduersyte:
Obadiah 1:14 nether shalt thou stande waytynge any more at the corners of stretes, to murthur soch as are fled or to take them presoners, that remayne in the daye of their trouble.
Obadiah 1:15 For the daye of the Lord is harde by vpon all the Heathen. Lyke as thou hast done, so shalt thou be dealte wythall, yee thou shalt be rewarded euen vpon thyne head.
Obadiah 1:16 For lyke wyse as ye haue droncken vpon myne holy hyll, so shall all Heathen dryncke contynually: yee dryncke shall they, and swalowe vp, so that ye shalbe, as though ye had neuer bene.
Obadiah 1:17 But vpon the mount Syon, there shall a remnaunt escape: these shalbe holye, and the house of Iacob shall possesse euen those, that had them selues afore in possessyon.
Obadiah 1:18 Moreouer, the house of Iacob shalbe a fyre, the house of Ioseph a flame, & the house of Esau shalbe the strawe, whych they shall kyndle and consume, so that nothynge shalbe left of the house of Esau, for the Lorde hym self hath sayde it.
Obadiah 1:19 They of the South shall haue the mount of Esau in possession: and loke what lyeth vpon the grounde, that shall the Philistines haue: the playne feldes shall Ephraim & Samaria possesse: and the mountaynes of Galaad shal BenIamin haue.
Obadiah 1:20 And thys hoost shalbe the chyldren of Israels presoners: Now what so lyeth from Canaan vnto Zareptah, and in Sepharad, that shalbe vnder the subieccion of Ierusalem: and the cytyes of the south shall enheret it.
Obadiah 1:21 Thus they that escape vpon the hyll of Syon, shall go vp to punysh the mount of Esau and the kyngdome shallbe the Lordes.

BOOK: Jonah

CHAPTER: 1

Jonah 1:1 The worde of the Lorde came vnto Ionas the sonne of Amithai, saying:
Jonah 1:2 Aryse, and get the to Niniue that greate cyte: & preache vnto them, how that their wyckednes is come vp before me.
Jonah 1:3 And Ionas made hym ready to fle vnto Tharsis from the presence of the Lord, and gat hym downe to Ioppa: where he founde a shyppe ready for to go vnto Tharsis. So he payde his fare, & wente aborde, that he myght go wyth them vnto Tharsis, from the presence of the Lorde.
Jonah 1:4 But the Lorde hurled a greate wynde into the sea, and there was a myghtye tempest in the sea: so that the shippe was in ieoperdy of goinge in peces.
Jonah 1:5 Then the maryners were afrayde, & cryed euery man vnto hys God: & the goodes that were in the shyppe, they cast in to the sea, to lyghten it of them. But Ionas gat hym vnder the hatches, where he layed hym downe and slombred.
Jonah 1:6 So the master of the shyppe came to hym and sayde vnto hym: why slomberest thou? Vp, call vpon thy God: yf God (happely) wil thyncke vpon vs, that we peryshe not.
Jonah 1:7 And they sayde one to another: come, lett vs cast lottes: that we maye knowe, for whose cause we are thus troubled. And so they cast lottes, and the lot fell vpon Ionas.
Jonah 1:8 Then sayde they vnto him: tel vs, for whose cause are we thus troubled? what is thyne occupacyon? whence commest thou? what countre man art thou, and of what nacyon?
Jonah 1:9 He answered them: I am an Ebreue, and I feare the Lorde God of heauen, whych made both the sea & drye lande.
Jonah 1:10 Then where the men exceadingly afrayed, & sayde vnto hym: why didest thou so? (for they knewe, that he was fled from the presence of the Lord, because he had tolde them)
Jonah 1:11 & sayde moreouer vnto hym: What shal we do vnto the, that the sea maye ceasse from troubling vs? (for the sea wrought & was troublous)
Jonah 1:12 he answered them: Take me, and cast me in to the sea, so shall it let you be in rest: for I wote, it is for my sake, that this great tempest is come vpon you.
Jonah 1:13 Neuerthelesse, the men assayed with rouwynge, to bringe the shyppe to lande: but it wolde not be, because the sea wrought so, and was so troublous agaynst them.
Jonah 1:14 Wherfore they cryed vnto the Lord, & sayde: O Lord lett vs not perish for this mans death, nether laye thou innocent bloude vnto oure charge: for thou, O Lorde, hast done, euen as thy pleasure was.
Jonah 1:15 So they toke Ionas, & cast hym in to the sea, & the sea left ragyng.
Jonah 1:16 And the men feared the Lorde exceadingly, doyng sacrifices and makinge vowes vnto the Lorde.
Jonah 1:17 Bvt the Lorde prepared a greate fyshe, to swalow vp Ionas. So was Ionas in the bely of the fysh, thre dayes & thre nightes.

CHAPTER: 2

Jonah 2:1 And Ionas prayed vnto the Lord his God, out of the fysshes bely,
Jonah 2:2 & sayde: In my trouble I called vnto the Lord, & he herde me: out of the bely of hell I cryed, and thou herdest my voyce.
Jonah 2:3 Thou haddest cast me downe depe in the myddest of the sea, and the floude compassed me aboute: yee all thy waues and roules of water went ouer me,
Jonah 2:4 I thought that I had bene cast awaye out of thy syght: but I wyll yet agayne loke towarde thy holy temple.
Jonah 2:5 The waters compased me, euen to the very soule, the depe laye aboute me, and the wedes were wrapte aboute myne head.
Jonah 2:6 I went downe to the botome af the hylles, and was barred in wyth earth for euer. But thou, O Lorde my God, haste brought vp my lyfe agayne out of corrupcyon.
Jonah 2:7 When my soule faynted within me, I thought vpon the Lord: & my prayer came in vnto the, euen in to thy holy temple.
Jonah 2:8 They that holde of vayue vanyties, will forsake hys mercy.
Jonah 2:9 But I wyll do the sacryfyce wyth the voyce of thankesgeuynge, and wil paye that I haue vowed: for why? saluacion commeth of the Lorde.
Jonah 2:10 And the Lorde spake vnto the fysh, and it cast out Ionas agayne vpon the drye lande.

CHAPTER: 3

Jonah 3:1 Then came the worde of the Lorde vnto Ionas agayne, sayenge:
Jonah 3:2 vp, and get the to Niniue that great cytye, & preache vnto them the preachinge whyche I bade the.
Jonah 3:3 So Ionas arose, and wente to Niniue at the Lordes commaundement. Niniue was a greate cyte vnto God, namely, of thre dayes iourney.
Jonah 3:4 And Ionas wente to, and entred in to the cytie: euen a dayes iourney, & cryed, sayenge: There are yet .xl. dayes and then shall Niniue be ouerthrowen.
Jonah 3:5 And the people of Niniue beleued God, and proclamed fastynge, and arayed them selues in sack cloth, as wel the greate as the small of them.
Jonah 3:6 And the tydinges came vnto the kynge of Niniue, whyche arose out of hys seate, and dyd hys apparell of, and put on sack cloth, & sate hym downe in asshes.
Jonah 3:7 And it was cryed and commaunded in Niniue, by the auctorite of the king and hys lordes, sayenge: se that nether man or beast, oxe or shepe taste ought at all: and that they nether fede ner drinke water:
Jonah 3:8 but put on sack cloth both man and beast, and crye myghtely vnto God: yee se that euery man turne from hys euell waye, and from the wyckednesse, that he hath in hande.
Jonah 3:9 Who can tell? God maye turne, & repente & cease from his fearce wrath, that we perish not.
Jonah 3:10 And when God sawe their workes, how they turned from their wicked wayes, he repented on the euell, whych he sayde he wolde do vnto them, and dyd it not.

CHAPTER: 4

Jonah 4:1 Therfore Ionas was sore dyscontent & angrye.
Jonah 4:2 And he prayed vnto the Lord, & sayde: O Lord was not thys my sayinge (I praye the) when I was yet in my countre? therfore I hasted rather to fle vnto Tharsis, for I know well ynough that thou art a mercyfull God, full of compassion, long sufferyng, & of a great kyndnesse, & repentest when thou shuldest take punishment.
Jonah 4:3 And now O Lord, take my lyfe fro me (I beseche the) for I had rather dye then lyue.
Jonah 4:4 Then sayde the Lord: art thou so angrie?
Jonah 4:5 And Ionas gat hym out of the cytye, & sat downe on the east side therof: & there made hym a boothe, & sat vnder it in the shadow, tyll he myght se, what shulde chaunce vnto the cytie.
Jonah 4:6 And the Lord God prepared a wylde vyne which sprang vp ouer Ionas, that he myght haue shadowe aboue hys head, to delyuer hym out of hys payne. And Ionas was exceadynge glad of the wylde vyne.
Jonah 4:7 But vpon the nexte morowe agaynst thespring of the daye. The Lord ordened a worme which smote the wylde vyne, so that it wethered awaye.
Jonah 4:8 And when the Sunne was vp God prepared a feruent east wynde: and the Sunne bett ouer the head of Ionas, that he faynted agayne, and wisshed vnto hys soule, that he myght dye, and sayde: It is better for me to dye, then to lyue.
Jonah 4:9 And God sayde vnto Ionas: Art thou so angrie for the wylde vyne? And he sayde: yee very angrie am I euen vnto the death.
Jonah 4:10 And the Lorde sayde: thou hast compassion vpon a wylde vyne, wheron thou bestowdest laboure, ner maydest it growe: whyche sprange vp in one nyght & peryshed in another:
Jonah 4:11 And shulde not I then haue compassion vpon Niniue that greate cytye, wherin there are aboue an .C. & .xx. thousand persones, that knowe not their right hand from the lefte, besyde moch catell?

BOOK: Micah

CHAPTER: 1

Micah 1:1 Thys is the worde of the Lord that came vnto Micheas the Morastite, in the dayes of Iothan, Ahas & Iehezekiah kinges of Iuda: which was shewed hym vpon Samaria & Ierusalem.
Micah 1:2 Heare all ye people, marcke thys well O earth, and all that therin is: Yee the Lorde God hym selfe be wytnesse amonge you, euen the Lord from hys holy temple.
Micah 1:3 For why? beholde, the Lord shal go oute of his place, & come downe & treade vpon the hye thynges of the earth.
Micah 1:4 The mountaynes shall consume vnder hym, and the valleyes shall cleue asunder, lyke as wax consumeth at the fyre, & as the waters runne downwarde.
Micah 1:5 And all this shall be for the wyckednesse of Iacob, and the synnes of the house of Israell. But what is the wyckednesse of Iacob? Is not Samaria? Whiche are the hye places of Iuda? Is not Ierusalem?
Micah 1:6 Therfore I shall make Samaria an heape of stones in the felde, to laye aboute the vineyarde: her stones shall I cast in to the valley, & discouer her foundacions.
Micah 1:7 All her Images shalbe broken downe & all her wynnynges shalbe brent in the fyre: yee all her Idols wyll I destroye: for why, they are gathered out of the hyre of an whore, and in to an whores hyre shall they be turned agayne.
Micah 1:8 Wherfore I wyll mourne and make lamentacion, bare & naked wyll I go: I must mourne lyke the dragons, and take sorow as the Estriches:
Micah 1:9 for their wounde is past remedy: And why? it is come in to Iuda, & hath touched the porte of my people at Ierusalem alredy.
Micah 1:10 Wepe not, lest they at Geth perceyue it. Thou at Betaphra, welter thy self in the dust & asshes.
Micah 1:11 Thou that dwellest at Sephir get the hence with shame. The proude shall boost nomore for very sorowe: and why? her neyghboure shall take from her what she hath.
Micah 1:12 The rebellyous cytye hopeth, that it shal not be so euell: but for all that, the plage shall come from the Lorde, euen in to the porte of Ierusalem.
Micah 1:13 The greate noyse of the charettes shal feare them, that dwell at Lachis, whyche is an occasyon of the synne of the daughter of Sion, for in the came vp the wyckednesses of Israell.
Micah 1:14 Yee she sent her coursers in to the lande of Geth. The houses of lyes wyll dysceaue the kinges of Israell.
Micah 1:15 And as for the (O thou that dwellest at Morassa) I shall brynge a possessioner vpon the, and the plage of Israel shall reach vnto Odolla.
Micah 1:16 Make the balde, & shaue the, because of thy tender chyldren: Make the cleane balde as an Aegle, for they shalbe caryed awaye captyue from the.

CHAPTER: 2

Micah 2:1 O wo vnto them, that Imagyn to do harme, & deuyse vngracyousnesse vpon their beddes, to perfourme it in the cleare daye: for there power is agaynst God.
Micah 2:2 When they couet to haue lande, they take it by vyolence, they robbe men of their houses. Thus they oppresse a man for his house, & euery man for hys heretage.
Micah 2:3 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde: Beholde agaynst thys housholde haue I deuysed a plage, wherout ye shal not plucke your neckes: Ye shal nomore go so proudely, for it wyll be a perlous tyme.
Micah 2:4 In that daye shall thys terme be vsed, and a mournynge shalbe made ouer you on thys maner: We be vtterly desolate, the porcyon of my people is translated. When wyll he parte vnto vs the lande, that he hath taken from vs?
Micah 2:5 Neuertheles there shalbe no man to deuyde the thy porcyon in the congregacyon of the Lorde.
Micah 2:6 Tush, holde youre tunge (saye they.) It shall not fall vpon thys people, we shall not come so to confusyon,
Micah 2:7 sayeth the house of Iacob. Is the sprete of the Lorde so cleane awaye? or is he so mynded? Trueth it is, my wordes are frendly vnto them that lyue right:
Micah 2:8 but my people doth the contrary, therfore must I take parte agaynst them: for they take awaye both cote and cloke from the symyle. Ie haue turned youre selues to fyght,
Micah 2:9 the wemen of my people haue ye shot out from their good houses, and taken away my excellent gyftes from their chyldren.
Micah 2:10 Vp, get you hence, for here shall ye haue no rest. Because of their Idolatrye they are corrupte, & shall myserably perishe.
Micah 2:11 If I were a fleshlye felowe, & a preacher of lyes, & tolde them that they myght syt bebbynge & bollyng, and be droncken: O that were a Prophete for this people.
Micah 2:12 But I wyll gather the in dede, O Iacob, & dryue the remnaunt of Israell all together I shall cary them one wyth another, as a flocke in the folde, and as the catell in their stalles, that they maye be dysquyeted of other men.
Micah 2:13 Who so breaketh the gappe, he shall go before. They shal breake vp the porte, and go in and out at it. Their kynge shall go before them, and the Lorde shallbe vpon the head of them.

CHAPTER: 3

Micah 3:1 Heare, O ye heades of the house of Iacob, & peleders of the house of Israel: Shulde not ye know what were lawfull and ryght?
Micah 3:2 But ye hate the good, and loue the euell: ye plucke of mennes skynnes, and the flesh from their bones:
Micah 3:3 ye eate the flesh of my people, and slay of their skynne: ye breake their bones, ye choppe them in peces as it were in to a cauldron, and as flesh into a pot.
Micah 3:4 Now the tyme shall come, that when they call vnto the Lorde, he shall not heare them, but hyde hys face from them, because that thorowe their owne Imaginacyons they haue dealte so wyckedly.
Micah 3:5 And as concernynge the prophetes that disceyue my people, thus the Lorde sayeth agaynst them: When they haue enye thynge to byte vpon, then they preach that all shalbe well: but yf a man put not some thynge is to their mouthes, they preach of warre agaynst hym.
Micah 3:6 Therfore youre vysyon shallbe turned to night, & youre prophecyenge to darckness. The Sunne shall go downe ouer those prophetes, and the daye shalbe darcke vnto them.
Micah 3:7 Then shall the vysyon seers be ashamed, and the suthsayers confounded: yee they shallbe fayne, all the packe of them, to stoppe their mouthes, for they haue not Gods worde.
Micah 3:8 As for me, I am full of strength, and of the sprete of the Lorde, full of iudment and boldnesse: to shewe the house of Iacob their wyckednesse, and the house of Israell their synne.
Micah 3:9 O heare this ye rulers of the house of Iacob, and ye iudges of the house of Israell: ye that abhorre the thynge that is laufull, and wrayst asyde the thynge that is streyght.
Micah 3:10 Ye that buylde vp Syon wyth bloude, and Ierusalem wyth doynge wronge.
Micah 3:11 O ye iudges, ye geue sentence for gyftes: O ye preastes, ye teach for lucre: O ye Prophetes, ye prophecy for monye. Yet wyll they be taken as those that holde vpon God, and saye: Is not the Lorde amonge vs? Tushe, there can no mysfortune happen vs.
Micah 3:12 Therfore shall Syon (for youre sakes) be plowed lyke a felde: Ierusalem shalbe come an heape of stones, and the hyll of the temple shalbe turned to an hye wodde.

CHAPTER: 4

Micah 4:1 Bvt in the latter dayes it wyll come to passe, that the hyll of the Lordes house shallbe sett vp hyer then enye mountaynes or hylles: Yee the people shall prease vnto it,
Micah 4:2 and the multitude of the Gentyles shall haste them thyther, sayeng: Come lett vs go vp to the hyll of the Lorde, and to the house of the God of Iacob: that he maye teach vs hys wayes, & that we maye walke in hys parthes. For the lawe shall come out of Sion, and the worde of God from Ierusalem,
Micah 4:3 and shall geue sentence amonge the multytude of the Heathen and refourme the people of farre countrees: so that of their sweardes they shall make plowshares, and sythes of their speares. One people shall not lyft vp a swearde agaynst another, yee they shal nomore learne to fyght:
Micah 4:4 but euerye man shall syt vnder hys vineyarde and vnder his fygetre, & no man to fraye hym awaye: for the mouth of the Lord of hostes hath spoken it.
Micah 4:5 Therfore, where as all the people haue walcked euery man in the name of hys owne God, we wyll walcke in the name of oure God for euer and euer.
Micah 4:6 At the same tyme, sayeth the Lorde, wyll I gather vp the lame and the outcastes, and soche as I haue chastened:
Micah 4:7 & wyll geue yssue vnto the lame, and make of the out castes a greate people: and the Lorde hym selfe shalbe their kynge vpon the mount Sion, from this tyme forth for euermore.
Micah 4:8 And vnto the (O thou tower of Eder, thou strong holde of the doughther Sion) vnto the shall it come: euen the lordshype and kyngdome of the daughter Ierusalem.
Micah 4:9 Why then art thou now so heuy? is there no Kynge in the? are they councelers awaye that thou art so payned, as a woman in her trauayle?
Micah 4:10 And now (O thou daughter Sion) be sory, let it greue the as a wyfe laborynge wyth chyld: for now must thou gett the out of the cytie, & dwell vpon the playne felde: Yee vnto Babylon shalt thou go, there shalt thou be delyuered, and there the Lorde shall lowse the from the hande of thyne enemyes.
Micah 4:11 Now also are there manye people gathered together agaynst the, sayinge: what, Sion is cursed, we shal se oure lust vpon her.
Micah 4:12 But they knowe not the thoughtes of the Lorde, they vnderstande not hys councell, that shal gather them together as the sheeues in the barne.
Micah 4:13 Therfore get the vp, O thou doughter Sion, & throsshe out the corne: For I wyll make thy horne yron, and thy clawes brasse, that thou mayest grynde many people their goodes shalt thou appropriate vnto the Lorde, and their substaunce vnto the ruler of the whole worlde.

CHAPTER: 5

Micah 5:1 After that shalt thou be robbed thy selfe, O thou robbers daughter: they shall laye sege agaynst vs, & smyte the iudge of Israell wyth a rodde vpon the cheke.
Micah 5:2 And thou Bethleem Ephrata, art lytle among the thousandes of Iuda, Out of the shall come vnto me, whyche shall be the gouernoure in Israell: whose out goinge hath bene from the begynnyge, and from euerlastynge.
Micah 5:3 In the meane whyle he plageth them for a season, vntyll the tyme that she (whyche shall beare) haue borne: then shall the remnaunt of hys brethren be conuerted vnto the chyldren of Israell.
Micah 5:4 He shall stande fast, and geue fode in the strength of the Lorde, and in the vyctorye of the name of the Lorde hys God: and when they be conuerted, he shal be magnifyed vnto the farthest partes of the worlde.
Micah 5:5 Then shall there be peace, so that the Assirian maye come in to oure lande, and treade in oure houses. We shall brynge vp seuen shepherdes and .viij. prynces vpon them:
Micah 5:6 these shall subdue the lande of Assur wyth the swerde, and the lande of Nymrod wyth their naked weapens. Thus shall he delyuer vs from the Assirian, when he commeth within oure lande, & setteth hys fote wythin oure borders.
Micah 5:7 And the remnaunt of Iacob shalbe amonge the multytude of people, as the dewe of the Lorde, and as the droppes vpon the grasse, that tarieth for no man, & wayteth of no body.
Micah 5:8 Yee the resydue of Iacob shalbe amonge the Gentyles and the multitude of people, as the lyon amonge the beastes of the wod, and as the Lyons whelpe amonge a flocke of shepe: whyche (when he goeth thorowe) treadeth downe, teareth in peces, and there is no man that can helpe.
Micah 5:9 Thyne hande shalbe lyft vp vpon thyne enemyes, and all thyne aduersaries shall perish.
Micah 5:10 The tyme shall come also, sayeth the Lord, that I wyll take thyne horses from the, and destroye thy charettes.
Micah 5:11 I wyll breake downe the cytyes of thy lande, and ouerthrowe all thy stronge holdes.
Micah 5:12 All witchcraftes wyll I rote oute of thyne hande, there shall no mo soyth sayinges be within the.
Micah 5:13 Thyne Idols and thyne Images will I destroye out of the so that thou shalt nomore bowe thy selfe vnto the worckes of thyne owne handes.
Micah 5:14 Thy groues wyll I plucke vp by the rotes, and breake downe the cyties.
Micah 5:15 Thus wyll I be auenged also, vpon all the Heathen that wyll not heare.

CHAPTER: 6

Micah 6:1 Herken now what the Lorde sayeth: Vp reproue the mountaynes, and let the hylles heare thy voyce.
Micah 6:2 O heare the punishment of the Lord, ye mountaynes, & ye myghtie foundacions of the earth: for the Lorde wyll reproue hys people, and reason with Israel:
Micah 6:3 O my people, what haue I done vnto the? or wherin haue I hurte the? geue me answere.
Micah 6:4 Because I brought the from the lande of Egypte, and delyuered the out of the house of bondage? Because I made Moses, Aaron and Miriam to lede the?
Micah 6:5 Remembre (O my people) what Balach the kyng of Moab had Imagyned agaynst the, and what answeree that Balaam the sonne of Beor gaue hym, from Sethim vnto Galgal, that ye maye know the louyng kyndnesses of the Lorde.
Micah 6:6 What acceptable thynge shall I offre vnto the Lord? shall I bowe my knee to the hye God? Shall I come before hym wyth brentoffrynges, and wyth calues of a yeare olde?
Micah 6:7 Hath the Lorde a pleasure in many thousand rammes, or innumerable streames of oyle? Or shal I geue my fyrstborne for myne offences, and the fruyte of my body for the synne of my soule?
Micah 6:8 I wyll shewe the, O man, what is good, & what the Lorde requyreth of the: Namely, to do right, to haue pleasure in louynge kyndnesse, to be lowlye, and to walcke wyth thy God:
Micah 6:9 that thou mayest be called a cytye of the Lorde, & that thy name maye be ryghtuousnesse. Heare (O ye trybes) who wolde els geue you soch warnynge?
Micah 6:10 Shulde I not be displeased, for the vnrightuous good in the houses of the wycked, and because the measure hys mynyshed?
Micah 6:11 Or shulde I iustifie the false balaunces and the bagge of disceytfull weyghtes,
Micah 6:12 amonge those that be full of ryches vnryghtuously gotten: where the cyte syns deale with falshede, speake lies, & haue dysceytfull tunges in their mouthes?
Micah 6:13 Therfore I wyll take in hande to punysh the, and to make the desolate, because of thy sinnes:
Micah 6:14 Thou shalt eate, & not haue ynough: yee thou shalt bringe thy selfe downe. Thou shalt fle, but not escape: and those that thou woldest saue, wyll I delyuer to the swerde.
Micah 6:15 Thou shalt sowe, but not reape: thou shalt presse out oliues, but oyle shalt thou not haue to anoynte thy selfe wythall: thou shalt tread out swete must, but shalt dryncke no wyne.
Micah 6:16 Ye kepe the ordynaunces of Amri, & all the customes of the house of Ahab: ye folowe their pleasures, therfore wyll I make the waste, & cause thy inhabyters to be abhorred, O my people: and thus shalt thou beare thyne owne shame.

CHAPTER: 7

Micah 7:1 Wo is me: I am become as one, that goeth a gleanynge in the haruest. There are no mo grapes to eate, yet wolde I fayne (with all my herte) haue of the best fruyte.
Micah 7:2 There is not a godlye man vpon earth, there is not one ryghtuous amonge men. They laboure al to shed bloud, and euery man hunteth his brother to death:
Micah 7:3 yet they saye: they do well, when they do euil. As the prince wyll, so sayeth the iudge: that he maye do him a pleasure agayne. The greate man speaketh what his herte desyreth: & the hearers alowe hym.
Micah 7:4 The best of them is but as a thistle, & the most rightuous of them is but as a breer in the hedge. But when the day of thy preachers commeth, that thou shalt be vysyted: then shall they be wasted awaye.
Micah 7:5 Let no man beleue hys frende, nor put his confidence in a prynce. Kepe the porte of thy mouthe, from her that lyeth in thy bosome:
Micah 7:6 for the sonne shall put hys father to dyshonoure, the doughter shall ryse agaynst her mother, the doughter in lawe agaynst her mother in lawe: & a mans foes shalbe euen they of hys owne houshold.
Micah 7:7 Neuerthelesse I wyll loke vp vnto the Lorde, I wyll pacyentlye abyde God my sauyoure: my God shall heare me.
Micah 7:8 O thou enemye of myne, reioyce not at my fal, for I shal get vp agayne: and thoughe I syt in my darckenesse, yet the Lorde is my lyght.
Micah 7:9 I wyl beare the punyshment of the Lorde (for why? I haue offended hym) tyll he sit in iudgement vpon my cause, and se that I haue ryghte. He wyll brynge me forth to the lyght, & I shall se hys ryghtuousnesse.
Micah 7:10 She that is myne enemy shall loke vpon it, & be confounded, which now sayth. Where is thy Lorde God? Myne eyes shall beholde her, when she shalbe troden doune, as the clay in the stretes.
Micah 7:11 The tyme will come, that thy gappes shall be made vp, & the lawe shall go abroade:
Micah 7:12 & at the tyme shal they come vnto the, from Assur vnto the stronge cytyes, & from the stronge cytyes vnto the ryuer: from the one sea to the other, from the one mountaine to the other.
Micah 7:13 Not withstandynge the land must be wasted, because of them that dwell therein, and for the frutes of theyr owne Imaginacyons.
Micah 7:14 Therfore fede thy people wyth thy rodde, the flocke of thyne herytage which dwell desolate in the woodde, that they maye be fedde vpon the mounte of Charmell, Basan & Galaad as afore tyme.
Micah 7:15 Maruelous thinges wyll I shewe them, lyke as when they came oute of Egypte.
Micah 7:16 This shall the heathen se, and be ashamed for all theyr power, so that they shal laye theyr hande vpon theyr mouthe, and stoppe theyr eares.
Micah 7:17 They shal licke the dust lyke a serpente, & as the wormes of the earthe that tremble in theyr holes. They shalbe afraid of the Lorde oure God, and they shall feare the.
Micah 7:18 Where is there such a God as thou? that pardonest wickednes, and forgeuest the offences of the remnaunte of thyne herytage? He kepeth not hys wrath for euer. And why? his delyte is to haue compassyon:
Micah 7:19 he shal turne agayne, and be mercyfull to vs: he shall put doune oure wyckednesses, and caste all oure synnes into the botome of the sea.
Micah 7:20 Thou shalt kepe thy truste wyth Iacob, and thy mercye for Abraham, lyke as thou haste sworne vnto oure fathers longe agoo.

BOOK: Nahum

CHAPTER: 1

Nahum 1:1 Thys is the heuye burthen of Niniue, which Nahum of Elchos dyd wryte as he sawe it.
Nahum 1:2 The Lorde is a gelous God, & a taker of vengeaunce: yee a taker of vengeaunce is the Lorde, and wrathfull. The Lord taketh vengeaunce of hys enemyes, and reserueth dyspleasure for his aduersaries.
Nahum 1:3 The Lorde suffreth longe, he is of greate power, & so innocent that he leaueth no man fautlesse before hym. The Lorde goeth forth in tempest and stormy wether, the cloudes are the dust of his fete.
Nahum 1:4 When he reproueth the sea, he drieth it vp, and turneth all the floudes to drye lande. Basan is desolate, Charmel & the pleasure of Lybanus wasteth awaye.
Nahum 1:5 The mountaynes tremble for him, the hylles consume. At the syght of hym, the earth quaketh: yee the whole world, and all that dwell therin.
Nahum 1:6 Who maye endure before his wrath? Or who is able to abyde hys gryme displeasure? His anger taketh on lyke fyre, and the harde rockes burst in sunder before hym.
Nahum 1:7 Full gracious is the Lorde, and a stronge holde in the tyme of trouble, he knoweth them that put their truste in hym:
Nahum 1:8 when the floude renneth ouer, and destroyeth the place, and when the darcknesse foloweth styll vpon his enemyes.
Nahum 1:9 What do ye Imagin then agaynst the Lord on this maner? (Tush, when he hath ones made an ende, there shall come nomore trouble.)
Nahum 1:10 For lyke as the thornes that sticke together, and as the drye strawe, so shall the dronckardes be consumed together, euen when they be full.
Nahum 1:11 There come oute of the soche as Imagin meschefe, & geue vngracious councell agaynst the Lorde.
Nahum 1:12 Therfore thus sayeth the Lorde: Let them be as well prepared, yee and as many as they can, yet shall they be hewen downe, & passe awaye. And as for the, I wyll vexe the, but not vtterly destroye the.
Nahum 1:13 And now wyll I breake hys rodde from thy backe, & burst thy bondes in sonder.
Nahum 1:14 But the Lorde hath geuen a commaundement concernynge the, that there shall come nomore sede of thy name. The carued & casten Images wyll I rote out of the house of thy God. Thy graue shall I prepare for the, and thou shalt be confounded.
Nahum 1:15 Beholde, vpon the mountaynes come the fete of hym, that bryngeth good tydynges, and preacheth peace. O Iuda, kepe thy holy dayes, perfourme thy promyses: for Beliall shall come nomore in the, he is vtterly roted out.

CHAPTER: 2

Nahum 2:1 The scaterer shall come vp agaynst the, & laye sege to the castell. Loke thou well to the stretes, make thy loynes stronge, arme thy self with all thy myght:
Nahum 2:2 for the Lorde shal restore agayne the glorye of Iacob, lyke as the glory of Israell. The destroyers haue broken them downe, & marred the wyne braunches.
Nahum 2:3 The shylde of hys gyauntes glystereth, hys men of warre are clothed in purple. Hys charettes are as fyre, when he maketh hym forward, his archers are well decke & trimmed.
Nahum 2:4 The charettes rolle vpon the stretes, & welter in the hye wayes. They are to loke vpon lyke cressettes of fyre, & go swyftly, as the lyghtenynge.
Nahum 2:5 When he doth but warne his giauntes, they fal in their araye, & hastely they clymme vp the walles: yee the engins of the warre are prepared all ready.
Nahum 2:6 The water portes shalbe opened, and the kynges palace shal fall.
Nahum 2:7 The quene her selfe shalbe led awaye captyue, and her gentil wemen shall mourne as the doues and grone wyth in their hertes.
Nahum 2:8 Niniue is lyke a pole full of water, but then shall they be fayne to fle. Stand, stande (shal they crye) and there shall not one turne backe.
Nahum 2:9 Awaye with the syluer, awaye wyth the golde: for here is no ende of treasure. There shalbe a multytude of all maner costlye ornamentes.
Nahum 2:10 Thus muste she be spoyled, emptied and clene striped out: that their hertes maye be melted awaye, their knees tremble, all their loynes be weake, and their faces blacke as a pot.
Nahum 2:11 Where is now the dwellyng of the lyons, & the pasture of the lyons whelpes? where the lyon & the lyonesse went wt the whelpes, & no man frayed them awaye?
Nahum 2:12 But the lyon spoyled ynough for hys yonge ones, & deuoured for his lionesse: he filled his dennes with his pray, & his dwellynge place with that he had rauyshed.
Nahum 2:13 Beholde, I wyll vpon the, sayeth the lord of hostes, & wyll set fyre vpon thy charettes, that they shall smoke with all, & the swerde shal deuoure the yong lyons. I wyll make an ende of thy spoylyng from out of the earth, and the voyce of thy messaungers shal no more be hearde.

CHAPTER: 3

Nahum 3:1 Wo to the bloudthurstye cytye, which is full of lyes & robbery & wyl not leaue of from rauyshyng.
Nahum 3:2 There a man may heare scourgynge, russhyng, the noyse of the weeles, the cryenge of the horses, & the rollynge of the charettes.
Nahum 3:3 There the horsmen get vp with naked swerdes, & glystering speares. There lyeth a multytude slayn, & a great heape of deade bodyes. There is no ende of dead coarses, yea, men fall vpon theyr bodyes:
Nahum 3:4 And that for the greate and manyfolde whordome, of the fayre and beutyfull harlot, which is a maistresse of witchcrafte, yea, and selleth the people thorowe her whordom, and the nacyons thorowe her witchcraft.
Nahum 3:5 Beholde, I wyll vpon the (sayeth the Lord of hostes) and will pull thy clothes ouer thy heade: that I maye shew thy nakednes among the Heathen, and thy shame amonge the kingdomes.
Nahum 3:6 I wyll caste dyrte vpon the, to make the be abhorred, and a gasyng stocke:
Nahum 3:7 Yea al they that loke vpon the, shall starte backe, and say: Niniue is destroyed. Who wyll haue pyte vpon the: where shall I seke one to conforte the?
Nahum 3:8 Art thou better then the greate cytie of Alexandria? that lay in the waters, and had the waters rounde about it: whiche was strongly fensed and walled with the sea?
Nahum 3:9 Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength and that excedynge greate aboue measure. Aphrica and Lybia were her helpers,
Nahum 3:10 yet was she dryuen away, and brought into captiuite: her yonge chyldren were smiten doune at the heade of euerye strete, the lottes were cast for the most auncient men in her, and al her mightye men were bounde in chaynes.
Nahum 3:11 Euen so shalt thou also be droncken, and hyde thy self, and seke some helpe agaynst thyne enemy.
Nahum 3:12 Al thy strong cities shalbe lyke figgetrees with ripe figges: which when a man shaketh, they shal fall into the mouthe of the eater.
Nahum 3:13 Behold, thy people within the are but wemen: the portes of thy laude shalbe opened vnto thyne enemyes, and the fyre shall deuoure thy barres.
Nahum 3:14 Drawe water nowe agaynst thou be beseged, make vp thy strong holdes, go into the claye, tempre the morter, make stronge bricke,
Nahum 3:15 yet the fyre shall consume the, the swerde shall destroye the, yea, as the locuste doeth, so shal it eate the vp. It shal fal heuely vpon the as the locustes, yea, right heuely shal it fal vpon the, euen as the greshoppers.
Nahum 3:16 Thy marchauntes haue ben nombred with the starres of heauen: but nowe shal they sprede abroad as the locustes, and fle theyr waye.
Nahum 3:17 Thy Lordes are as the greshoppers, & thy captaynes as the multytude of greshoppers: which when they be colde, remayne in the hedges: but when the Sunne is vp, they fle awaye, and no man can tel where they are become:
Nahum 3:18 Thy shepherdes are a slepe (O kynge of Assur) thy worthyes are layed doune: thy people is scatred abroad vpon the mountaynes, and no man gathereth them together agayne.
Nahum 3:19 Thy wounde can not be hyd, thy plage is so sore. All they that heare this of the, shal clappe theyr handes ouer the. For what is he to whom thou hast not alway ben doyng hurte.

BOOK: Habakkuk

CHAPTER: 1

Habakkuk 1:1 This is the heauye burthen, whiche the Prophet Abacuc did se.
Habakkuk 1:2 O lord how long shal I crye, and thou wilt not heare? How long shal I complayn vnto the, sufferynge wrong, & thou wilte not helpe?
Habakkuk 1:3 Why lettest thou me se weerynesse and laboure? Tyranny & vyolence are before me, power ouergoeth righte:
Habakkuk 1:4 for the lawe is toarne in peces, and there can no ryghte iudgemente go forthe. And why? the vngodly is more set by then the rightuous: this is the cause, that wronge iudgemente procedeth.
Habakkuk 1:5 Beholde, amonge the Heathen, & loke well: wondre at it, and be abashed: for I wyll do a thynge in youre tyme, whiche thoughe it be tolde you, ye shall not beleue.
Habakkuk 1:6 For lo, I wyll rase vp the Caldees, that bitter and swifte people: whiche shall go as wyde as the land is, to take possessyon of dwellyng places, that be not theyr owne.
Habakkuk 1:7 A grymme and boysteours people is it, these shall sit in iudgement, and punish.
Habakkuk 1:8 Their horses are swifter then the cattes of the mountayne, & byte sorer then the wolues in the euenynge. Theyr horsmen come by greate heapes from farre, they fle hastely to deuour as the Aegle.
Habakkuk 1:9 They come all to spoyle: oute of them commeth an easte wynde, whiche bloweth and gathereth theyr captyues, lyke as the sande.
Habakkuk 1:10 They shall mocke the kynges, and laughe the princes to scorne. They shal not set by any stronge holde, for they shall laye ordynaunce agaynst it, and take it.
Habakkuk 1:11 Then shall they take a freshe courage vnto them, to go forth, and to do more euil, & so ascrybe that power vnto theyr God.
Habakkuk 1:12 But thou O Lorde my God, my holy one thou arte from the begynnynge, therfor shall we not dye. O Lorde, thou hast ordened them for a punyshment, and set them to reproue the myghtye.
Habakkuk 1:13 Thyne eyes are clene, thou mayest not se euyll, thou canst not beholde the thynge that is wycked. Wherfor then doest thou loke vpon the vngodly, and holdest thy tung, when the wycked deuoureth the man that is better then hym selfe?
Habakkuk 1:14 Thou makest men as the fysh in the sea, and lyke as the crepynge beastes that haue no gyde.
Habakkuk 1:15 They take vp all with theyr angle, they catche it in theyr net, and gather it in theyr yarne: whereof they reioyce, and are glad,
Habakkuk 1:16 Therfore offre they vnto theyr net, and do sacryfyce vnto theyr yarne: because that thorowe it theyr porcyon is become so fat, & theyr meate so plenteous.
Habakkuk 1:17 Wherfore they cast oute theyr net agayne, and neuer cease to slaye the people.

CHAPTER: 2

Habakkuk 2:1 I stode vpon my watch, & set me vpon my bulworke, to loke & se, what he wolde saye vnto me, & what answere I shuld geue him that reproueth me.
Habakkuk 2:2 But the Lord aunswered me, and sayde: Wryte the vysyon planely vpon thy tables, that who so cometh by, maye rede it,
Habakkuk 2:3 for the vysyon is yet farre of for a tyme, but at the last it shal come to passe & not fayle. And thoughe he tarye, yet wayte thou for hym, for in very dede he wyll come, & not be slacke
Habakkuk 2:4 Beholde, who so wyll not beleue, hys soule shall not prospere: but the iuste shall lyue by hys fayth.
Habakkuk 2:5 Lyke as the wyne disceyueth the dronkarde, euen so the proud shall fayle and not endure. He openeth hys desyre wyde vp as the hell, & is as vnsacyale as death. All Heathen gathered he to hym, and heapeth vnto hym all people.
Habakkuk 2:6 But shall not all these take vp a prouerbe agaynst hym, & mocke hym with a byworde & saye: Wo vnto hym that heapeth vp other mens goodes? Howe longe wyll he lade hym selfe with thicke claye?
Habakkuk 2:7 O howe sodenly wyll they stand vp that shall byte, and awake, that shal teare the in peces? yea, thou shalt be their praye.
Habakkuk 2:8 Seynge thou hast spoyled many Heathen, therfore shall the remuaunte of the people spoyle the: because of mens bloude, and for the wronge done in the lande, in the cytye and vnto all them that dwell therein.
Habakkuk 2:9 Wo vnto hym, that couetouslye gathereth euyll gotten goodes into hys house: that he maye set hys neste an hye, to escape from the power of mysfortune.
Habakkuk 2:10 Thou hast deuysed the shame of thyne owne house, for thou haste slayne to muche people, and hast wylfully offended,
Habakkuk 2:11 so that the very stones of the wall shall crye oute of it, and the tymbre that lyeth betwixte the ioyntes of the buyldynge shal aunswere.
Habakkuk 2:12 Wo vnto hym, that buyldeth the towne wyth bloude, & maintaineth the citie wyth vnryghtuousnes.
Habakkuk 2:13 Shall not the Lorde of hostes brynge thys to passe, that the laboures of the people shal be brent wyth a greate fyre, & that the thynge wherevpon the people haue weeryed them selues, shall be lost?
Habakkuk 2:14 For the earth shall be full of knowledge of the Lordes honoure, lyke as the waters that couer the sea.
Habakkuk 2:15 Wo vnto hym that geueth his neighboure dryncke, to get hym wrothefull dyspleasure for his dronckennesse: that he maye se his preuytees.
Habakkuk 2:16 Therfore wyth shame shalte thou be fylled, in steade of honoure. Drincke thou also tyll thou slombre wyth al: for the cuppe of the Lordes ryght hande shall compasse the about and shamefull spewyng in steade of thy worshippe.
Habakkuk 2:17 For the wronge that thou hast done in Lybanus, shall ouerwhelme the, and the wylde beastes shal make the afrayd: because of mens bloude, and for the wronge done in the lande, in the cytye, and vnto all such as dwell therein.
Habakkuk 2:18 What helpe then wyll the Image do, whom the worckman hath fashyoned? Or the vayne cast Image, wherein because the craftesman putteth hys trust, therfore maketh he domme Idols?
Habakkuk 2:19 Wo vnto hym, that sayeth to a pece of woode: aryse, & to a domme stone: stande vp. For what instruccyon maye suche one geue? Beholde it is layed ouer wyth gold and siluer and there is no breth in it.
Habakkuk 2:20 But the Lord in his holy temple is he, whome all the world shuld feare.

CHAPTER: 3

Habakkuk 3:1 n/a
Habakkuk 3:2 O Lord, when I hearde speake of the, I was afrayed. The worck that thou hast taken in hande, shalt thou perfourme in his tyme (O Lord): and when thy time commeth, thou shalte declare it. In thy verye wrath thou thinckest vpon mercye.
Habakkuk 3:3 God commeth from Theman, and the holye one from the mounte of Pharan Selah. Hys glory couereth the heauens, and the earthe is full of hys prayse.
Habakkuk 3:4 Hys shyne is as the sunne, & beames of lyght go out of his handes, there is his power hyd.
Habakkuk 3:5 Destruccyon goeth before hym, and burnynge cressettes go from his fete.
Habakkuk 3:6 He standeth and measureth the earth. He loketh, and the people consume awaye, the mountaines of the worlde fall doune to poulder, & the hilles are faine to bowe them selues for hys goynges are euerlastynge and sure.
Habakkuk 3:7 I sawe, that the pauylions of the Morians & the tentes of the lande of Madian were vexed for werynesse.
Habakkuk 3:8 Waste thou not angrye, O Lorde, in the waters? was not thy wrathe in the floodes, and thy displeasure in the sea? yes when thou sattest vpon thyne horse, & when thy charettes had the vyctory.
Habakkuk 3:9 Thou sheuedst thy bowe openly, lyke as thou haddest promised with an othe vnto the trybes. Selah. Thou diddest deuyde the waters of the earth.
Habakkuk 3:10 When the mountaynes sawe the, they were afrayed, the water streame wente awaye: the depe made a noyse at the lyftyng vp of thyne hande.
Habakkuk 3:11 The sunne and mone remayned. styll in theyr habitacyon. Thyne arowes went out glysterynge, and thy speares as the shyne of the lyghtenyng.
Habakkuk 3:12 Thou trodest doune the land in thyne anger, and dyddest throsshe the Heathen in thy displeasure.
Habakkuk 3:13 Thou camest forth to helpe thy people, to helpe thyne annoynted. Thou smotest doune the heade the house of the vngodlye, and dyscoueredest hys foundacyons, euen vnto the necke of hym. Selah.
Habakkuk 3:14 Thou cursest hys scepters, the captayne of men of warre: whiche come as a stormy wind to scatre me abroade, and are glad when they maye eate vp the poore secretely.
Habakkuk 3:15 Thou makest awaye for thyne horses in the sea, euen in the mudde of greate waters.
Habakkuk 3:16 When I heare thys, my bodye is vexed, my lyppes tremble at the voyce therof, my bones corruppe, I am afrayed where I stande. O that I myght rest in the day of trouble, that I myght go vp vnto oure people, whiche are alredye prepared.
Habakkuk 3:17 For the fygge trees shall not be grene, & the vynes shall beare no frute. The laboure of the olyue shalbe but lost, & the lande shall bringe no corne: the shepe shalbe taken oute of the fold & there shalbe no catel in the stalles.
Habakkuk 3:18 But as for me, I wyll be glad in the Lorde, and wyll reioyce in God my sauyoure.
Habakkuk 3:19 The Lord God is my strengthe, he shall make my fete as the fete of hertes: and he whiche geueth the vyctorye, shal bryng me to my hye places, synging vpon my psalmes.

BOOK: Zephaniah

CHAPTER: 1

Zephaniah 1:1 This is the worde of the lorde whiche came vnto Sophonye the sonne of Chusi, the sonne of Gedoliah, the sonne of Amariah the sonne of Hezekiah in the time of Iosiah the sonne of Amon kynge of Iuda.
Zephaniah 1:2 I wyl gather vp all thynges in the lande (sayeth the Lorde)
Zephaniah 1:3 I wyl gather vp man and beast: I wil gather vp the foules in the ayre and the fyshe in the sea (to the greate decaye of the wycked) and wyll vtterlye destroye the men out of the lande, sayeth the Lorde.
Zephaniah 1:4 I wyll stretche oute myne hande vpon Iuda, and vpon all suche as dwell at Ierusalem. Thus wyll I rote oute the remnaunte of Baal from thys place, & the names of the Remurins and priestes:
Zephaniah 1:5 yea and suche as vpon theyr house toppes worshyppe and bowe them selues vnto the host of heauen: whiche sweare by the Lorde, & by theyr Malchom also:
Zephaniah 1:6 whiche starte a backe from the Lord, & neyther seke after the Lorde, nor regarde him.
Zephaniah 1:7 Be styll at the presence of the Lorde God, for the daye of the Lorde is at hande: yea the Lorde hath prepareth a slayne offerynge, and called hys gestes therto.
Zephaniah 1:8 And thus shall it happen in the daye of the Lordes a slayneofferyng: I wyll vpset the prynces, the kynges chyldren, and all suche as were straunge clothynge.
Zephaniah 1:9 In the same daye also wyll I vyset all those, that treade ouer the thresholde so proudely, which fyll theyr Lordes house with trobbery and falshede.
Zephaniah 1:10 At the same time (saith the Lorde) there shalbe hearde a greate crye from the fyshporte and an howlyng from the other porte, and a greate murthur from the hylles.
Zephaniah 1:11 Howle ye that dwell in the myll, for all the marchaunt people are gone, and al they that were laden with syluer, are roted oute.
Zephaniah 1:12 At the same tyme will I seke thorowe Ierusalem with lanternes, and vpset them that contynue in theyr dregges, and saye in theyr hertes. Tushe, the Lorde wil do neyther good nor euyll.
Zephaniah 1:13 Theyr goodes shalbe spoyled, and theyr houses layed waste: they shall buylde houses, and not dwel in them: they shal plant vyneyardes, but not drinck the wyne, therof.
Zephaniah 1:14 For the greate daye of the Lorde is at hande, it is harde by, and commeth on a pace. Horryble is the tydynges of the Lordes daye, then shall the gyaunte crye oute:
Zephaniah 1:15 for that daye is a daye of wrath, a daye of trouble and heuinesse, a daye of vtter destruccyon & mysery, a darcke & glomyng daye, a cloudy and stormy daye,
Zephaniah 1:16 a daye of the noyse of trompettes & shawmes, agaynst the stronge cities & hye towres.
Zephaniah 1:17 I wyl brynge the people into suche vexacyon, that they shal go aboute lyke blyndemen, because they haue synned agaynste the Lorde. Theyr bloude shalbe shed as the duste, & theyr bodyes as the myre.
Zephaniah 1:18 Nether theyr syluer nor theyr golde shalbe able to delyuered them in the wrothfull daye of the Lorde, but the whole lande shalbe consumed thorow the fyre of his gelousy: for he shall soone make cleane ryddaunce of all them that dwell in the lande.

CHAPTER: 2

Zephaniah 2:1 Come together & gather you, O froward people,
Zephaniah 2:2 or the thing go forthe that is concluded, & or the tyme be passed awaye as the duste: or the fearefull wrath of the Lorde come vpon you,
Zephaniah 2:3 yea or the daye of the Lordes sore dyspleasure come vpon you. Seke the Lorde all ye meke herted vpon earth, ye that worcke after hys iudgemente, seke ryghtuousnesse: seke lowlynesse, that ye maye be defended in the wrothfull daye of the Lorde.
Zephaniah 2:4 For Gaza shal be destroyed, and Ascalon shall be layed waste. They shal caste oute Asdod at the noone daye, and Accaron shalbe pluckte vp by the rotes.
Zephaniah 2:5 Wo vnto you that dwell vpon the sea cost ye murtherous people: the worde of the Lord shal come vpon you. O Canaan thou lande of the Phylistines, I wyl destroy the, so that there shall no man dwel in the any more:
Zephaniah 2:6 and as for the sea coast, it shall be hyrdemens cotages & shepe foldes:
Zephaniah 2:7 yea it shalbe a porcyon for suche as remayne of the house of Iuda, to fede there vpon. In the houses of Ascalon shall they reste towarde nyght: for the Lorde theyr God shal vpset them, & turne awaye theyr captyuyte.
Zephaniah 2:8 I haue heard the despyte of Moab, & the blasphemyes of the chyldren of Ammon, howe they haue shamefullye intreated my people, and magnifyed them selues wythin the borders of theyr lande.
Zephaniah 2:9 Therfore as truely as I lyue (sayeth the Lorde of hostes the God of Israel) Moab shalbe as Sodome, & Ammon as Gomorra: euen drye thorne hedges, salt pyttes and a perpetual wyldernes. The resydue of my folcke shall spoyle them the remnaunte of my people shall haue them in possession.
Zephaniah 2:10 This shal happen vnto them for their pryde, because they haue dealte so shamefullye wyth the Lorde of hostes people, and magnified themselues aboue them.
Zephaniah 2:11 The lorde shall be gryme vpon them, & destroy al the goddes in the lande. And al the Iles of the heathen shal worshippe him, euery man in hys place.
Zephaniah 2:12 Ye Morians also shal perish with my swerd:
Zephaniah 2:13 yea, he shall stretche oute his hande ouer the north, and destroye Assur. As for Niniue, he shall make it desolate, drye and waste.
Zephaniah 2:14 The flockes & all the beastes of the people shall lye in the middeste of it, pellicanes & storckes shall abyde in the vpperpostes of it, soules shall synge in the wyndowes, & rauens shall syt vpon the balckes, for the borders of Cedre shal be ryuen doune.
Zephaniah 2:15 Thys is the proude and carelesse cytye, that sayde in her herte: I am, and there is els none. O how is she made so wast that the beastes lye therein? Who so goeth by mocketh her, and poynteth at her wyth hys fynger.

CHAPTER: 3

Zephaniah 3:1 Wo to the abhomynable, fylthy & cruell cytie:
Zephaniah 3:2 whiche will not heart, nor be refourmed. Get trust is not in the Lord, neither wyll she holde her to her goo.
Zephaniah 3:3 Her rulers within her are as roaryng lyons: her iudges are as wolues in the euenynge, which leaue nothynge behynde them tyll the morowe.
Zephaniah 3:4 Her prophetes are lyght persones & vnfaythfull men: her priestes vnhalowe the Sanctuarye, and do wrong vnder the pretence of the lawe.
Zephaniah 3:5 But the iuste Lorde that doth no vnryghte, was amonge them, euery morning shewynge them hys lawe clearlye, and ceased not. But the vngodlye wyll not learne to be ashamed.
Zephaniah 3:6 Therfore wyll I rote out thys people, and destroye theyr towres: yea, and make theyr stretes so voyd, that no man shal go therin. Theyr cytyes shalbe broken doune, so that no bodye shall be lefte, nor dwell there anye more.
Zephaniah 3:7 I sayde vnto them: O feare me, and be contente to be refourmed. That theyr dwellynge shulde not be destroyed, and that there shulde happen vnto them none of these thynges, wherewyth I shall vyset them. But neuertheles they stande vp earlye, to folowe the fylthynes of theyr owne ymagynacions.
Zephaniah 3:8 Therfore ye shall wayte vpon me (sayeth the Lord) vntil the tyme that I stand vp: for I am determed, to gather the people & to bring the kingedoms together, that I may poure oute myne anger, yea, al my wrothfull displeasure vpon them. For all the worlde shalbe consumed wyth the fyre of my gelousy.
Zephaniah 3:9 And then wyll I clense the lyppes of the people, that they may euerychone call vpon the name of the Lord, and serue hym with one shulder.
Zephaniah 3:10 Such as I haue subdued, and my chyldren also whome I haue scatred abroade, shall brynge me presentes beyond the waters of Ethiopia.
Zephaniah 3:11 In that tyme shalte thou no more be confounded, because of all thy ymagynacyons, where thorow thou haddest offended me: for I wyll take awaye the proude boasters of thyne honoure from the, so that thou shalte no more tryumphe because of my holy hyll.
Zephaniah 3:12 In the also will I leaue a small poore simple people, which shal trust in the name of the Lorde.
Zephaniah 3:13 The remnaunt of Israel shal do no wyckednes, nor speake lyes, neyther shall there anye disceytful tunge be founde in theyr mouthes. For they shalbe fed, and take theyr reste, and no man shall make them afrayed.
Zephaniah 3:14 Geue thankes O doughter Syon, be ioyfull O Israell, reioyce and be glad from thy whole herte, O doughter Ierusalem,
Zephaniah 3:15 for the Lorde hath taken awaye thy punyshemente, and turned backe thyne enemyes. The kynge of Israell, euen the Lorde hymselfe is with the: so that thou nedest no more to feare any mysfortune.
Zephaniah 3:16 In that tyme it shall be sayed to Ierusalem: feare not, and to Syon: let not thyne handes be slacke,
Zephaniah 3:17 for the Lorde thy GOD is with the, it is he that hath power to saue: he hath a specyall pleasure in the, & a maruelous loue towarde the: yea, he reioyseth ouer the wyth gladnesse.
Zephaniah 3:18 Suche as haue bene in heuynesse, wyll I gather together, and take out of thy congregacion: as for the shame & reprofe that hath bene layed vpon the, it shalbe farre from the.
Zephaniah 3:19 And lo, in that tyme wyll I destroye all those that vexe the: I wyl helpe the lame, and gather vp the caste awaye: yea I wil get them prayse and honoure in all landes, where they haue bene put to shame,
Zephaniah 3:20 At the same time wyll I brynge you in, and at the same tyme wyll I gather you. I wyll get you a name and a good reporte amonge al people of the earthe, when I turne back youre captyuyte before youre eyes, sayeth the Lorde.

BOOK: Haggai

CHAPTER: 1

Haggai 1:1 In the seconde yeare of Kynge Darius, in the .vi. moneth, the first day of the moneth, came the worde of the Lorde (by the Prophete Aggeus) vnto Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel the prynce of Iuda, and to Iesua the sonne of Iosedech the hye prieste, sayinge:
Haggai 1:2 Thus speaketh the Lord of hostes, and sayeth: This people doth saye: The tyme is not yet come to buylde vp the Lordes house.
Haggai 1:3 Then spake the Lord by the Prophete Aggeus, and sayde:
Haggai 1:4 Ye your selues can fynde tyme to dwell in syled houses, and shall thys house lye waste?
Haggai 1:5 Consydre nowe youre owne wayes in youre hertes (sayth the Lorde of hostes)
Haggai 1:6 ye sowe muche, but ye bryng lytle in: ye eate, but ye haue not ynoughe: ye drincke, but ye are not fylled, ye decke youre selues, but ye are not warme: and he that earneth any wage, putteth it in a broken purse.
Haggai 1:7 Thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes: Consydre your owne wayes in your hertes,
Haggai 1:8 get you vp to the mountayne, fetche wood, and buyld vp the house, that it maye be acceptable vnto me, and that I maye shewe myne honoure, sayeth the Lorde.
Haggai 1:9 Ye loked for much, and lo, it is come to lytle: & thoughe ye bryng it home, yet do I blowe it awaye. And why so, sayeth the Lorde of hostes? Euen because that my house lyeth so waste, and ye runne euery man vnto hys owne house.
Haggai 1:10 Wherfore the heauen is forbidden to geue you anye dewe, and the earthe is forbidden to geue you encrease.
Haggai 1:11 I haue called for a drouthe, both vpon the lande & vpon the mountaynes, vpon corne, vpon wyne, & vpon oyle, vpon euery thynge that the grounde bryngeth forth, vpon men and vpon catell, yea and vpon all handy laboure.
Haggai 1:12 Now when Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel, and Iesua the sonne of Iosedech the hye priest with the remnaunte of the people, heard the voyce of the Lorde theyr God, and the wordes of the Prophete Aggeus (lyke as the lorde theyr God hath sent him) the people dyd fear the Lorde.
Haggai 1:13 Then Aggeus the Lordes angell sayde in the Lordes message vnto the people: I am wyth you, sayeth the Lorde.
Haggai 1:14 So the Lorde waked vp the spryte of Zorobabel the prince of Iuda, and the sprete of Iesua the sonne of Iosedech the hye priest, and the sprete of the remnaunte of all the people: that they came, and laboured, in the house of the Lorde of Hostes theyr God.
Haggai 1:15 Vpon the .xxiiij. daye of the sixte moneth, in the seconde yeare of Kyng Darius,

CHAPTER: 2

Haggai 2:1 the .xxi. daye of the seuenthe moneth, came the worde of the Lorde vp the prophete Aggeus, saying:
Haggai 2:2 speake to Zorobabel the sonne of Salathiel prince of Iuda, and to Iesua the sonne of Iosedech the hye priest, & to the resydue of the people, and saye:
Haggai 2:3 Who is lefte amonge you, that sawe this house in her fyrste beutye? But what thinck ye now by it? Is it not in your eyes, euen as though it were nothynge?
Haggai 2:4 Neuerthelesse be of good chere O Zarobabel (sayeth the Lorde) be of good comforte, O Iesua thou sonne of Iosedech hye pryest: take good hertes vnto you also, all ye people of the lande, sayeth the Lorde of hostes
Haggai 2:5 and do accordynge to the worde (for I am wt you, sayeth the Lorde of hostes) lyke as I agreed wyth you, when ye came oute of the land of Egypte: and my spryte shalbe among you, feare ye not.
Haggai 2:6 For thus sayth the Lorde of hostes: yet ones more wyll I shake heauen and earthe, the sea and the drye lande:
Haggai 2:7 yea, I will moue al heathen, & the comforte of all Heathen shall come, and so wyll I fyl thys house wyth honoure, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
Haggai 2:8 The syluer is myne, and the gold is myne, sayth the lord of hostes.
Haggai 2:9 Thus the glorye of the last house shalbe greater then the fyrste, sayeth the Lorde of hostes: and in this place will I geue peace, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
Haggai 2:10 The .xxiiij. daye of the .ix. moneth in the seconde yeare of kynge Darius, came the word of the Lorde vnto the Prophete Aggeus, sayinge:
Haggai 2:11 Thus sayeth the Lorde GOD of hostes: Aske the priestes concerninge the lawe, & saye:
Haggai 2:12 yf one beare holye flesh in his cote lappe, and with his lappe do touche the bread, potage, wyne, oyle, or anye other meate: shall he be holye also? The priestes answered & sayde: No.
Haggai 2:13 Then sayde aggeus: Nowe yf one being defyled with a dead carcase, touche anye of these: shall it also be vncleane.
Haggai 2:14 The Pryestes gaue answers, & sayd: yea, it shalbe vncleane. Then Aggeus answered, and sayde: euen so is thys people & this nacyon before me, sayth the Lord: & so are al the worckes of theyr handes, yea, and all that they offre, is vncleane.
Haggai 2:15 And now (I praye you) consydre from thys daye forthe, and howe it hath gone wyth you afore: or euer there was layed one stone vpon another in the temple of the Lorde,
Haggai 2:16 that when ye came to a corne heape of .xx. bushels, there were scarce ten: and that when ye came to the wyne presse for to powre oute .C. pottes of wyne, there were scarce .xx.
Haggai 2:17 For I smote you wyth heate, blastynge and hayle stones in all the labours of your handes: yet was there none of you, that wolde turne vnto me, sayth the Lorde.
Haggai 2:18 Consydre then from thys daye forth and afore, namely, from the .xxiiij. daye of the .ix. moneth, vnto the daye that the foundacion of the Lordes temple was layed: marck it wel
Haggai 2:19 is not the sede yet in the barne? haue not the vines, the fyggetrees, the pomgranates, & oliue trees bene yet vnfrutefull? but from this day forth, I shall make them to prospere.
Haggai 2:20 Moreouer the .xxiiij. daye of the moneth came the worde of the Lorde vnto Aggeus agayne, sayinge:
Haggai 2:21 Speake to Zorobabel the prynce of Iuda, and saye: I wyll shake bothe heauen and earthe,
Haggai 2:22 and ouerthrowe the seat of the kyngedomes, yea; & destroye the myghtye kyngedome of the heathen. I wyll ouerthrow the charettes, and those that syt vpon them, so that both horse and man shall fall doune, euerye man thorowe hys neyghbours swearde.
Haggai 2:23 And as for the, O Zorobabel (sayeth the Lord of hostes) thou sonne of Salathiel my seruaunt: I wil take the (sayeth the Lord) at the same tyme, and make the as a seale, for I haue chosen the, saith the Lord of hostes.

BOOK: Zechariah

CHAPTER: 1

Zechariah 1:1 In the eyght moneth of the seconde yeare of kyng Darius, came the word of the Lorde vnto Zacharye the sonne of Barachias, the sonne of Addo, the prophet saying:
Zechariah 1:2 the Lorde hath ben sore dyspleased at youre forefathers.
Zechariah 1:3 And saye thou vnto them: thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes. Turne you vnto me (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) & I wyll turne me vnto you, sayth the Lorde of hostes.
Zechariah 1:4 Be not ye lyke youre forefathers, vnto whom the Prophetes cryed afore tyme, sayinge: Thus sayeth the Lord God of hostes. Turne you from youre euyll wayes, & from your wicked ymaginacyons. But thei wolde not heare, nor regarde me, sayeth the Lorde.
Zechariah 1:5 What is nowe become of your forefathers & the prophetes? are they yet styll aliue?
Zechariah 1:6 But dyd not my wordes and statutes (which I commaunded by my seruauntes the prophetes) touche your forefathers? Vpon this, they gaue aunswere and sayde: lyke as the Lord of hostes deuysed to do vnto vs, accordynge to oure owne wayes & ymagynacyons, euen so hath he dealte wyth vs.
Zechariah 1:7 Vpon the .xxiiij. daye of the .xi. moneth which is the moneth Sebat, in the second year of Darius, came the worde of the Lorde vnto Zacharye the sonne of Barachias, the sonne of Addo the Prophete, sayinge:
Zechariah 1:8 I sawe by nyght, and lo, there sate one vpon a read horse & stode styll amonge the Myrte trees, that were beneth vpon the grounde: and behynde hym were there reade, spekled, and whyt horses.
Zechariah 1:9 Then sayde I: O my Lorde, what are these? And the aungell that talcked with me, sayde vnto me: I wyll shewe the, what these be.
Zechariah 1:10 And the man that stode amonge the Myrt trees, aunswered and sayde: These are they, whom the Lorde hath sente to go thorowe the worlde.
Zechariah 1:11 And they aunswered the aungell of the Lorde, that stode amonge the myrt trees, and sayde: We haue gone thorowe the world: and beholde, all the worlde dwell at ease, and are carelesse.
Zechariah 1:12 Then the Lordes aungell gaue aunswere, and sayde: O Lorde of hostes, howe longe wylte thou be vnmercyfull to Ierusalem and to the cytyes of Iuda, wyth whom thou hast bene dyspleased nowe these .lxx. yeares.
Zechariah 1:13 So the Lorde gaue a louynge and a confortable aunswere vnto the aungell that talcked wyth me.
Zechariah 1:14 And the aungel that commoned with me, sayde vnto me: Crye thou, and speake: Thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes: I am exceadynge gelous ouer Ierusalem and Syon,
Zechariah 1:15 and sore dyspleased at the carelesse Heathen: for where as I was but a lytle angrye, they dyd theyr best that I myghte destroye them.
Zechariah 1:16 Therfore thus sayeth the Lord: I wyl turne me againe in mercy toward Ierusalem, so that my house shalbe buylded in it, saith the Lord of Hostes: yea and the plommet shalbe layd abroad in Ierusalem, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
Zechariah 1:17 Crye also, and speake: thus sayeth the lorde of hostes: My cytyes shalbe in good prosperyte agayne, the Lorde shall yet comfort Sion, and chose Ierusalem.
Zechariah 1:18 Then lyfte I vp myne eyes, and sawe, and beholde, foure hornes.
Zechariah 1:19 And I sayde vnto the angel, that talketh with me: what be these? he aunswered me: These are the hornes, whiche haue scatred Iuda, Israel and Ierusalem abroade.
Zechariah 1:20 And the Lorde shewed me .iiij. carpenters.
Zechariah 1:21 Then sayde I: what wyll these do? He aunswered, and said: Those are the hornes, which haue so strowed Iuda abroade, that no man durste lyft vp his head: But these are come to fraye them away and to caste oute the hornes of the Gentyles, whiche lyfte vp theyr horne ouer the lande of Iuda, to scatre it abroade.

CHAPTER: 2

Zechariah 2:1 I lyfte vp myne eyes agayne, & loked, and beholde, a man wyth a measure lyne in his hand.
Zechariah 2:2 Then sayde I: whether goest thou? And he sayde vnto me: To measure Ierusalem, that I maye se howe longe & howe broade it is.
Zechariah 2:3 And beholde, the aungell that talked with me, wente hys way forthe. Then wente there oute another aungell to mete him
Zechariah 2:4 and sayde vnto hym: Runne, speake to thys younge man, and saye: Ierusalem shall be inhabyted wythoute anye wall, for the verye multytude of people and catell, that shal be therein
Zechariah 2:5 Yea I my selfe (sayeth the Lorde) wil be vnto her a wall of fyre rounde aboute, and wilbe honoured in her.
Zechariah 2:6 O get you forthe, O fle from the lande of the northe, sayeth the Lorde, ye whom I haue scatred into the foure wyndes vnder heauen, sayeth the Lorde.
Zechariah 2:7 Saue thy selfe, O Syon: thou that dwellest with the doughter of Babylon,
Zechariah 2:8 for thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes: Wyth a gloryous power hath he sent me out to the Heathen, which spoyled you: for who so toucheth you, shal touche the aple of his owne eye.
Zechariah 2:9 Beholde, I wyl lyfte vp myne hande ouer them, so that they shall be spoyled of those, whiche afore serued them: and ye shall knowe that the Lorde of hostes hath sente me.
Zechariah 2:10 Be glad, and reioyce, O doughter of Sion: for lo, I am come to dwell in the myddeste of the, sayeth the Lord.
Zechariah 2:11 At the same tyme there shall manye Heathen cleue to the Lorde, and shall be my people. Thus wyll I dwell in the myddest of the, & thou shalte knowe, that the Lorde of hostes hathe sente me vnto the.
Zechariah 2:12 The Lorde shall haue Iuda in possessyon for hys parte in the holye grounde, and shall chose Ierusalem yet agayne.
Zechariah 2:13 Let all fleshe be styll before the Lorde, for he is rysen oute of hys holy place.

CHAPTER: 3

Zechariah 3:1 And he shewed me Iesua the hye priest, standynge before the angell of the Lorde, and Satan stode at hys ryghte hande to resiste hym.
Zechariah 3:2 And the Lorde sayde vnto Satan: The Lorde reproue the (thou Satan) yea the Lorde that hath chosen Ierusalem, reproue the. Is not thys a brande taken out of the fyre?
Zechariah 3:3 Nowe Iesua was clothed in vnclean rayment, and stode before the aungel:
Zechariah 3:4 whiche aunswered and sayde vnto those, that stode before hym: take awaye the foule clothes from him. And vnto hym he sayd: Beholde, I haue taken away thy synne from the, and wil decke the with chaunge of rayment.
Zechariah 3:5 He sayde moreouer: set a fayre myter vpon his head. So they set a fayre myter vpon hys heade, and put on clothes vpon hym, and the aungel of the Lorde stode there.
Zechariah 3:6 Then the aungell of the lord testyfyed vnto Iesua, and spake,
Zechariah 3:7 thus sayth the Lorde of hostes: If thou wylte walke in my wayes, & kepe my watche: thou shalt rule my house, & kepe my courtes, and I wil geue the place amonge these that stande here.
Zechariah 3:8 Heare O Iesua thou hye priest, thou and thy frendes that dwell before the, for they are wonderous people. Beholde, I wyll brynge forthe the braunche of my seruaunt:
Zechariah 3:9 for lo, the stone that I haue layed before Iesua: vpon one stone shalbe .vij. eyes. Beholde, I wyll hewe hym out (sayeth the Lorde of Hostes) & take awaye the synne of that lande in one daye.
Zechariah 3:10 Then shal euery man cal for hys neyghboure vnder the vyne & vnder the fygge tree, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.

CHAPTER: 4

Zechariah 4:1 And the angel that talked wyth me, came agayne, & waked me vp, as a man that is raysed out of hys slepe,
Zechariah 4:2 & sayde vnto me: What seyst thou? And I sayde: I haue loked, & beholde: a candelsticke of all golde, wyth a boll vpon vpon it and his seuen lampes therein, & vpon euery lamp .vij. stalkes.
Zechariah 4:3 And two olyue trees therby, one vpon the right syde of the bol, and the other vpon the left side.
Zechariah 4:4 So I answered, & spake to the angell that talked with me, sayinge: O my Lorde what are these?
Zechariah 4:5 The angel that talked with me aunswered & sayde vnto me: knowest thou not what these be? And I sayde: No, my Lorde.
Zechariah 4:6 He aunswered, and sayde vnto me: Thys is the word of the Lorde vnto Zorobabel, saying: Nether thorowe an hoste of men, nor thorow strength, but thorowe my sprete, sayeth the Lorde of hoostes.
Zechariah 4:7 What art thou, thou greate mountayne, before Zorobabel: thou must be mayde euen. And he shall brynge vp the fyrst stone, so that men shall crye vnto hym: good lucke, good lucke.
Zechariah 4:8 Moreouer the worde of the Lorde came vnto me, sayinge:
Zechariah 4:9 The handes of Zorobabel haue layed the foundacyon of thys house, his handes shal also fynysh it, that ye may know how that the Lorde of hostes hath sent me vnto you.
Zechariah 4:10 For he hath ben dispysed a lytle season, shall reioyce, when he seyth the tynne weyght in Zorobabels hande. The .vij. eyes are the Lordes, whiche go thorowe the whole worlde.
Zechariah 4:11 Then aunswered I, and said vnto him: What are these .ij. olyue trees vpon the right & left syde of the candelstycke?
Zechariah 4:12 I spake moreouer, & sayde vnto hym: what be these two olyue braunches (whiche thorow the two golden pypes) emptye them selues into the gold?
Zechariah 4:13 He aunswered me, and sayde: knoweste thou not, what these be? And I sayde: no, my Lord.
Zechariah 4:14 Then sayde he: These are the two olyue braunches, that stande before the ruler of the whole earthe.

CHAPTER: 5

Zechariah 5:1 So I turned me, lyftyng vp myne eyes, and loked, and beholde, a flying boke.
Zechariah 5:2 And he sayd vnto me: what seyst thou? I answered: I se a flyinge boke of .xx. cubytes longe, and ten cubytes broade.
Zechariah 5:3 Then sayd he vnto me: This is the cursse that goeth forth ouer the whole earth: for all theues shal be iudged after this boke, & all swearers shalbe iudged accordynge to the same,
Zechariah 5:4 I wyl bring it forth (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) so that it shall come to the house of the these, and to the house of hym, that falselye sweareth by my name, and shall remayne in hys house, and consume it, with the timbre & stones thereof.
Zechariah 5:5 Then the aungell that talked wyth me, wente forth, & sayde vnto me: lyfte vp thyne eyes, & se, what this is that goeth forth.
Zechariah 5:6 And I sayde: what is it? He answered: this is a measure goinge oute. He sayde moreouer: Euen thus ate they (that dwel vpon the whole earth) to loke vpon.
Zechariah 5:7 And beholde, there was lyfte vp a talent of leade: and lo, a woman sat in the myddeste of the measure.
Zechariah 5:8 And he sayde: This is vngodlynesse. So he caste her into the middest of the measure, and threwe the lompe of leade vp into an whole.
Zechariah 5:9 Then lyft I vp myne eyes, and loked: & beholde, there came oute two wemen, & the wynd was in theyr wynges (for they had wynges lyke the wynges of a storke) & they lyfte vp the measure betwixt the earth & the heauen.
Zechariah 5:10 Then spake I to the aungell that talcked with me: whyther wyll these beare the measure?
Zechariah 5:11 And he sayde vnto me: into the lande of Synear, to buylde them an house: which when it is prepared, the measure shalbe set there in his place.

CHAPTER: 6

Zechariah 6:1 Moreouer, I turned me, lyftynge vp myne eyes, and loked: and beholde there came .iiij. charettes oute from betwixte two hylles, whiche hylles were of brasse.
Zechariah 6:2 In the fyrste charet were reade horse: in the second charet were blacke horse, in the thyrde charette were whyte horse,
Zechariah 6:3 in the fourthe charet were horses of dyuerse colours and stronge.
Zechariah 6:4 Then spake I, and sayde vnto the angel that talcked with me: O Lorde, what are these?
Zechariah 6:5 The Aungell aunswered, and sayde vnto me: These are the .iiij. wyndes of the heauen, whiche be come forthe to stand before the ruler of al the earth.
Zechariah 6:6 That with the blacke horse wente into the land of the northe, & the whyte folowed them, and the spekled horses wente forthe towarde the southe.
Zechariah 6:7 These horses were very stronge, and wente oute, and soughte to go, and take theyr iourney ouer the whole earthe. And he sayde: get you hence, & go thorowe the worlde. So they wente thorowe oute the worlde.
Zechariah 6:8 Then cryed he vpon me, and spake vnto me, saying: beholde, these that go towarde the north, shall styll my wrath in the northe countreye.
Zechariah 6:9 And the worde of the Lord came vnto me, saying:
Zechariah 6:10 Take of the presoners that are come from Babylon, namely, Heldai, Tobiah and Idaia: and come thou the same daye, and go into the house of Iosiah the sonne of Sophony.
Zechariah 6:11 Then take golde and syluer, and make crounes thereof, and set them vpon the heade of Iesua the sonne of Ioseueh, the hye pryeste,
Zechariah 6:12 and speake vnto hym: Thus sayth the Lorde of hostes: Behold the man whose name is the braunche: and he that shall sprynge vp after hym, shall buylde vp the temple of the Lorde,
Zechariah 6:13 yea euen he shall buylde vp the temple of the Lord. He shall beare the prayse, he shal syt vpon the Lordes trone, and haue the domynacyon. A Priest shall be also vpon hys trone, & a peaceable councell shalbe betwixte them both.
Zechariah 6:14 And the crounes shalbe in the temple of the Lorde, for a remembraunce vnto Helem, Tobiah, Idaia, and Hen the sonne of Sophony. And suche as be farre of, shal come and buylde the temple of the Lorde,
Zechariah 6:15 that ye maye knowe, howe that the Lorde of hostes hath sent me vnto you. And this shal come to passe. Yf ye will herken diligently vnto the voyce of the Lorde youre God.

CHAPTER: 7

Zechariah 7:1 It happened also in the fourthe yeare of kinge Darius, that the word of the lord came vnto Zachary in the fourth daye of the .ix. monethe, whiche is called Caslew:
Zechariah 7:2 what tyme as Sarasar & Rogomelech & the men that were with them, sent vnto Bethel for to pray before the lord:
Zechariah 7:3 & that they should say vnto the priestes, which were in the house of the Lord of hostes, & to the prophetes: should I wepe in the fyfte moneth, and absteyne, as I haue done now cerrtain yeares?
Zechariah 7:4 Then came the word of the Lorde of hostes vnto me, saying:
Zechariah 7:5 Speake vnto all the people of the land, & to the priestes, and saye: when ye fasted and mourneth in the .v. & .vij. moneth (now this .lxx. yeares) dyd ye fast vnto me?
Zechariah 7:6 When ye ate also and droncke; dyd ye not eate & drincke for youre owne selues?
Zechariah 7:7 Are not these the wordes which the Lord spake by his prophetes afore tyme, when Ierusalem was yet inhabited & welthy, she and the cities round aboute her: when there dwelt men, both toward the south and in the playne countreyes?
Zechariah 7:8 And the worde of the Lorde came vnto Zachary, saying:
Zechariah 7:9 Thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes: Execute true iudgement: shew mercy & louinge kindnesse, euery man to his brother.
Zechariah 7:10 Do the widdow, the fatherlesse, the straunger, and poore no wronge: and let no man ymagen euil against his brother in his hert.
Zechariah 7:11 Neuertheles they would not take hede, but turned their backes, & stopped their eares, that they should not heare:
Zechariah 7:12 yea, they made their hertes as an Adamant stone, least they should hear the law & wordes, whiche the Lorde of hostes sent in his holy spirite by the Prophetes afore tyme. Wherfore the Lorde of hostes was verye wroth at them.
Zechariah 7:13 And thus it is come to passe, that like as he spake, & they woulde not hear: euen so they cryed, and I woulde not heare, (sayeth the Lord of hostes)
Zechariah 7:14 but scatered them among al Gentiles, whom they knew not: Thus the lande was made so desolate, that there trauayled no man in it, neyther to, nor for for that pleasaunt lande was vtterly layed waste.

CHAPTER: 8

Zechariah 8:1 So the worde of the lord came onto me saying:
Zechariah 8:2 Thus sayeth the Lord of hostes: I was in a great gelousy ouer Syon, yea I haue bene very gelous ouer her in a great displeasure:
Zechariah 8:3 thus sayeth the Lord of hostes: I wil turne me agayne vnto Syon & wil dwell in the middest of Ierusalem: so that Ierusalem shalbe called a faythfull, and true cytie, the hyll of the Lorde of hostes, yea an holy hill.
Zechariah 8:4 Thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes: There shal yet olde men & wemen dwell againe in the stretes of Ierusalem: yea, & such as go wt staues in their handes for very age.
Zechariah 8:5 The stretes of the citie also shalbe ful of yonge boyes & damoselles, playinge vpon the stretes.
Zechariah 8:6 Thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes: yf the residue of this people thincke it to be vnpossible in these dayes, should it therfore be vnpossible in my sight, sayeth the Lord of hostes:
Zechariah 8:7 Thus sayeth the Lord of hostes: Behold, I wil delyuer my people from the land of the east & west,
Zechariah 8:8 and will bringe them againe, that they maye dwell at Ierusalem. Then shalbe my people and I wilbe their God, in trueth & righteousnesse.
Zechariah 8:9 Thus sayeth the lord of hostes: let your handes be stronge, yea that nowe heare these wordes by the mouth of the prophetes which be in the dayes, that the foundacion is layed vpon the Lorde of hostes house, that the temple may be buylded.
Zechariah 8:10 For why? before these dayes neyther men nor cattell coulde wynne anye thinge, neyther might anye man come in and oute in rest, for trouble: but I let euery man go agaynst his neyghboure.
Zechariah 8:11 Neuerthelesse I wil now entreate the resydue of this people no more as for a time, sayeth the Lord of Hostes,
Zechariah 8:12 but they shalbe a sede of peace. The vineyarde shal geue her frute, the grounde shal geue her increase, and the heauens shall geue their dew: & I shall cause the remnaunt of this people, to haue all these in possession.
Zechariah 8:13 And it shall come to passe, that like as ye were a curse amonge the Heathen (O ye house of Iuda & ye house of Israel) Euen so wil I deliuer you, that ye shalbe a blessing: feare not, but let your handes be stronge.
Zechariah 8:14 For thus sayeth the Lord of Hostes: lyke as I deuised to punishe you, what tyme as youre fathers prouoked me vnto wrath, sayeth the Lord of hostes, and spared not.
Zechariah 8:15 Euen so I determed now in these dayes, for to do well vnto the house of Iuda, and Ierusalem, therfore feare ye not.
Zechariah 8:16 Now the thinges that ye shall do, are these: Speake euery man the truth vnto his neyghboure, execute iudgement trulye, & peaceably within your portes,
Zechariah 8:17 none of you ymagin euill in his hert againste hys neyghboure, & loue no false othes: for al these are the thynges that I hate, sayeth the Lord.
Zechariah 8:18 And the word of the lord of hostes, came vnto me saying:
Zechariah 8:19 Thus sayeth the lord of Hostes: The fast of the fourth moueth, the fast of the fyfth, the fast of the seuenthe, & the faste of the tenth, shalbe ioye and gladnesse, and prosperous hye feastes vnto the house of Iuda: Only loue the treuth and peace.
Zechariah 8:20 Thus sayeth the Lorde of hostes: There shal yet come people, and the inhabiters of many cities:
Zechariah 8:21 and they that dwell in one citie, shal go to another sayeng: Vp, let vs go, and pray before the Lord, let vs seke the Lorde of Hostes, I will go with you:
Zechariah 8:22 yea much people and mightie heathen shall come and seke the Lorde of Hostes at Ierusalem, & to pray before the Lorde.
Zechariah 8:23 Thus sayeth the Lorde of Hostes: In that tyme shal ten men (out of al maner of languages of the Gentiles) take one Iew by the hemme of his garment, and saye: we wyl go with you, for we haue hearde, that God is amonge you.

CHAPTER: 9

Zechariah 9:1 The worde of the Lorde shalbe receyued at Abrach, & Damascus shalbe his offering: for the eyes of all men and of the trybes of Israel shall loke vp vnto the lord.
Zechariah 9:2 The borders of Hemath shalbe hard therby, Tyrus also and Sidon, for they are verye wise.
Zechariah 9:3 Tyrus shal make herself strong, heape vs syluer as the sande, & golde as the clay of the stretes.
Zechariah 9:4 Beholde, the lord shal take her in, & haue her in possession: he shall smyte doune her power into the sea, & she shalbe consumed with fire.
Zechariah 9:5 This shall Ascalon se, & be afraied. Gaza shalbe very sory, so shal Accaron also, because her hope is come to confusyon. For the Kinge of Gaza shal peryshe, and at Ascalon shal no man dwel.
Zechariah 9:6 Straungers shal dwel at Asdod, & as for the pryde of the Philistines, I shal rote out
Zechariah 9:7 Their bloud wil I take away from their mouth and their abhominacyons from among their teeth Thus they shalbe left for our God, yea they shalbe as a prince in Iuda, & Accaron like as Iebusy:
Zechariah 9:8 & so wil I compase my house round about wt my men of warre goynge to & fro: that no oppressoure come vpon them any more. For that haue I sene now with myne eyes.
Zechariah 9:9 Reioyce thou greatly, O doughter Syon, be glad, O doughter Ierusalem. For lo, thy king commeth vnto the, euen the ryghteous & Sauioure: Lowly and simple is he, he rydeth vpon an asse, & vpon the foale of an asse.
Zechariah 9:10 I wil rote out the charrettes from Ephraim, & the horse from Ierusalem, the battel bowes shalbe destroyed. He shall geue the doctryne of peace vnto the heathen, & his dominion shal be from the one syde to the other, and from the flundes to the endes of the worlde.
Zechariah 9:11 Thou also thorow thy bloude of thy couenaunt, shalte let thy presoners out of the pyt, wherin is no water.
Zechariah 9:12 Turne you nowe to the strong holde, ye that be in preson, & long sore to be delyuered: And this daye I brynge the word, that I wil rewarde the double agayn.
Zechariah 9:13 For Iuda haue I bent out as a bowe for me, and Ephraim haue I fylled Thy sonnes (O Sion) will I rase vp againste the Grekes, & make the as a giauntes swearde:
Zechariah 9:14 the Lorde God shalbe sene aboue them, and his dartes shal go forth as the lyghteninge. The Lorde God shall blowe the trompet, and shall come forth as a storme oute of the south.
Zechariah 9:15 The Lorde of hostes shall defende them, they shall consume and deuoure, & subdue them with slyng stones. They shal dryncke & rage as it were thorow wyne. They shalbe fylled like the basens, & as the hornes of the aulter.
Zechariah 9:16 The Lorde their God shall delyuer them in the day, as the flock of his people: for the stones of his Sanctuary shalbe set vp in his land,
Zechariah 9:17 O how prosperous & goodlye a thinge shall that be? The corne shall make the yong men chearefull, and the newe wyne the maydens.

CHAPTER: 10

Zechariah 10:1 Praye the Lord then by tymes to geue thou the latter rayne, so shall the Lorde make cloudes, & geue you raine ynough, for all the intreace of the felde:
Zechariah 10:2 For vayne is the answere of Idols. The sothsayers se lyes, & tel but vayn dreames: the comforthe that they geue, is nothinge worth. Therfore go they astraye lyke a flocke of shepe, & are troubled, because they haue no sheperde.
Zechariah 10:3 My wrothfull displeasure is moued at the sheperdes, & I will vpset the goates. For the Lord of hostes wil graciously viset his flocke, the house of Iuda, and hold them as a goodlye fayre horse in the battell.
Zechariah 10:4 Out of Iuda shall come the helmet, the nale, the battelbowe, and all the princes together.
Zechariah 10:5 They shalbe as the giauntes, whiche in the batell tread doune the myre vpon the stretes. They shal fight, for the Lorde shalbe wyth them, so that the horsemen shalbe confounded.
Zechariah 10:6 I will comforth the house of Iuda, and preserue the house of Ioseph. I wil turne them also, for I pitie them: & they shalbe lyke as they were, when I had not cast them of. For I the Lord am their God, and wil hear them.
Zechariah 10:7 Ephraim shalbe as a gyaunt, and their hert shalbe chereful as thorow wine: yea, their children shall se it, & be glad, & their herte shall reioyce in the Lord.
Zechariah 10:8 I wil blow for them & gather them together, for I wil redeme them. They shal increase as they increased afore.
Zechariah 10:9 I will sow them among the people, that they may thincke vpon me in farre countreyes, they shall lyue wt their children, & turne again.
Zechariah 10:10 I wil bring them again also from the land of Egipt, & gather them out of Assiria. I wil carie them into the land of Galaad & to Libanus, & they shall wante nothing.
Zechariah 10:11 He shall go vpon the sea of trouble, & smyte the sea waues: so that al the depe floudes shalbe dried vp. The proud boastinge of Assur shalbe cast doun, & the scepter of Egipte shalbe taken away.
Zechariah 10:12 I will comforte them in the Lord, that they maye walcke in his name, sayeth the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 11

Zechariah 11:1 Open thy dores, O Lybanus, that the fyre maye consume thy Cedre trees.
Zechariah 11:2 Howle ye fyrre trees, for the Cedre is fallen, yea, all the proude are wasted awaye. Howle (O ye oke trees of Baasan) for the mightye strong wood is cut doun
Zechariah 11:3 Men may heare the sheperdes mourne, for their glory is destroyed. Men may heare the lyons whelpes roare, for the pride of Iordan is wasted away.
Zechariah 11:4 Thus sayeth the Lorde my God: Fede the shepe of the slaughter,
Zechariah 11:5 which shalbe slaine of those that possesse them: yet they take it for no sinne, but they that sell them, say: The Lorde be thancked, I am rich: yea, their owne sheperdes spare them not.
Zechariah 11:6 Therfore will I nomore spare those that dwell in the land (sayeth the Lord) but lo, I wil delyuer the people, euerye man into his neighboures hand, and into the hande of his king, that they may smyte the lande, & out of their handes wil not I delyuer them.
Zechariah 11:7 I my self fedde the slaughter shepe (a pore flocke verely) & toke vnto me two staues: the one I called louinge mekenesse, the other I called wo, & so I kepte the shepe.
Zechariah 11:8 Thre sheperdes destroyeth I in one moneth, for I might not away wt them, neither had they any delyte in me.
Zechariah 11:9 Then sayd I: I wil fede you no more, the thing that dieth, let it dye: & that wil perishe, let it perishe, & let the remnaunt eate, euery one the fleshe of his neyghboure.
Zechariah 11:10 I toke also my louing meke staf, & brake it, that I might disanul the couenaunt, which I made with al people.
Zechariah 11:11 And so it was broken in that daye. Then the poore simple shepe that had a respecte vnto me, knewe therby, that it was the word of the lord.
Zechariah 11:12 And I sayde vnto them: yf ye thincke it good, bring hither my pryce: yf no, then leaue. So they wayed doune .xxx. syluer pens, the value that I was prysed at.
Zechariah 11:13 And the Lorde sayd vnto me: cast it vnto the potter (a goodly pryce for me to be valued at of them) & I toke the .xxx. siluer pens, & cast them to the potter in the house of the Lorde.
Zechariah 11:14 Then brake I my other staf also (namely wo) that I mighte lowse the brotherhead betwixte Iuda and Israel.
Zechariah 11:15 And the Lord said vnto me: Take to the also the staf of a foolish sheperd:
Zechariah 11:16 for lo, I wil rayse vp a sheperde in the lande, which shall not seke after the thinges that be lost, nor care for such as go astray: he shall not heale the wounded, he shall not norishe the thing that is whole: but he shall eate the fleshe of suche as be fat, and teare their clawes in peces.
Zechariah 11:17 O Idols sheperd, that leaueth the flocke. The swerde shall come vpon his arme & vpon his right eye. His arme shalbe cleane dryed vp, and hys ryght eye shalbe sore blinded.

CHAPTER: 12

Zechariah 12:1 The heauy burthen which the lord hath deuised for Israel. Thus saieth the lord, which spred the heauens abroade, layde the foundacyon of the earth, and geueth man the breath of lyfe:
Zechariah 12:2 Beholde I will make Ierusalem a cuppe of surfet, vnto al the people that are round aboute her: Yea, Iuda him self also shalbe in the sege agaynste Ierusalem.
Zechariah 12:3 At the same tyme wil I make Ierusalem, an heauye stone for al people, so that al such as lift it vp shalbe toarne & rente, & all the people of the earth shalbe gathered together against it.
Zechariah 12:4 In that day, sayeth the Lorde, I will make all horses abashed, & those that ryde vpon them to be out of their wittes. I wyll open myne eyes vpon the house of Iuda, & smite all the horses of the people with blindnesse.
Zechariah 12:5 And the princes of Iuda shal say in their hertes. The inhabiters of Ierusalem shal geue me consolacion in the Lord of hostes their God.
Zechariah 12:6 In that tyme will I make the princes of Iuda lyke an hote burninge ouen with wood, & lyke a cresset of fyre among the strawe, so that they shal consume al the people rounde about them, both vpon the right hand and the left. Ierusalem also shalbe inhabited agayne: namely, in the same place, where Ierusalem standeth.
Zechariah 12:7 The Lorde shal preserue the tentes of Iuda like as afore time: so that the glorye of the house of Dauid, & the glory of the citesins of Ierusalem, shalbe but litle regarded, in comparison of the glory of Iuda.
Zechariah 12:8 In that day shal the Lord defende the citesins of Ierusalem: so that the weakest then amonge them shalbe as Dauid: & the house of Dauid shalbe lyke as Gods house, and as the Angel of the Lorde before them.
Zechariah 12:9 At the same tyme wil I go about to destroy al suche people as come againste Ierusalem.
Zechariah 12:10 Moreouer, vpon the house of Dauid & vpon the cytesins of Ierusalem wil I poure oute the spirite of grace & prayer, so that they shal loke vpon me, whom they haue pearsed: & they shal bewepe him, as men mourne for their onely begotten sonne: yea & be sory for him, as men are sorye for their fyrst childe.
Zechariah 12:11 Then shal there be a great mourning at Ierusalem, like as the lamentacion at Adremnon in the feld of Maggadon.
Zechariah 12:12 And the land shal bewayle euery kinred by them selues. The kinred of the house of Dauid them selues alone, & their wiues by them selues.
Zechariah 12:13 The kinred of the house of Nathan themselues alone, & their wyues by them selues. The kinred of the house of Leui them selues alone, & their wiues by them selues. The kinred of the house of Semei themselues alone & their wiues by them selues.
Zechariah 12:14 In lyke maner, all the other generacions, euerychone by them selues alone, and their wiues by them selues.

CHAPTER: 13

Zechariah 13:1 In that tyme shall the house of Dauid and the citesins at Ierusalem haue an open well, to wash of synne and vnclennesse.
Zechariah 13:2 And then (saieth the lord of hostes) I will destroye the names of Idols out of the land: so that they shal nomore be put in remembraunce. As for the false prophetes also & the vnclene spirit, I shal take them out of the land:
Zechariah 13:3 so that yf any of them prophecy any more, hys owne father and mother that begat him, shal saye vnto him: Thou shalt dye, for thou speakest lyes vnder the name of the Lord: yea his owne father and mother that begat him, shal wound him, when he prophecieth.
Zechariah 13:4 And then shal those prophetes be confounded, euery one of his vision when he prophecieth: neither shall they weer sackclothes any more, to disceyue men wt all.
Zechariah 13:5 But he shalbe fayne to saye: I am no prophete: I am an husband man, for so am I taught by Adam from my youth vp:
Zechariah 13:6 & yf it be sayd vnto him: how came these woundes then in thine handes? He shal answere: Thus am I wounded in the house of myne owne frendes.
Zechariah 13:7 Arise, O thou swerd, vpon my shepeherd, & vpon the prince of my people sayeth the lorde of hostes. Smite the sheperd, & the shepe shal be scatred abroade, & so wil I turne mine hand to the litle ones.
Zechariah 13:8 And it shal come to passe (saieth the Lord) that in all the land two partes shalbe roted oute, but the thirde parte shall remayne therin
Zechariah 13:9 And the same thyrd part wil I bring thorow the fyre, & wil clense them, as the siluer is clensed: yea, & try them like as gold is tryed. Then shall they call vpon my name and I wyll heare them: I wyl saye: it is my people. And they shal say: Lorde my God.

CHAPTER: 14

Zechariah 14:1 Beholde, the day of the Lorde commeth, that thou shalt be spoyled, & robbed:
Zechariah 14:2 for I will gather together al the heathen, to fighte agaynste Ierusalem, so that the city shalbe woune, the houses spoyled, & the wemen defiled. The half of the city shal go away into captiuite, & the residue of the people shal not be caried out of the cyty.
Zechariah 14:3 After that shal the lord go forthe to fyght agaynste those heathen, as men vse to fight in the daye of batell.
Zechariah 14:4 Then shall his fete stand vpon the mount olyuete, that lyeth vpon the east syde of Ierusalem. And the mount olyuete shal cleue in two, eastward & westward, so that there shalbe a great valley: & the half mount shal remoue toward the north, & the other toward the south.
Zechariah 14:5 And ye shal fle vnto the valley of my hylles, for the valley of the hylles shal reach vnto Asal. Yea, fle shal ye, like as ye fled for the earthquake in the dayes of Osiah king of Iuda. And the lord my God shall come, and al sayntes with him.
Zechariah 14:6 In that day shal it not be light; but could & frost.
Zechariah 14:7 This shalbe that specially day, whiche is knowne vnto the Lord: neyther day nor light, but about the euening time it shalbe light.
Zechariah 14:8 In that tyme shal the waters of lyfe runne out from Ierusalem: the half parte of them toward the east sea, & the other half toward the vttermost sea, & shal continue both somer & winter.
Zechariah 14:9 And the lord him selfe shalbe king ouer al the earth. At that time shal there be one Lord onlye, & his name shalbe but one.
Zechariah 14:10 Men shall go about the whole earth, as vpon a feld: from Gibea to Remnon, & from the south to Ierusalem. The shal be set vp, & inhabited in her place: from BenIamins porte, vnto the place of the first port, & vnto the corner porte, & from the tower of Hananeel, vnto the kinges wine presses.
Zechariah 14:11 There shal men dwel, & there shalbe nomore cursing but Ierusalem shalbe safely inhabited.
Zechariah 14:12 This shalbe the plage, wherwith the Lorde wyll smite al people, that haue fought agaynst Ierusalem: Namely, their flesh shal consume awaye, though they stand vpon their fete: their eyes shalbe corrupt in their holes, and their tung shall consume in their mouth.
Zechariah 14:13 In that day shal the Lorde make a great sedicion amonge them, so that one man shal take another by the hande, & lay his handes vpon the handes of his neighbour.
Zechariah 14:14 Iuda shal fight also against Ierusalem, & the goodes of al the heathen shalbe gathered together round aboute: gold & siluer, & a very great multitude of clothes:
Zechariah 14:15 & so shal this plage go ouer horses, mules, camels, asses, & al the beastes that shalbe in the host, like as yonder plage was.
Zechariah 14:16 Euery one that remayneth then of al the people, which came against Ierusalem, shal go vp yearly, to worshippe the king (euen the Lord of hostes) & to kepe the feast of tabernacles:
Zechariah 14:17 & loke what generacion vpon earth goeth not vp to Ierusalem for to worshippe the kinge (euen the Lorde of hostes) vpon the same shal come no rayne.
Zechariah 14:18 Yf the kinred of Egypt go not vp, and come not, it shall not rayne vpon them neyther. This shalbe the plage wherwith the Lorde wil smite al heathen, that come not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles:
Zechariah 14:19 yea, this shalbe the sinne plage of Egipt, & the sinne plage of al people that go not vp to kepe the feast of tabernacles.
Zechariah 14:20 At that time shall the riding geer of the horses be holy vnto the Lord, & the kettels in the Lordes house shalbe lyke the basens before the aulter:
Zechariah 14:21 yea al the kettels in Ierusalem & Iuda, shalbe holy vnto the Lord of hostes: & all they that slay offeringes, shall come take of them, & dight them therin. And at that tyme there shalbe no mo Cananites in the house of the Lorde.

BOOK: Malachi

CHAPTER: 1

Malachi 1:1 The heauy burthen, whiche the Lorde sheweth agaynst Israel by Malachi.
Malachi 1:2 I haue loued you, sayeth the Lord: and yet ye say: wherin haste thou loued vs? Was not Esau Iacobs brother, sayeth the Lord? yet haue I loued Iacob,
Malachi 1:3 & hated Esau: yea I haue made his hilles waste, & his heretage a wildernesse for dragons:
Malachi 1:4 & though Edom sayd: wel, we are destroyed, we wyll go buylde vp agayne the places that be wasted: yet (sayeth the Lord of hostes) what they buylded, that brake I domie, so that is was called a cursed lande, and a people, whom the Lorde hath euer bene angrye withall.
Malachi 1:5 Youre eyes haue sene it, & ye youre selues must confesse, that the Lord hath brought the land of Israel to great honour.
Malachi 1:6 Should not a sonne honoure his father, & a seruaunte hys mayster? Yf I be now a father, where is mine honoure? Yf I be the Lorde, where am I feared? sayeth the Lord of hostes. Now to you priestes, that despise my name. And yf ye saye: wherin haue we despised thy name:
Malachi 1:7 In this, that ye offre vnclean bread vpon myne aulter. And yf ye wyl say: wherin haue we offered auye vnclene thinge vnto the? In this place ye say: the aulter of the lord is not to be regarded.
Malachi 1:8 Yf ye offre the blind, is not that euill? And yf ye offre the lame, and syck, is not that euyll? Yea, offre it vnto thy prince, shal he be content with the, or accepte thy personne, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
Malachi 1:9 And now make your prayer before God, that he may haue mercy vpon vs: for suche thinges haue ye done. Shal he regarde your personnes, thyncke ye, sayeth the Lorde of hostes?
Malachi 1:10 Yea, what is he amonge you, that wyll do so muche as to shut the dores, or to kindle the fire vpon myne aulter for naught? I haue no pleasure in you, sayeth the Lord of hostes: and as for the meatofferynge, I will not accepte it at your hande.
Malachi 1:11 For from the rysynge vp of the sunne vnto the goynge doune of the same, my name is greate amonge the Gentyles: yea, in euery place shall there sacryfice be done, & a cleane meatoffering offered vp vnto my name: for my name is great among the heathen, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
Malachi 1:12 But ye haue vnhalowed it, in that ye say: the aulter of the Lorde is not to be regarded, & the thinge that is set ther vpon, not worthy to be eaten.
Malachi 1:13 Now say ye: It is but laboure and trauail, and thus haue ye thought scorne at it (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) offeryng robbery, yea, the lame and the sicke. Ye haue brought me in a meatoffering, shoulde I accepte it of youre hande, sayeth the Lorde?
Malachi 1:14 Cursed be the dissembler, which hath in his flocke one that is male and when he maketh a vowe, offereth a spoted one vnto the lord. For I am a great king (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) and my name is fearfull amonge the Heathen.

CHAPTER: 2

Malachi 2:1 And now (O ye priestes) thys commaundement toucheth you:
Malachi 2:2 yf ye wyll not heare it, nor regarde it, to geue the glorye vnto my name, sayeth the lorde of hostes, I wyll sende a curse vpon you, and wyl cursle your blessinges: yea, curse them wil I yf ye do not take hede.
Malachi 2:3 Behold, I shall corrupte your sede, and cast dong in your faces: turn the donge of your solempne feastes, & it shal cleue faste vpon you:
Malachi 2:4 & ye shal know, that I haue sent this commaundement vnto you: that my couenaunt which I made with Leui, myght stande, sayeth the Lorde of Hostes.
Malachi 2:5 I made a couenaunt of life & peace wt hym: this I gaue him, that he might stande in awe of me: & so he did feare me, & had my name in reuerence.
Malachi 2:6 The law of truth was in his mouth and there was no wickednesse founde in hys lippe. He walcked with me in peace & equite, and dyd turne manye one awaye from their synnes.
Malachi 2:7 For the priestes lippes should be sure knowledge, that men may seke the lawe at his mouth: for he is a messaunger of the lorde of hostes.
Malachi 2:8 But as for you, ye are gone cleane out of the waye, & haue caused the multitude to be offended at the lawe: ye haue broken the couenaunt of Leui, sayeth the Lord of hostes.
Malachi 2:9 Therfore wil I also make you to be despised, and to be of no reputacion among al the people, because ye haue not kepte my wayes, but bene parcial in the lawe.
Malachi 2:10 Haue we not all one father? Hath not one God made vs? why doth euery one of vs then despyse his owne brother, and so breake the couenaunt of oure fathers?
Malachi 2:11 Now hath Iuda offended, yea, the abhomynacyon is done in Israel & in Ierusalem, for Iuda hath defiled the Sanctuarye of the Lorde, whyche he loned, & haue kept the doughter of a straunge God.
Malachi 2:12 But the Lorde shall destroye the man that doth thys (yea, both the mayster and the scolar) out of the tabernacle of Iacob, with hym that offereth vp meateofferinge vnto the lord of hostes.
Malachi 2:13 Nowe haue ye brought it to thys poynte againe, that the aulter of the Lorde is couered with teares wepyng and mourning: so that I will no more regarde the meatofferinge, neyther will I receyue or accepte anye thinge at your handes
Malachi 2:14 And yet ye say: wherfore? Euen because that where as the Lorde made a couenaunt betwixt the & the wyfe of thy youth, thou hast despysed her: Yet is she thyne owne companion and maried wife.
Malachi 2:15 So dyd not the one, and yet had he an excellente spirite. What dyd then the one? He sought the sede promised of God. Therfore loke well to your spirit, and let no man despise the wyfe of his youth.
Malachi 2:16 Yf thou hatest her, put her awaye, sayeth the Lord God of Israel, & geue her a clothinge for the scorne, sayeth the Lord of hostes. Loke wel then to your spirit, & despise her not.
Malachi 2:17 Ye greue the lord with your wordes, & yet ye say: wherwt al haue we greued him? In this, that ye say: Al that do euil are good in the sight of god, and such please him. Or els where is the God that punisheth?

CHAPTER: 3

Malachi 3:1 Beholde, I wil sende my messaunger, which shall prepare the way before me: & the Lord whome, ye woulde haue, shall sone come to hys temple, yea, euen the messenger of the couenaunt, whome ye longe for. Beholde he commeth, sayeth the Lord of hostes
Malachi 3:2 But who may abyde the day of hys commyng? Who shalbe able to endure, when he appeareth? For he is lyke a goldsmythes fire and lyke a wasshers sope.
Malachi 3:3 He shall syt hym doune to trye and to clense the syluer, he shall pourge the children of Leui, & puryfye them lyke as golde and syluer: that they may bring meatofferinges vnto the Lorde in righteousnes.
Malachi 3:4 Then shal the offering of Iuda & Ierusalem be acceptable vnto the Lord, lyke as from the beginninge, and in the yeares, afore tyme.
Malachi 3:5 I wil come and punish you, and I my selfe will be a swyf wytnes against the witches, agaynst the aduouterers, agaynste false swearers: yea, and agaynst those, that wrongeouslye kepe backe the hyrelinges dewtye: which vexe the widdowes and the fatherlesse and oppresse the straunger, and feare not me, sayeth the Lord of Hostes.
Malachi 3:6 For I am the lord that chaunge not, and ye (O children of Iacob) wyll not leaue of:
Malachi 3:7 ye are gone away from myne ordinaunces, and sens the time of your forefathers haue ye not kepte them. Turne you now vnto me, and I will turne me vnto you, sayeth the Lorde of hostes: ye saye: wherin shall we turne?
Malachi 3:8 Shoulde a man vse falshede and disceyte with God as ye vse falshede and disceyte wyth me? Yet ye saye: wherin vse we disceyt wyth the? In Tithes & heaueofferinges.
Malachi 3:9 Therfore are ye cursed with penury, because ye dissemble with me, all the sorte of you.
Malachi 3:10 Bringe euerye Tithe into my barne, that there maye be meat in myne house: and proue me withall (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) yf I will not open the windowes of heauen vnto you, and poure you out a blessynge with plenteousnesse.
Malachi 3:11 Yea, I shal reproue the consumer for youre sakes, so that he shall not eate vp the frute of youre grounde, neyther shall the vineyarde be baren in the felde, sayeth the Lord of hostes.
Malachi 3:12 In so muche that all people shall saye, that ye be blessed, for ye shalbe a pleasaunt lande, sayeth the Lorde of hostes.
Malachi 3:13 Ye speake harde wordes agaynst me, sayeth the Lorde. And yet ye saye: What haue we spoken agaynst the?
Malachi 3:14 Ye haue sayed. Is it but lost labour, to serue God? What profyt haue we for keping his commaundementes, and for walkinge humbly before the Lorde of Hostes?
Malachi 3:15 Therfore maye we saye, that the proude are happye, and that they whiche deale with the vngodlynesse, are sette vp: for they tempte God, and yet escape.
Malachi 3:16 But they that feare God, saye thus one to another: the Lord consydereth and heareth it. Yea, it is before him a memoriall boke, wryten for such as feare the Lorde, & remembre his name.
Malachi 3:17 And in the day that I will make (sayeth the Lord of hostes) they shalbe mine own possession: and I wil fauoure them, lyke as a man fauoureth his owne sonne, that doth him seruyce.
Malachi 3:18 Turne you therfore, and consydre what difference is betwyxt the ryghteous & vngodly: betwyxt him that serueth God, and him that serueth him not.

CHAPTER: 4

Malachi 4:1 For marck, the day commeth, that shall burne as an ouen: and al the proude, yea and al such as do wickednesse, shalbe straw: and the daye that is for to come, shall burne them vp (sayeth the Lorde of hostes) so that it shall leaue them neyther rote nor braunche.
Malachi 4:2 But vnto you that feare my name, shall the Sonne of ryghteousnesse aryse, and healthe shalbe vnder his winges: ye shal go forth, & multipply as the fat calues.
Malachi 4:3 Ye shall treade doune the vngodlye: for they shalbe lyke the asshes vnder the soles of your fete, in the day that I shall make, sayeth the Lord of hostes.
Malachi 4:4 Remembre the lawe of Moses my seruaunt whyche I commytted vnto hym in Oreb for al Israel, with the stratutes and ordynaunces.
Malachi 4:5 Beholde, I wyl sende you Elias the Prophet: before the comming of the daye of the greate and fearfull Lorde.
Malachi 4:6 He shall turne the hertes of the fathers to their chyldren, and the hertes of the children to their fathers, that I come not, & smite the earth with cursynge.

BOOK: Matthew

CHAPTER: 1

Matthew 1:1 Thys is the boke of the generation of Iesus Christ the sonne of dauyd, the sonne also of Abraham.
Matthew 1:2 Abraham begat Isaac: Isaac begat Iacob: Iacob begat Iudas and hys bretherne:
Matthew 1:3 Iudas begat Phares & Zaram of Thamar: Phares begat Esrom: Esrom begat Aram:
Matthew 1:4 Aram begat Amidadab: Aminadab begat Naasson: Naasson begat Salmon:
Matthew 1:5 Salmon begat Boos of Rachab: Boos begat Obed of Ruth: Obed begat Iesse:
Matthew 1:6 Iesse begat Dauid the kynge: Dauid the kinge begat Solomon, of her that was the wyfe of Vrye:
Matthew 1:7 Salomon begat Roboam: Roboam begat Abia: Abia begat Asa:
Matthew 1:8 Asa begat Iosaphat. Iosaphat begat Ioram: Ioram begat Hosias:
Matthew 1:9 Hosias begat Ioatham: Ioatham begat Achas: Achas begat Ezechias:
Matthew 1:10 Ezechias begat Manasses: Manasses begat Amon: Amon begat Iosias:
Matthew 1:11 Iosias begat Iechonias & hys brethren about the tyme they were caried awaye to Babylon.
Matthew 1:12 And after they were brought to Babylou Iechonias begat Salathiel: Salathiel begat zorobabel:
Matthew 1:13 zorobabel begat Abiud: Abiud begat Eliachim: Eliachim begat Azor:
Matthew 1:14 Azor begat Sadoc: Sadoc begat Achin: Achin begat Eliud:
Matthew 1:15 Eliud begat Eliazar: Eliazar begat Matthan: Matthan begat Iacob:
Matthew 1:16 Iacob begat Ioseph the husbande of Marie of which was borne that Iesus, that is called Christ.
Matthew 1:17 All the generacions frome Abraham to Danid are .xiiij. generations. And from Dauid vnto the captiuitie of Babylon: are .xiiij. generations. And from the captiuitie of Babylon vnto Christe, are also fourtene generations.
Matthew 1:18 The byrth of Iesus Christe was ou thys wise. When hys mother Mary was betrouthed to Ioseph, before they came to dwell together, she was founde with chylde by the holye Ghost.
Matthew 1:19 Then Ioseph her husbande beinge a perfecte man and loth to make an ensample of her, was mynded to put her awaye secretly.
Matthew 1:20 While he thus thought, behold the Aungel of the Lord appered vnto him in a dreame, sainge: Ioseph thou sonne of Dauid. fear not to take vnto the Mary thy wife. For that which is conceyued in her is of the holye Ghost.
Matthew 1:21 She shall bryngforth a sonne, & thou shalt cal his name Iesus. For he shal saue his people from their sins.
Matthew 1:22 All thys was done to fulfyll that whyche was spoken of the Lorde by the Prophet, saiynge:
Matthew 1:23 Bholde a mayde shall be wyth chylde, and shal bringe forth a sonne, and they shall call hys name Emanuell, whyche is by interpretation, God wyth vs.
Matthew 1:24 And Ioseph assone as he awoke out of slepe, did as the Aungel of the Lorde had bidden him, and toke hys wyfe vnto him,
Matthew 1:25 and knewe her not tyl she had broughte forthe her fyrste sonne, and called hys name Iesus.

CHAPTER: 2

Matthew 2:1 When Iesus was born at Bethleem in Iurye, in the time of Herode the kinge: Beholde there came wise men from the east to Ierusalem
Matthew 2:2 sayinge. Where is he that is borne kinge of Iewes? We haue sene his star in the east, and are come to worshyppe hym.
Matthew 2:3 When Herode the kinge had herde this, he was troubled, and al Ierusalem with him,
Matthew 2:4 and he gathered al the chiefe priestes and scribes of the people, & axed of them where Christe shoulde be borne.
Matthew 2:5 And they sayd vnto hym: at Bethleem in Iury. For thus it is wrytten by the prophete.
Matthew 2:6 And thou Bethleem in the land of Iury, art not the least concerning the Princes of Iuda. For out of the shal come the captaine, that shall gouerne my people Israel.
Matthew 2:7 Then Herode preuily called the wyse men, and diligently enquired of them, the tyme of the starre that apeared,
Matthew 2:8 and sent them to Bethleem sayinge: Go and searche diligentlye for the childe. And when ye haue founde hym, bringe me worde, that I may come and worshyppe him also.
Matthew 2:9 When they hearde the kynge, they departed: and lo the starre which they sawe in the east went before them, tyll it came and stode ouer the place wher the childe was.
Matthew 2:10 When they sawe the starre, they were maruelously glad:
Matthew 2:11 and went into the house, and found the chylde with Mary his mother, and kneled doune & worshypped him, and opened their treasures and offred to him giftes golde, frankinsence and myrre.
Matthew 2:12 And after they were warned of God in a dreame, that they should not go agayne to Herode, they retourned into their owne countre another waye.
Matthew 2:13 When they were departed: Beholde the aungell of the Lorde appeared to Ioseph in a dreame sayinge. Aryse, and take the chylde & his mother, and flee into Egipte, and abyde there tyll I bringe the worde. For Herode wil seke the chylde to destroye him.
Matthew 2:14 Then he arose and toke the chylde and his mother by night and departed into Egypte,
Matthew 2:15 and was there vnto the death of Herode to fulfyll that whiche was spoken of the Lord by the prophete, which saieth out of Egipt haue I called my sonne.
Matthew 2:16 Then Herode perceauing that he was mocked of the wyse men, was excedinge wroth, & sent forth and slue al the children that were in Bethleem, and in all the costes therof, as many as were two yere olde and vnder according to the time which he had diligently searched out of the wise men.
Matthew 2:17 Then was fulfylled that which was spoken by the prophete Ieremy sayinge:
Matthew 2:18 On the hilles was a voice hearde, morning, weping & great lamentacion: Rachel weping for her children, & would not be comforted because thei were no
Matthew 2:19 When Herode was dead: beholde, an aungel of the Lorde appeared in a dreame to Iosephe in Egip
Matthew 2:20 sayinge: arise and take the childe and his mother, & go into the lande of Israel. For they are dead which sought the childes life.
Matthew 2:21 Then he arose vp, and toke the childe and his mother, & came into the lande of Israell.
Matthew 2:22 But when he hearde that Archelaus did raygne in Iurye, in the roume of his father Herode, he was afraide to go thither. Notwithstanding after he was warned of God in a dreame, he turned a syde into the partyes of Galile,
Matthew 2:23 & went & dwelt in a citie called Nazareth, to fulfyl that which was spoken by the prophetes: he shalbe called a Nazarite.

CHAPTER: 3

Matthew 3:1 In those dayes Iohn the Baptist came and preached in the wyldernes of Iury
Matthew 3:2 saying: Repent the kingdome of heauen is at hande.
Matthew 3:3 This is he of whom it is spoken by the prophete Esaye which sayeth: The voice of a cryer in wildernes prepare the Lordes way and make his pathes, strayt.
Matthew 3:4 This Ihon had his garmente of Camels hear & a girdel of a skinne about his loynes. His meate was locustes, & wilde honye.
Matthew 3:5 Then went out to him Ierusalem & all Iurye, & all the region rounde about Iordan,
Matthew 3:6 & were baptised of him in Iorden, confessing their sinnes.
Matthew 3:7 When he sawe many of the Phariseis & of the Saduces come to his baptisme, he sayd vnto them: O generacion of vipers, who hath taught you to fle from the vengaunce to come?
Matthew 3:8 Bringe forth therfore the frutes belonging to repentaunce.
Matthew 3:9 And se that ye once thinke not to saye in your selues, we haue Abraham to our father. For I say vnto you, that God is able of these stones rayse vp children vnto Abraham.
Matthew 3:10 Euen now is the axe put vnto the rote of the trees: so that euerye tre which bringeth not forth good fruit, is hewen doun & cast into the fire.
Matthew 3:11 I baptise you in water in token of repentaunce, but he that cometh after me is mightyer then I, whose shues I am not worthy to beare. He shal baptise you with the holy ghost and with fyre:
Matthew 3:12 which hath also his fan in hys hande, and will purge his floure gather the wheat into his garner, & wyl burne the chaffe with vnquenciable fyre.
Matthew 3:13 Then came Iesus from Galylee to Iordane, vnto Ihon to be baptysed of him.
Matthew 3:14 But Ihon forbad him sayinge: I oughte to be baptysed of the: and commest thou to me?
Matthew 3:15 Iesus answered and sayd to hym: Let it be so nowe. For thus it becometh vs to fulfyll al righteousnes. Then he suffred him.
Matthew 3:16 And Iesus as sone as he was baptysed came straight out of the water. And lo heauen was open ouer him: and Ihon sawe the spirite of God descende like a doue, and light vpon him.
Matthew 3:17 And lo ther came a voice from heauen sayinge. This is my beloued sonne in whom is my delyte.

CHAPTER: 4

Matthew 4:1 Then was Iesus led away of the spirite into wildernes, to be tempted of the deuyll.
Matthew 4:2 And when he had fasted .xl. dayes & .xl. nightes, he was afterwarde an hungred.
Matthew 4:3 Then came to him the temptour, & said: if thou be the sonne of God, commaunde that these stones be made bread.
Matthew 4:4 He aunswered and said: it is written, man shall not lyue by breade onlye, but by euerye worde that procedeth out of the mouth of God.
Matthew 4:5 Then the deuyll toke him vp into the holye cytye, and set him on a pinacle of the temple,
Matthew 4:6 & sayd vnto him: if thou be the sonne of God cast thy selfe doune. For it is written, he shall geue his aungels charge ouer the, & with their handes they shal holde the vp, that thou dashe not thy fote against a stone:
Matthew 4:7 And Iesus said to him, it is written also: Thou shalt not tempt thy lord God.
Matthew 4:8 The deuil toke him vp again & ledde him into an exceding hye mountayne, and shewed him all the kingdoms of the world, & al the glory of them,
Matthew 4:9 & said to him: al these wyl I geue the, if thou wilt fall doune & worshyppe me.
Matthew 4:10 Then sayd Iesus vnto him. Auoide sathan. For it is wrytten, thou shalt worshippe the Lord thy God and him only shalt thou serue.
Matthew 4:11 Then the diuel left him, & beholde, the aungels came and ministred vnto him.
Matthew 4:12 When Iesus had heard that Iohn was taken, he departed into Galile
Matthew 4:13 and left Nazareth, and went and dwelt in Capernaum, which is a citye vpon the sea, in the coastes of Zabulon & Nephthalim,
Matthew 4:14 to fulfil that which was spoken by Esay the prophete, sayinge.
Matthew 4:15 The lande of Zabulon and Nephthalym, the waye of the sea beyonde Iordan, Galile of the gentils,
Matthew 4:16 the people which sate in darkenes, sawe great light, & to them which sate in the regyon and shadowe of death, light is begonne to shine.
Matthew 4:17 From the tyme Iesus began to preache, & to say repent for the kingdom of heauen is at hand.
Matthew 4:18 As Iesus walked by the sea of Galile, he sawe two brethren: Symon which was called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fysshers,
Matthew 4:19 & he sayed vnto them, folowe me, and I wyll make you fysshers of men.
Matthew 4:20 And they straight waye left their nettes, and folowed hym.
Matthew 4:21 And he went forth from thence, and sawe other two brethren, Iames the sonne of Zebede, and Ihon his brother, in the shippe wyth Zebede their father, mending their nets, and called them.
Matthew 4:22 And they without tarringe left the shyp and their father and folowed hym.
Matthew 4:23 And Iesus went about al Galile, teaching in their sinagoges, & preaching the gospel of the kingdome, & healed al maner of sickenes, & all maner of diseases among the people.
Matthew 4:24 And his fame sprede abrode through out all Siria. And they brought vnto him all sycke people that were taken with diuers diseases & gripinges, and them that were possessed with deuils and those which were lunatike, & those that had the palsie: & he healed them,
Matthew 4:25 & their folowed hym a great numbre of people, from Galyle. And from the ten cities, & from Ierusalem & from Iurie & from the regions that lye beiond Iordan.

CHAPTER: 5

Matthew 5:1 When he sawe the people, he went vp into a mountaine, and when he was set his disciples came to him,
Matthew 5:2 and he opened his mouth, and taught them sayinge,
Matthew 5:3 blessed are the pore in sprete: for theirs is the kingdom of heauen.
Matthew 5:4 Blessed are they that morne, for they shalbe comforted.
Matthew 5:5 Blessed are the meke: for they shall inheret the earth.
Matthew 5:6 Blessed are they which honger & thurste for rightuousnes: for they shalbe filled.
Matthew 5:7 Blessed are the mercifull: for they shal obtaine mercy.
Matthew 5:8 Blessed are the pure in hert: for thei shal se God.
Matthew 5:9 Blessed are the peace makers: for thei shalbe called the children of God.
Matthew 5:10 Blessed are they which suffer persecucion for rightuousnesse sake: for theirs is the kingdom of heauen:
Matthew 5:11 Blessed are ye when men reuile you and persecute you, and shal falsely say al maner of yuel sayinges against you for my sake.
Matthew 5:12 Reioyce & be glad, for great is your reward in heauen. For so persecuted they the prophetes which were before your dayes.
Matthew 5:13 Ye are the salt of the earth: but & if the salt haue lost her saltnes, what can be salted therwith? It is thensforth good for nothinge, but to be cast out, and to be troden vnder fote of men.
Matthew 5:14 Ye are the light of the worlde. A cytye that is set on an hill, can not be hid,
Matthew 5:15 neither do men light a candell & put it vnder a bushell, but on a candelsticke, and it lighteth al that are in the house.
Matthew 5:16 Let your light so shyne before men that they maye se your good workes, and gloryfye your father which is in heauen.
Matthew 5:17 Thinke not that I am come to destroy the lawe, or the prophetes: no I am not come to destroy them, but to fulfil them.
Matthew 5:18 For truly I say vnto you, til heauen & earth perish, one iote or one title of the lawe shal not escape, til al be fulfilled
Matthew 5:19 Whosoeuer therfore breaketh one of these lest commaundementes, & teacheth men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdome of heauen. But whosoeuer obserueth & teacheth, the same shal be called great in the kingdom of heauen.
Matthew 5:20 For I say vnto you except your rightuousnes excede, the rightuousnes of the scribes & phariseis, ye can not entre into the kingdom of heauen.
Matthew 5:21 Ye haue heard howe it was said vnto them of the olde time: Thou shalt not kil. For whosoeuer killeth, shal be in daunger of iudgement,
Matthew 5:22 but I sai vnto yow, whosoeuer is angre wt his brother without a cause shal be in daunger of iudgement. Whosoeuer saieth to his brother Racha, shalbe in daunger of a counsel. But whosoeuer saieth thou fole, shalbe in daunger of hel fire
Matthew 5:23 Therefore when thou offrest thy gift at the altare, & their remembrest that thy brother hath ought against the:
Matthew 5:24 leue there thy offringe before the altare, & go thy way first & be reconciled to thy brother, & then come and offre thy gift.
Matthew 5:25 Agre with thine aduersary quickly, whiles thou art in the way wt him, lest the aduersary deliuer the to the iudge, & the iudge deliuer the to the minister, & then thou be cast into prison.
Matthew 5:26 I say vnto the verely: thou shalt not come out thence tyl thou haue payed the vttermost farthing.
Matthew 5:27 Ye haue heard how it was sayed to them of olde time: Thou shalt not commit adultery.
Matthew 5:28 But I saye vnto you, that whosoeuer loketh on a wife, lustinge after her, hath committed adulterye with her alredy in his herte
Matthew 5:29 Wherfore if thy ryght eye offende the plucke him out, & cast him from the. Better it is for the that one of thy members perishe, then that thy whol body should be cast into hel.
Matthew 5:30 Also if thy right hand offende the, cut him of & cast him from the. Better it is that one of thy members perish, then that all thy body should be cast into hel.
Matthew 5:31 It is sayed, whosoeuer putteth a way his wife, let him geue her a testimonial of the deuorcement.
Matthew 5:32 But I sai vnto you: whosoeuer putteth away his wife (except it be for fornicacion) causeth her to breke matrimony. And whosoeuer marieth her that is deuorced, breaketh wedlocke.
Matthew 5:33 Agayne ye haue hearde how it was sayed to them of olde time, thou shalt not forsweare thy self, but shalt performe thine othe to God.
Matthew 5:34 But I saye vnto you, swere not at al, neither by heauen, for it is Goddes seate:
Matthew 5:35 nor yet by the earth, for it is his fotstole: neither by Ierusalem for it is the citye of the great kinge
Matthew 5:36 neither shalt thou sweare by thy head, because thou canst not make one whyte hear, or blacke.
Matthew 5:37 But your communicacion shalbe, yea, yea: nay, nay. For whatsoeuer is more than that cometh to euell.
Matthew 5:38 Ye haue hearde how it is sayed, an eye for an eye: a tothe for a tothe.
Matthew 5:39 But I saye to you that ye resyst not wrong. But who soeuer geue the a blowe on the right cheke, tourne to hym the other.
Matthew 5:40 And if anye man wyll sue the at the lawe, and take awaye thy coote, let hym haue thy clooke also.
Matthew 5:41 And whosoeuer wyll compell the to goo a myle, goo with hym twaine.
Matthew 5:42 Geue to hym that axeth, & from him that woulde borow tourne not away.
Matthew 5:43 Ye haue hearde how it is said: thou shalt loue thy neighbour, and hate thyne enemy.
Matthew 5:44 But I say vnto you loue your enemies. Blesse theim that cursse you. Do good to them that hate you. Pray for them which doo you wronge and persecute you,
Matthew 5:45 that ye may be the chyldren of youre father that is in heauen: for he maketh his sonne to aryse on the yuyll, and on the good and sendeth his raine on the iust and vniust.
Matthew 5:46 For if ye loue them, whiche loue you: what rewarde shall ye haue? Doo not the publicanes euen so?
Matthew 5:47 And if ye be frendly to your brethren only what synguler thinge doo ye? Do not the publycanes likewyses?
Matthew 5:48 Ye shall therfore be perfect, euen as your father which is in heauen, is perfect.

CHAPTER: 6

Matthew 6:1 Take hede to your almes, that ye geue it not in the sight of men, to the intent that ye would be sene of them. Or els ye get no rewarde of youre father whyche is in heauen.
Matthew 6:2 Whensoeuer therfore thou geuest thime almes, thou shalt not make a trompet to be blowen before the, as the hypocrytes do in the synagoges and in the stretes, for to be praised of men. Verely I saye vnto you, they haue their rewarde.
Matthew 6:3 But when thou doest thine almes, let not thy lyft hande knowe what thy ryght hande doth,
Matthew 6:4 that thyne almes may be secrete: and thy father whiche seeth in secrete, shall rewarde the openly.
Matthew 6:5 And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as the hipocrites are. For they loue to stande and praye in the sinagoges, and in the corners of the stretes, and because they wolde be seane of men. Verely I say vnto you, they haue their rewarde.
Matthew 6:6 But when thou prayest, entre into thy chamber, & shut thy dore to the, & praie to thi father which is in secrete: & thy father which seeth in secrete, shall rewarde the openlye.
Matthew 6:7 But when ye praye, bable not much as the Heathen do: for they thinke that they shalbe herde, for their muche bablynge sake.
Matthew 6:8 Be ye not lyke them therfore. For your father knoweth wherof ye haue neade, before ye axe of him
Matthew 6:9 after this manner therfore pray ye. Our father which art in heauen, halowed be thy name.
Matthew 6:10 Let thy kingdome come. Thy wyll be fulfylled, as well in earth, as it is in heauen.
Matthew 6:11 Geue vs this daye our daylye breade.
Matthew 6:12 And forgeue vs our trespases, euen as we forgeue oure trespasers.
Matthew 6:13 And lead vs not into temptaciou. But delyuer vs from euyll. For thyne is the kingdome and the power, and the glorye for euer Amen.
Matthew 6:14 For and if ye shall forgeue other men their trespases, your heauenlye father shall also forgeue you.
Matthew 6:15 But and ye wyll not forgeue men theyr trespases, no more shall your father forgeue your trespases.
Matthew 6:16 Moreouer when ye fast, be not sad as the hipocrites are. For they disfygure their faces, that they myght be sene of men how they fast. Verely I say vnto you, they haue their rewarde.
Matthew 6:17 But thou, when thou fastest, annoint thine head, & wash thy face
Matthew 6:18 that it appeare not vnto men howe that thou fastest but vnto thy father which is in secrete: & thy father which seth in secret shal reward the openly.
Matthew 6:19 Se that ye gater you not treasure vpon the earth, where ruste & mothes corrupte, & wher theues breake throughe & steale.
Matthew 6:20 But gather ye treasure together in heauen, where neither rust nor mothes corrupt, & where theues neyther breake vp nor yet steale.
Matthew 6:21 For wher soeuer your treasur is, ther wyl your hertes be also.
Matthew 6:22 The lyght of thy body is thine eye. Wherfore if thine eye be single, al thy bodye shalbe full of light.
Matthew 6:23 But and if thyne eye be wycked then al thy bodye shalbe ful of darkenes. Wherfore if the light that is in the, be darkenes: how great is that darckenes?
Matthew 6:24 No man can serue two maysters. For eyther he shall hate the one & loue the other: yea or eles he shall leane to the one & dispise the other. Ye cannot serue God & Mammon.
Matthew 6:25 Therfore I saie vnto you, be not tareful for you life what ye shall eate or what ye shall dryncke, nor yet for your bodye, what ye shall put on, is not the lyfe more worthe then meate, and the body more of value then rayment?
Matthew 6:26 Behold the foules of the ayer: for the sowe not, neyther reape, nor yet cary into the barnes: and yet your heauenlye father fedethe them. Are ye not muche better then they?
Matthew 6:27 Whych of you (though he toke thoughte therfore) coulde put one cubit vnto hys statuture?
Matthew 6:28 And why care ye then for rayment? Considre the lylies of the filde, howe they growe. They laboureth not nether spynne.
Matthew 6:29 And yet for all that I saye vnto you that euen Solomon in all hys royaltie was not arayed lyke vnto one of these.
Matthew 6:30 Wherfore if God so clothe the grasse, which is to day in the felde, and to morowe shall be cast in to the fournace: shall he not much more do the same vnto you, o ye of lytle fayth?
Matthew 6:31 Therfore take no thought saiynge: what shall we eate, or what shall we dryncke, or wherewith shal we be clothed?
Matthew 6:32 After all these thynges seke the gentils. For your heauenlye father knoweth that ye haue neade of all these thynges.
Matthew 6:33 But rather seke ye first the kyngdome of heauen and the rightuousnes therof, & all these thynge shalbe ministred vnto you.
Matthew 6:34 Care not then for the morow, but let the morow care for itself: for the day present hath euer ynough of his owne trouble.

CHAPTER: 7

Matthew 7:1 Ivdge not, that ye be not iudged.
Matthew 7:2 For as ye iudge so, shall ye be iudged. And with what measur ye meate, with the same shal it be measured to you agayne.
Matthew 7:3 Why seiste thou a moote in thy brothers eye, & perceyuest not the beame that is in thyne owne eye?
Matthew 7:4 Or why saist thou to thy brother: suffer me to plucke out the moote out of thyne eye, & beholde a beame is in thyne owne eye?
Matthew 7:5 Hypocrite, first caste out the beame out of thyne owne eye, and then shalte thou se clearelye to plucke out the moote out of thy brothers eye.
Matthew 7:6 Geue not that whiche is holye, to dogges nether cast ye your pearles before swyne, lest they treade them vnder theyr feete, and the other tourne agayne and al to rent you.
Matthew 7:7 Axe and it shalbe geuen you. Seke and ye shall fynde. Knocke & it shalbe opened vnto you.
Matthew 7:8 For whosoeuer axeth receyueth, and he that seketh fyndethe, and to hym that knocketh, it shalbe opened.
Matthew 7:9 Ys there any man amonge you whiche if his sonne axed hym bread, would offer him a stone?
Matthew 7:10 Or if he axed fyshe, woulde he profer him a serpente?
Matthew 7:11 Yf ye then whyche are euyll, can geue to youre chyldren good gyftes: howe muche more shall your father whiche is in heauen, geue good thinges to them that axe hym?
Matthew 7:12 Therfore whatsoeuer ye woulde that men shoulde do to you, euen so do ye to them. Thys is the lawe and the Prophetes.
Matthew 7:13 Enter in at the strayte gate: for wide is the gate and broade is the way that leadeth to destruction: and many there be whiche go in therat.
Matthew 7:14 But strayt is the gate, and narrowe is the waye which leadeth vnto lyfe: & feawe there be that fynde it.
Matthew 7:15 Beware of false Prophetes, whiche come to you in shepes clothing, but inwardly they are rauenynge wolues.
Matthew 7:16 Ye shall knowe them by their fruites. Do men gaddre grapes of thornes? or figges of bryers?
Matthew 7:17 Euen so euery good tre bryngeth forth good fruite. But a corrupt tree, bringeth forth euyll fruyte.
Matthew 7:18 A good tree can not bringe forthe bad fruyte: nor yet a bad tree can bringe forth good fruite.
Matthew 7:19 Euery tree that bryngeth not forthe good fruite shalbe hewen downe, and cast into the fyre.
Matthew 7:20 Wherfore by theyr fruytes ye shal knowe them.
Matthew 7:21 Not al they that saye vnto me, Maister Maister, shal enter into the kingdome of heauen: but he that doeth my fathers will which is in heauen.
Matthew 7:22 Many will saye to me in that daye: Maister, maister, haue we not in thy name prophesied? And in thy name haue cast out deuylles? And in thy name haue done many miracles?
Matthew 7:23 And then will I knowledge vnto them, that I neuer knewe them. Departe from me, ye workers of iniquitie.
Matthew 7:24 Whosoeuer heareth of me these sayinges and doethe the same, I wyll lyken hym vnto a wyse man which buylt hys housse on a rocke
Matthew 7:25 and aboundaunce of rayne descended, and the flouddes came, and the windes blew and bet vpon that same housse, and it fell not because it was grounded on the rocke.
Matthew 7:26 And whosoeuer heareth of me these sayinges and doeth them not, shalbe lykened vnto a folyshe man whyche buylt hys housse vpon the sande
Matthew 7:27 and abundance of rayne descended, and the floudes came, and the wyndes blewe and bet vpon that housse, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.
Matthew 7:28 And it came to passe, that when Iesus had ended these saynges, the people were astonyed at his doctrine.
Matthew 7:29 For he taught them as one hauing power, and not as the Scribes.

CHAPTER: 8

Matthew 8:1 When he was come downe from the mountayne, much people folowed him.
Matthew 8:2 And lo, there came a lepre & worshipped him saying Master, if thou wylt, thou canst make me cleane.
Matthew 8:3 And Iesus put forthe his hand & touched him, saiyng: I will, be thou cleane, & immediatly his leprosye was clensed.
Matthew 8:4 And Iesus sayde vnto hym. Se thou tell no man, but go and shewe thy selfe to the pryeste, and offer the gyft that Moyses commaunded in witnes to them.
Matthew 8:5 When Iesus was entred into Capernaum there came vnto him a certayne Centurion, & besought him
Matthew 8:6 sayinge: Master my seruaunte lyeth sycke at home of the palsy, & is greuouslye pained.
Matthew 8:7 And Iesus saide vnto him: I wyll come and heale him.
Matthew 8:8 The Centurion aunswered and sayd: Sir I am not worthy that thou shouldest come vnder my rofe, but speake the worde only and my saruaunt shalbe healed.
Matthew 8:9 For I also my selfe am a man vndre power, & haue soudiers vnder me, & I say to one, go, & he goeth, and to an other come, & he cometh: and to my seruante, do this, he doeth it:
Matthew 8:10 When Iesus hearde that, he maruailed & sayed to them that folowed him. Verely I say vnto you, I haue not founde so great faith: no, not in Israel.
Matthew 8:11 I say therfore vnto you that many shall come from the east and west, and shal rest with Abraham, Isaac and Iacob in the kingdome of heauen:
Matthew 8:12 and the children of the kingdome shall be cast out in the vtter darkenes: there shalbe wepinge and gnashynge of teth.
Matthew 8:13 Iesus sayd vnto the Centurion, go thy way, and as thou hast beleued so be it vnto the. And his seruaunt was healed the selfe houre.
Matthew 8:14 And then Iesus went to Peters house, and sawe his wyues mother lyinge sycke of a feuer,
Matthew 8:15 and touched her hand, & the feuer left her: and she arose, and ministred vnto them.
Matthew 8:16 When the euen was come, they brought vnto him many that were possessed with deuyls. And he cast out the spretes with a word, and healed all that were sycke,
Matthew 8:17 to fulfyll that which was spoken by Esaias the prophete sayinge. He toke on him oure infyrmyteis, & beare oure sycknesses.
Matthew 8:18 When Iesus sawe muche people aboute him, he commaunded to go ouer the water.
Matthew 8:19 And there came a scribe and sayde vnto hym: master, I wil folowe the whither soeuer thou goest.
Matthew 8:20 And Iesus sayd vnto him: the foxes haue holes, and the birddes of the ayer haue nestes, but the sonne of man hath not wheron to rest his heade.
Matthew 8:21 Another that was one of his disciples said vnto him: master, suffer me fyrst to go and burye my father.
Matthew 8:22 But Iesus sayd vnto hym folowe me, and let the dead burye their deade.
Matthew 8:23 And he entred into a shyppe, and his disciples folowed him.
Matthew 8:24 And beholde there arose a great tempest in the sea, in so much that the shippe was couered with waues, and he was a slepe.
Matthew 8:25 And his discyples came vnto him, and awoke him sayinge: master saue vs, we peryshe.
Matthew 8:26 And he sayed vnto them: why are ye fearfull, O ye of lytle fayth? Then he arose, and rebuked the wyndes and the sea, and there folowed a great calme.
Matthew 8:27 And the men maruayled and sayed: what man is this, that both wyndes and sea obey hym?
Matthew 8:28 And when he was come to the other syde, into the countre of the Gergesytes, there mete him two possessed of deuils, which came out of the graues, & were out of measure fearce, so that no man myght go by that way.
Matthew 8:29 And behold they cried out saying: O Iesu the sonne of God, what haue we to do with the? Art thou come hither to torment vs before the tyme be come?
Matthew 8:30 And ther was a good waye of from them a great hearde of swyne fedinge.
Matthew 8:31 Then the deuyls besoughte him sayinge: if thou cast vs out, suffer vs to go our way into the heard of swyne.
Matthew 8:32 And he said vnto theim, go your waies. Then went they out of & departed into the hearde of swine. And behold the whole heard of swyne was caryed with violence headling into the sea, and peryshed in the water.
Matthew 8:33 Then the hearde men fled & went their wayes into the citye, and tolde euerye thynge, and what had fortuned vnto the possessed of the deuyls.
Matthew 8:34 And beholde all the cytye came out and met Iesus, and when they sawe him they besought hym for to departe out of their coastes.

CHAPTER: 9

Matthew 9:1 Then he entred into a shyppe & passed ouer and came into his owne citie.
Matthew 9:2 And, lo thei brought to him a man sycke of the palsye, lyinge in his bedde. And when Iesus sawe the faith of them he said to the sick of the palsie sonne be of good chere, thy sinnes be forgeuen the.
Matthew 9:3 And beholde certayne of the scribes sayd in them selues, thys man blasphemeth.
Matthew 9:4 And when Iesus sawe theyr thoughtes, he sayed: wherfor thinke ye euill in your hertes?
Matthew 9:5 Whether is easyer to saye, thy synnes be forgeuen the, or to saye: aryse and walke?
Matthew 9:6 That ye maye knowe that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue synnes in earth: then sayed he vnto the sicke of the palsie: aryse, take vp thy bed, and go home to thyne house.
Matthew 9:7 And he arose and departed to hys owne house.
Matthew 9:8 And when the people sawe it, they marueyled & glorifyed God whiche hath geuen suche power to men.
Matthew 9:9 And as Iesus passed forth from thence, he saw a man syt receyuyng of custome named Mathew, and sayd to hym: folow me.
Matthew 9:10 And he arose and folowed hym. And it came to passe, as he sate at meat in the house: beholde many Publicans, and synners came and sate doune also with Iesus and hys disciples.
Matthew 9:11 When the Phariseis sawe that, they sayed to hys disciples: why eateth your master with Publicans and synners?
Matthew 9:12 When Iesus heard that he sayed vnto them: The whole neade not the Phisicion, but they that are sicke.
Matthew 9:13 Go, and learne, what that meaneth: I haue pleasure in mercye, & not in offerynge. For I am not come to cal the ryghtuouse but the synners to repentaunce.
Matthew 9:14 Then came the disciples of Iohn to hym saying: why do we and the Pharises fast ofte: but thy disciples fast not?
Matthew 9:15 And Iesus sayd vnto them. Can the weddyng children morne as long as the bridegrome is with them? The tyme will come when the bridegrome shalbe taken from them, and then shal they faste:
Matthew 9:16 No man peceth an olde garment with a pece of newe clothe. For then taketh he awaye the pece agayne from the garment, and the rente is made greater.
Matthew 9:17 Nether do men put newe wyne into olde vessels, for then the vessels breake and the wyne runneth out, and the vessels peryshe. But they poure newe wyne into newe vessels, and so are both saued together.
Matthew 9:18 Whyles he thus spake vnto them, behold there came a certaine rueler, and worshipped him sayinge my doughter is euen now dyseased, but come and lay thy hand on her, and she shall lyue.
Matthew 9:19 And Iesus arose and folowed him with his disciples.
Matthew 9:20 And beholde, a woman which was diseased with an issue of bloude .xij. yeres, came behinde him and touched the hem of his vesture.
Matthew 9:21 For she said in her selfe: if I maye touche but euen his vesture only, I shalbe safe.
Matthew 9:22 Then Iesus tourned him about, & behelde her saynge: Doughter be of good comforth, thy faith hath made the safe. And she was made whole euen that same houre.
Matthew 9:23 And when Iesus came into the rulers house, and sawe the ministrels and the people raginge,
Matthew 9:24 he sayd vnto them: Get you hence, for the mayde is not dead, but slepeth. And they laughed him to scorne.
Matthew 9:25 Assone as the people were put forth, he went in and toke her by the hande, and the mayde arose.
Matthew 9:26 And this was noysed through out all that lande.
Matthew 9:27 And as Iesus departed thence, two blinde men folowed hym cryinge and sayinge: O thou sonne of Dauid haue mercy on vs.
Matthew 9:28 And when he was come into the house, the blynde came to him. And Iesus saide vnto them: Beleue ye that I am able to do this? And they sayde vnto him: ye Lorde.
Matthew 9:29 Then touched he their eyes, sayinge: accordinge to your fayth, be it vnto you.
Matthew 9:30 And their eyes were opened. And Iesus charged them sayinge: Se that no man knowe of it.
Matthew 9:31 But they assone as they were departed, spred abrode his name through out all the lande.
Matthew 9:32 As they were come out behold, a domme man possessed of a deuil, was brought to him.
Matthew 9:33 And as sone as the deuyl was cast out, the domme spake: And the people meruayled: sayinge: it was neuer so sene in Israell.
Matthew 9:34 But the pharyseis sayed: he casteth out deuils, by the power of the chiefe deuyl.
Matthew 9:35 And Iesus went aboute all cytyes and tounes, teachinge in their synagoges and preachinge the gladde tidinges of the kingdome, and healinge all maner sicknes and disease amonge the people.
Matthew 9:36 But when he sawe the people, he had compassyon on them, because they were pyned awaye, and scattred abroad, euen as shepe hauinge no shepeherde.
Matthew 9:37 Then sayde he to his disciples: the herueste is greate, but the labourers are fewe.
Matthew 9:38 Wherfore pray the Lord of the haruest to send forth labourers into his haruest.

CHAPTER: 10

Matthew 10:1 And he called his .xij. Disciples vnto him & gaue theym power ouer vncleane spyrytes, to caste them out, and to heale all maner of sycknesses, and al maner of diseases.
Matthew 10:2 The names of the .xij. Apostles are these. The fyrst Simon called also Peter: and Andrewe his brother. Iames the sonne of Zebede, and Iohn his brother:
Matthew 10:3 Philip and Bartlemew. Thomas and Mathewe the publican. Iames the sonne of Alphe, and Lebbius otherwyse called Taddeus.
Matthew 10:4 Symon of Cane, and Iudus Iscarioth which also betrayed hym.
Matthew 10:5 These .xij. sent Iesus forth after he had geuen to them commaundement sainge Go not into the wayes that lead to the gentyls, & into the cityes of the Samaritanes enter ye not.
Matthew 10:6 But go rather to the lost shepe of the house of Israel.
Matthew 10:7 Go and preache sayinge: that the kingdome of heauen is at hande.
Matthew 10:8 Heale the sicke, clense the lepers, raise the dead, cast out the deuils. Frely ye haue receyued, frely geue againe.
Matthew 10:9 Possesse not golde, nor syluer, nor brasse in your girdles,
Matthew 10:10 nor yet scrip towardes your yourney: neither two cotes neyther shues, nor yet a staste. For the worck man is worthye to haue his meate.
Matthew 10:11 Into whatsoeuer citye or toune ye shall come enquire who is worthye in it, & there abyde tyl ye go thence
Matthew 10:12 And when ye come into an house salute the same.
Matthew 10:13 And if the house be worthy, your peace shall come vpon it. But if it be not worthy, your peace shall retourne to you againe.
Matthew 10:14 And whosoeuer shall not receiue you, nor wyll heare your preachinge: when ye departe out of that house or that cytye, shake of the duste of your fete.
Matthew 10:15 Truly I say vnto you: it shalbe easyer for the lande of Sodoma & Gomorra in the daye of iudgement then for that citie.
Matthew 10:16 Beholde I sende you forth as shepe among wolues. Be ye therfore wyse as serpentes, and innocent as doues.
Matthew 10:17 Beware of men, for they shall delyuer you vp to the counsels, and shall stourge you in their synagoges.
Matthew 10:18 And ye shalbe brought to the head rulers and kinges for my sake, in witnes to them & to the gentyls.
Matthew 10:19 But when they deliuer you vp take no thought howe or what ye shall speake, for it shalbe geuen you, euen in that same houre, what ye shal saye.
Matthew 10:20 For it is not ye that speake, but the sprete of your father which speaketh in you.
Matthew 10:21 The brother shall betraye the brother to death, and the father the sonne. And the children shall aryse againste their fathers & mothers, and shall put them to death:
Matthew 10:22 and ye shal be hated of all men for my name. But he that endureth to the ende shalbe saued.
Matthew 10:23 When they persecute you in one citye, flye into another. I tell you for a truthe, ye shall not fynishe all the cityes of Israel, tyl the sonne of man become.
Matthew 10:24 The discyples is not aboue his master: nor yet the seruaunt aboue his Lorde.
Matthew 10:25 It is ynough for the discyple to be as his master is, and that the seruaunt be as hys Lorde is. If they haue called the good man of the house him selfe belzebub: how muche more shal they call them of his housholde so?
Matthew 10:26 Fear them not therfore. Therfore is nothinge so close, that shal not be opened, & nothing so hid, that shal not be knowen.
Matthew 10:27 What I tell you in darkenes, that speake ye in light. And what ye heare in the eare, that preache ye on the house toppes.
Matthew 10:28 And feare ye not them which kil the body, and be not able to kill the soule. But rather feare him, which is able to destroy both soule & body into hell.
Matthew 10:29 Are not two sparowes solde for a farthyng? And none of them doth lyght on the grounde, without your father.
Matthew 10:30 And now are all that heires of your heades numbred.
Matthew 10:31 Feare ye not therfore: ye are of more value then many sparowes.
Matthew 10:32 Whosoeuer therfore shall acknowlege me before men, hym will I acknowledge also before my father which is in heauen.
Matthew 10:33 But whosoeuer shall deny me before men, hym will I also deny before my father which is in heauen.
Matthew 10:34 Thinke not that I am come to sende peace into the earth. I came not to sende peace but a swerd.
Matthew 10:35 For I am come to set a man at variaunce agaynst hys father, and the doughter against her mother, and the doughterlaw against her motherlaw:
Matthew 10:36 And a mans fooes shall be they of hys owne housholde.
Matthew 10:37 He that loueth hys father, or mother more then me, is not mete for me. And he that loueth hys sonne or doughter more then me, is not mete for me.
Matthew 10:38 And he that taketh not hys crosse & foloweth me, is not mete for me.
Matthew 10:39 He that findeth hys lyfe, shal loose it: and he that looseth hys lyfe for my sake, shall fynde it.
Matthew 10:40 He that receyueth you, receyueth me: & he that receyueth me, receiueth him that sent me,
Matthew 10:41 He that receyueth a Prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receyue a prophetes reward. And he that receyueth a righteouse man in the name of a righteous man, shal receyue the rewarde of a righteous man.
Matthew 10:42 And whosoeuer shall geue vnto one of these lytle ones to drinke, a cuppe of colde water only, in the name of a discypell: I tell you of a truthe, he shall not lose his rewarde.

CHAPTER: 11

Matthew 11:1 And it came to passe when Iesus had made an ende of commaundinge his .xij. disciples, he departed thence to teache and to preache in their cityes.
Matthew 11:2 When Iohn beinge in prison hearde the workes of Christe, he sent two of his discyples
Matthew 11:3 and sayd vnto him. Art thou he that shal come: or shall we loke for another.
Matthew 11:4 Iesus anuswered and saide vnto them. Go and shewe Ihon what ye haue hearde & sene.
Matthew 11:5 The blinde se, the halt go, the lepers are clensed: the deaf heare, the dead ryse againe, and the glade tydinges is preached to the poore.
Matthew 11:6 And happye is he that is not offended by me.
Matthew 11:7 And as thei departed Iesus began to speake vnto the people of Iohn. What thing went ye out into the wildernes to se? wente ye out to se a rede shaken with the winde?
Matthew 11:8 other what wente ye out for to se? A man clothed in soft rayment? Beholde they that weare softe clothed, are in kinges houses.
Matthew 11:9 But what went ye out for to se? A prophete. Yea, I say vnto you, and more then a prophete.
Matthew 11:10 For this is he of whom it is written. Beholde, I sende my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before the.
Matthew 11:11 Verely I say vnto you, amonge the children of women arose ther not a greater then Iohn the Baptist. Notwithstandinge he that is lesse in the kingdome of heauen, is greater then he.
Matthew 11:12 From the tyme of Iohn Baptiste hitherto, the kingdome of heauen suffreth violence, and they that go to it with violence plucke it vnto them.
Matthew 11:13 For all the prophetes and the lawe prophecyed vnto the tyme of Iohn.
Matthew 11:14 And if ye wyll receyue it, this is that Helias which shoulde come.
Matthew 11:15 He that hath eares to heare let hym heare.
Matthew 11:16 But wherunto shal I lyke this generacion? It is lyke vnto children which syt in the market and call vnto their felowes,
Matthew 11:17 and saye we haue pyped vnto you, & ye haue not daunced? We haue morned vnto you, and ye haue not sorowed.
Matthew 11:18 For Iohn came neyther eatynge nor drinkinge, and they say, he hath the deuyl.
Matthew 11:19 The sonne of man came eatinge and drynking, and they saye, beholde a glutton and drinker of wine, and a frende vnto publicans and synners. Neuerthelater wysdome is iustifyed of her children.
Matthew 11:20 Then began he to vpbrayd the cytyes, in which most of his miracles were done, because they mended not.
Matthew 11:21 Wo be to the Chorasin. Wo be to the Bethzaida: for if the miracles which were shewed in you, had be done in Tyre and Sidon, they had repented longe agone in sackcloth and ashes.
Matthew 11:22 Neuerthelesse I saye to you: it shall be easier for Tyre and Sydon at the daye of iudgement, then for you.
Matthew 11:23 And thou Capernaum, which art lyft vp vnto heauen, shall be brought doune to hell. For if the miracles which haue bene done in the, had be shewed in Zodome: they had remayned to this daye.
Matthew 11:24 Neuerthelesse I saye vnto you: it shall be easyer for the lande of Zodom in the daye of iudgement, then for the.
Matthew 11:25 At that time Iesus aunswered and said: I prayse the, O father Lorde of heauen and earth, because thou hast hid these thinges from the wyse and prudent, and hast opened theim vnto babes:
Matthew 11:26 euen so father, for so it pleased the.
Matthew 11:27 All thinges are geuen vnto me of my father. And no man knoweth the sonne but the father: neyther knoweth anye man the father, saue the sonne, and he to whom the sonne wyl open hym.
Matthew 11:28 Come vnto me all ye that labour and are laden and I wyll ease you.
Matthew 11:29 Take my yocke on you and learne of me, for I am meke and lowly in herte: and ye shall fynde reste vnto your soules.
Matthew 11:30 For my yocke is easy: and my burden is lyght.

CHAPTER: 12

Matthew 12:1 In that tyme went Iesus on the Saboth dayes thorowe the corne and his discyples were an hungred, and began to plucke the eares of corne and to eate.
Matthew 12:2 When the Phariseis sawe that they sayde vnto him: Beholde, thy discyples do that which is not laufwl to do vpon the saboth daye.
Matthew 12:3 He sayde vnto them: Haue ye not read what Dauid dyd, when he was an hungred, and they also whiche were with hym?
Matthew 12:4 How he entred into the house of God, & eate the halowed louwes, which were not lawful, for him to eate, neyther for them which were with him but onlye for the priestes.
Matthew 12:5 Or haue ye not read in the law, how that the pryestes in the temple breake the saboth day, and yet are blamlesse:
Matthew 12:6 But I say vnto you: that here is one greater then the temple.
Matthew 12:7 Wherfore if ye had wist what this sayinge meaneth: I require mercye and not sacrifyce: ye would neuer haue condemned innocentes:
Matthew 12:8 For the sonne of man is Lorde euen of the saboth day.
Matthew 12:9 And he departed thence, and went into their synagoge:
Matthew 12:10 and beholde there was a man which had his hande dryed vp. And they axed hym sayinge: is it lawful to heale vpon the saboth dayes? because they myght accuse him.
Matthew 12:11 And he sayd vnto them. Which of you wolde it be, if he had a shepe fallen into a pitte on the saboth daye, that woulde not take hym and lyft hym out?
Matthew 12:12 And how muche is a man better then a shepe? Wherfore it is lawful to do a good dede on the saboth dayes.
Matthew 12:13 Then sayde he to the man: stretch forth thy hande. And he stetched it forth. And it was made whole again lyke vnto the other.
Matthew 12:14 Then the pharyseis went out, and held a counsel against him, how they might destroy hym.
Matthew 12:15 When Iesus knewe that, he departed thence, and much people folowed hym, and he healed them all,
Matthew 12:16 and charged them, that they shoulde not make him knowen:
Matthew 12:17 to fulfyll that which was spoken by Esaye the prophete, which sayeth.
Matthew 12:18 Beholde my chylde, whom I haue chosen my beloued, in whom my soule delyteth. I wyll put my sprryte on him, and he shall shew iudgement to the gentils.
Matthew 12:19 He shall not striue, he shal not cry neither shal any man hear his voice in the stretes,
Matthew 12:20 a brosed rede shalnot he breake, & flaxe the beginneth to burne he shal not quenche, tyll he sende forth iudgemen vnto to victory,
Matthew 12:21 and in his name shall the gentyls truste.
Matthew 12:22 Then was brought to him, one possessed with a deuyll which was both blinde & dombe: and he healed him, insomuch that he which was blinde and dombe, both spake and sawe.
Matthew 12:23 And al the people were amased, and sayde: Is not this that sonne of Dauid?
Matthew 12:24 But when the Pharyseis hearde that they sayde: This felowe driueth the deuils no nother wyse out but by the helpe of Belzebub the chiefe of the deuils.
Matthew 12:25 But Iesus knewe their thoughtes, and sayed to them. Euery Kingdome deuided within it selfe, shall be brought to naught. Neyther shall anye cytye or housholde deuided against it selfe continue.
Matthew 12:26 So if sathan cast out sathan, then is he deuided againste him selfe Howe shall then his kingdome endure?
Matthew 12:27 Also if I by the helpe of belzabub cast out deuils: by whose helpe do your children caste them out? Therfore they shalbe your iudges.
Matthew 12:28 But if I cast out the deuyls by the sprete of God: then is the kingdome of God come on you?
Matthew 12:29 Eyther how can a man enter into a strong mans house, and violently take away his goodes: except he first binde the stronge man, and then spoyle his house?
Matthew 12:30 He that is not with me, is against me. And he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abrode.
Matthew 12:31 Wherfore I saye vnto you, all maner of synne and blasphemy of forgeuen vnto men: but the blasphemy of the sprete, shall not be forgeuen vnto men.
Matthew 12:32 And whosoeuer speaketh a worde against the sonne of man, it shall be forgeuen him. But whosoeuer speaketh againste the holye ghost, it shall not be forgeuen him: no, neyther in this worlde, neyther in the worlde to come.
Matthew 12:33 Either make the tree good, and his frute good also: or els make the tree euyll, and hys frute euyll also. For the tree is knowen by his frute.
Matthew 12:34 O generation of vipers, how can ye say well, when ye your selues are euil? For of the aboundaunce of the herte, the mouth speaketh.
Matthew 12:35 A good man out of the good treasure of hys herte, bringeth forth good thinges. And an euill man out of his euill treasure, bringeth forth euil thinges.
Matthew 12:36 But I say vnto you, that of euery idell worde that men shall haue spoken: they shall geue a countes at the daye of iudgement.
Matthew 12:37 For thy wordes thou shalt be iustified: & by thy wordes thou shalt be condemned.
Matthew 12:38 Then aunswered certaine of the scrybes and of the Phariseis sayinge. Master, we woulde fayne se a sygne of the.
Matthew 12:39 He aunswered and said to them: The euyll and aduouterous generation seketh a sygne, but there shal no sygne be geuen to them, saue the signe of the prophete Ionas.
Matthew 12:40 For as Ionas was thre dayes and thre nyghtes in the whales bellye: so shall the sonne of man be thre dayes and thre nyghtes in the herte of the earth.
Matthew 12:41 The men of Niniuye shall ryse at the daye of iudgement with this nacion, and condemne them: for thei amended at the preaching of Ionas: And beholde, a greater then Ionas is here.
Matthew 12:42 The quene of the south shall ryse at the daye of iudgement with this generacion, and shall condemne theim: for she came from the vttermost parties of the worlde to hear the wysdome of Salomon. And beholde a greater then Salomon is here.
Matthew 12:43 When the vncleane spirite is gone out of a man he walketh through out dry places, se kinge rest and fyndeth none.
Matthew 12:44 Then he sayth: I wyll retourne againe into my house, from whence I came out. And when he is come, he fyndeth the house empty and swepte and garnished.
Matthew 12:45 Then he goeth his way and taketh vnto him seuen other spirites worsse then hym selfe, and so enter they in and dwell there. And the ende of that man is worsse then the beginning. Euen so shall it be with this euill nacion.
Matthew 12:46 Whyle he yet talked to the people: beholde his mother and his brethren stode without, desyrynge to speake with hym.
Matthew 12:47 Then one sayd vnto: beholde thy mother and brethren stande without, desyrynge to speake with the.
Matthew 12:48 He aunswered and sayd to hym that tolde him: Who is my mother? Who are my brethren?
Matthew 12:49 And he stretched forth his hande ouer his disciples, and sayd: beholde my mother & my brethren.
Matthew 12:50 For whosoeuer doth my fathers wyll which is in heauen, the same is my brother, syster and mother.

CHAPTER: 13

Matthew 13:1 The same daye wente Iesus out of the house, and sate by the sea syde,
Matthew 13:2 and much people resorted vnto hym, so greatly that he went and sate in a shyppe, and all the people stode on the shore.
Matthew 13:3 And he spake many thinges to them in symilitudes, saying, beholde, the sower went forth to sowe.
Matthew 13:4 And as he sowed, some fel by the wayes syde, and the foules came and deuoured it vp.
Matthew 13:5 Some fell vpon stonye grounde where it hadde not muche earth: and anon it sprong vp, because it had no depth of earth:
Matthew 13:6 & when the sunne was vp, it caughte heate, and for lacke of rotynge wyddred awaye.
Matthew 13:7 Some fel among thornes, & the thornes sprong vp and chooked it.
Matthew 13:8 Parte fell in good grounde, and brought forth good frute: some an hundred fold, some sixtie folde, some thyrty folde.
Matthew 13:9 Whosoeuer hath eares to heare let hym heare.
Matthew 13:10 And the disciples came and sayde to hym: Why speakest thou to them in parables?
Matthew 13:11 He aunswered and sayde vnto theym: it is geuen vnto you to know the secretes of the kyngdom of heauen, but to them it is not geuen
Matthew 13:12 For whosoeuer hath to hym shalbe geuen, and he shall haue aboundaunce. But whosoeuer hath not: from hym shalbe taken awaye euen that he hath.
Matthew 13:13 Therfore speake I to them in similitudes: for though they se, they se not: and hearyng they heare not: neyther vnderstand.
Matthew 13:14 And in them is fulfilled the Prophesye of Esayas, whych prophesie sayth: with the eares ye shal heare, and shal not vnderstande, and with the eyes ye shal se, and shall not perceyue.
Matthew 13:15 For this people hertes are waxed grosse, and their eares were dull of hearynge, and their eyes haue they closed, lest they should se with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and shoulde vnderstand with their hertes, & should tourne that I myght heale them.
Matthew 13:16 But blessed are your eyes, for they se: and your eares, for thei heare.
Matthew 13:17 Verely I say vnto you, that many Prophetes and perfecte men haue desired to se the thinges whyche ye se, & haue not sene theim: and to heare the thynges which ye heare, and haue not heard them.
Matthew 13:18 Heare ye therfore the similitude of the sower.
Matthew 13:19 Whosoeuer heareth the word of the kyngedome and vnderstandeth it not, there cometh the euill man, and catcheth awaye that which was sowen in hys hert, and this is he whiche was sowen by the way side.
Matthew 13:20 But he that was sowen in the stony grounde, is he which heareth the worde of God, and anone with ioye receyueth it,
Matthew 13:21 yet hath he no rootes in hym selfe, and therefore dureth but a season. For assone as tribulation or persecucion ariseth because of the word, by and by he falleth.
Matthew 13:22 He that was sowen among thornes, is he that heareth the worde of God: but the care of thys world, and the disceythfulnes of ryches choke the word, & so is he made vnfruteful.
Matthew 13:23 But he whiche is sowen in the good ground, is he that heareth the worde and vnderstandeth it, whiche also beareth frute and bryngeth forth, some an .C. folde, some sixtye folde, and some .xxx. folde.
Matthew 13:24 Another similitude put he forth vnto them saying: The kyngedom of heauen is lyke vnto a man whiche sowed good seede in hys felde.
Matthew 13:25 But whyle men slept there came hys foo and sowed tares amonge the wheate, and went hys waye.
Matthew 13:26 When the blade was spronge vp, and had brought forth frute, then apeared the tares also.
Matthew 13:27 The seruauntes came to the housholder, and sayde vnto hym: Sir sowedest not thou good seede in thy close? From whence then hath it tared?
Matthew 13:28 He sayed to them: The enuious man hath done this. Then the seruauntes sayde vnto hym. Wilt thou then that we go and gadder them?
Matthew 13:29 But he sayde, nay, lest whyle ye go about to wede oute the tares, ye plucke vp also wyth them the wheat by the rotes.
Matthew 13:30 Let both growe together tyl haruest come, & in tyme of haruest, I wyl saye to the reapers, gather ye fyrst the tares, & bynde theym in shewes too be brent: but gather the wheate into my barne.
Matthew 13:31 Another parable he put forth vnto them saying: The kyngdom of heauen is lyke vnto a grayne of mustard seede, whiche a man taketh and soweth in hys felde,
Matthew 13:32 whych is the leest of all seedes. But when it is growen it is the greatest among herbes, & it groweth vp into a tree: so that the byrdes of the ayre come and buylde in the braunches of it.
Matthew 13:33 Another similitude sayde he to them. The kyngdom of heauen is lyke vnto leuen, which a woman taketh and hydeth in .iij. peckes of mele, tyll all be leuended.
Matthew 13:34 All these thynges spake Iesus vnto the people by similitudes, and withoute similitudes spake he nothyng to them,
Matthew 13:35 to fulfil that which was spoken by the Prophet saying: I wil open my mouth in similitudes, & will speake forth thynges whych haue ben kept secrete from the begynnyng of the world.
Matthew 13:36 Then sente Iesus the people awaye, & came home. And hys disciples came vnto him sayinge: declare vnto vs the similitude of the tares of the felde.
Matthew 13:37 Then aunswered he & sayed to them. He that soweth the good seede, is the sonne of man.
Matthew 13:38 And the fielde is the worlde. And the chyldren of the kyngdom, they are the good seede. And the tares are the chyldren of the wycked.
Matthew 13:39 And the enemy that soweth them is the deuell. The Haruest is the ende of the worlde. And the reapers be the Aungels.
Matthew 13:40 For euen as the tares are gaddred and brent in the fyre: so shall it be in the ende of thys worlde.
Matthew 13:41 The sonne of man shall sende forth hys Aungels, and they shall gather out of hys kyngedom all thynges that offende, and them whych do iniquity,
Matthew 13:42 and shall caste theim into a fournayce of fyre. There shalbe waylyng & gnasshyng of teth.
Matthew 13:43 Then shall the iuste men shyne as bryght as the sunne in the kyngdom of theyr father. Whosoeuer hath eares to heare let hym heare.
Matthew 13:44 Agayne the kyngdome of heauen is lyke vnto treasure, hidde in the fielde, the whiche a man fyndeth and hyddeth: and for ioye therof goeth and selleth all that he hathe, and byeth that felde.
Matthew 13:45 Agayne the kyngedome of heauen is lyke vnto a marchaunt that seketh good pearles,
Matthew 13:46 whyche when he had founde one precious pearle, went and solde all that he hadde, and bought it.
Matthew 13:47 Agayne the kyngedome of heauen is lyke vuto a nette cast into the sea, that gathered of all kyndes of fyshes:
Matthew 13:48 whiche when it is full, men drow to lande, and sitte and gadre the good int vessels, and cast the bad awaye.
Matthew 13:49 So shall it be at the ende of the worlde. The aungels shall come out, and seuer the bad from the good,
Matthew 13:50 and shall caste them into a furnayce of the fyre: there shalbe waylyng and gnashyng of teth.
Matthew 13:51 Iesus sayd vnto them: vnderstande ye al these thynges? They sayde, ye Lord.
Matthew 13:52 Then sayd he vnto them. Therfore euery Scribe which is taught vnto the kyngdome of heauen is lyke an housholder, whiche bringeth forth, out of his treasur, thinges both new & old.
Matthew 13:53 And it came to passe when Iesus had finished these similitudes, that he departed thence
Matthew 13:54 and came into hys owne countrey, and taught them in theyr sinagoges, in so much that they were astonyed and sayde: whence cometh all thys wysdome and power vnto hym?
Matthew 13:55 Is not thys the carpenters sonne? Is not his mother called Mary? and hys brethren be called Iames and Ioses and Simon and Iudas?
Matthew 13:56 And are not hys sisters all here with vs? Whence hath he all these thinges.
Matthew 13:57 And they were offended by hym. Then Iesus saide to them a Prophet is not without honor saue in his own countrey, & among his own kynne.
Matthew 13:58 And he did not make miracles there, for their vnbeleues sake.

CHAPTER: 14

Matthew 14:1 At that tyme Herode the Tetrarcha heard of the fame of Iesu,
Matthew 14:2 & sayd vnto his seruantes. This is Ihon Baptiste. He is rysen agayne from death, and therefore are suche miracles wrought by hym.
Matthew 14:3 For Herode had taken Ihon and bounde hym, & put hym in pryson for Herodias sake hys brother Philips wyfe.
Matthew 14:4 For Ihon sayd vnto him. It is not lawfull for the to haue her.
Matthew 14:5 And when he would haue put him to deth, he feared the people, because they counted hym as a Prophet.
Matthew 14:6 But when Herodes byrth daie was come, the daughter of Heeodias daunsed before them and pleased Herode.
Matthew 14:7 Wherefore he promysed with an othe, that he woulde geue her whatsoeuer she woulde axe.
Matthew 14:8 And she beynge informed of her mother before sayd: geue me here Ihon Baptistes head in a platter.
Matthew 14:9 And the king sorowed. Neuertheles for hys othe sake, & for theyr sakes that satte at also at the table, he commaunded it to be geuen her:
Matthew 14:10 and sent & beheaded Ihon in the pryson,
Matthew 14:11 and hys headde was brought in a platter and geuen to the damsel, and she brought it to her mother.
Matthew 14:12 And hys disciples came and toke vp the body, and buried it: and went and tolde Iesus.
Matthew 14:13 When Iesus heard that, he departed thence by shypp into a deserte place out of the waye. And when the people had hearde therof, they folowed him a fote out of theyr cities.
Matthew 14:14 And Iesus went forth and sawe muche people, & hys herte did melte vpon them, & he healed of theim those that were sicke.
Matthew 14:15 When euen was come, hys disciples came to hym saying: Thys is a desert place, and the daye is spent: let the people departe, that thei may go in to the townes & bye them vitayles.
Matthew 14:16 But Iesus sayde vnto them. They haue no nead to go away, Geue ye them to eate.
Matthew 14:17 Then sayde they vnto hym: we haue here but .v. loues & .ij. fishes.
Matthew 14:18 And he sayed brig them hither to me.
Matthew 14:19 And he commaunded the people to sit doune on the grasse: and toke the .v. loues and the .ij. fishes, and loked vp to heauen, and blessed, and brake and gaue the loues to his disciples, & the disciples gaue them to the people.
Matthew 14:20 And they did all eate, & were suffised. And they gathered vp the gobbets that remayned .xij. basketsful.
Matthew 14:21 And they that eate, were in numbre about .v.M. men beside women and chyldren.
Matthew 14:22 And strayght way Iesus made hys disciples into a ship, & to go ouer before him while he sent the people away.
Matthew 14:23 And assone as he had sent the people away, he went vp into a mountayn alone to pray, & when night was come, he was there him self alone.
Matthew 14:24 And the ship was now in the middest of the sea, & was toste wt waues, for it was a contrary wynde.
Matthew 14:25 In the .iiij. watch of the night. Iesus came vnto them walking on the sea.
Matthew 14:26 And when his disciples sawe him walkinge on the sea, they were troubled, saying: it is some spirite, & cried out for feare.
Matthew 14:27 And straight way Iesus spake vnto them saing be of good cheare, it is I, be not afrayed.
Matthew 14:28 Peter aunswered him & saied: master: if thou be he, bid me come vnto the on the water.
Matthew 14:29 And he saide come. And when Peter was come doun out of the ship, he walked on the water, to go to Iesus.
Matthew 14:30 But when he saw a mighty wynd, he was afrayed. And as he began to synke, he cried saying: master, saue me.
Matthew 14:31 And immediatly Iesus stretched forth his hande & caught him, & sayed to him. O thou litle fayth wherfore diddest thou doubt?
Matthew 14:32 And assone as they were come into the ship, the wind ceased.
Matthew 14:33 Then they that were in the ship came & worshipped him sayng: of a truth thou art the sonne of God.
Matthew 14:34 And when thei were come ouer, they went into the land of Genesareth.
Matthew 14:35 And when the men of the place had knowlege of him, they sent out into all the country rounde about, & brought vnto him al that were sicke,
Matthew 14:36 & besoughte him, that thei migh touche the hemme of his vesture only, & as many as touched it were made safe.

CHAPTER: 15

Matthew 15:1 Then came to Iesus Scribes and Phariseis from Hierusalem, sayinge:
Matthew 15:2 why do thy disciples transgresse the tradicions of the elders? for thei washe not their handes when they eate bread.
Matthew 15:3 He aunswered sayd vnto them: why do ye also transgresse the commaundement of God thorow your tradicions?
Matthew 15:4 For God commaunded saying: honoure thy father and mother, and he that curseth father or mother shall suffre death.
Matthew 15:5 But ye saye, euery man shal say to hys father or mother: that which thou desirest of me to helpe the with: is geuen to God,
Matthew 15:6 and so shall he not honour hys father or mother. And thus haue ye made, that the commaundement of God is without effecte, thorow your tradicions.
Matthew 15:7 Hypocrites, well prophecied of you Esaias sayinge:
Matthew 15:8 Thys people draweth nye vnto me with their mouthes, & honoureth me with their lippes, howe be it their hertes are farre from me:
Matthew 15:9 but in vayne they worshippe me teaching doctrines, which are nothyng but mens preceptes.
Matthew 15:10 And he called the people vnto hym, & sayd to them, heare and vnderstande.
Matthew 15:11 That whych goeth into the mouth, defileth not the man: but that whych commeth out of the mouthe, defileth the man.
Matthew 15:12 Then came hys disciples, and sayde vnto hym: Perceyuest thou not, how that the Phariseis are offended in hearing thys saying?
Matthew 15:13 He aunswered and sayd: al plantes whiche my heauenly father hath not planted, shalbe plucked vp by the rootes.
Matthew 15:14 Let them alone, thei be the blynde leaders of the blynd. If the blynd leede the blynde, both shall fall into the dytche.
Matthew 15:15 Then aunswered Peter and sayd to hym: declare vnto vs thys parable.
Matthew 15:16 Then sayde Iesus are ye yet without vnderstandyng?
Matthew 15:17 Perceyue ye not that whatsoeuer goeth in at the mouth, descendeth doune into the bealy, and is cast out into the draught?
Matthew 15:18 But those thynges, whiche procede out of the mouthe, come from the hert and they defyle the man.
Matthew 15:19 For out of the hert come euil thoughtes, murther, breakyng of wedlocke, whoredom, thefte, false, witnes bearing, blasphemye.
Matthew 15:20 These are the thynges which defyle a man. But to eate wt vnwashen handes, defileth not a man.
Matthew 15:21 And Iesus went thence, and departed into the costes of Tyre and Sidon
Matthew 15:22 And beholde a woman whych was a Cananite came out of the same costes, and cryed vnto hym sayinge: haue mercy on me Lord the sonne of Dauid, my doughter is piteously vexed with a deuel.
Matthew 15:23 And he gaue her neuer a woorde to aunswer. Then came to hym hys disciples, & besoughte hym saying: sende her away, for she foloweth vs criyng.
Matthew 15:24 He aunswered, and saide: I am not sent, but vnto the lost shepe of the house of Israel.
Matthew 15:25 Then she came and worshipped him saiyng master helpe me.
Matthew 15:26 He aunswered & sayde: It is not good, to take thy chyldrens bread, & to cast it to dogges.
Matthew 15:27 She aunswered & said: truth Lord, neuerthelesse the whelpes eate of the crommes, whiche fall from their masters table.
Matthew 15:28 Then Iesus aunswered and sayd vnto her: O woman, great is thy fayth, be it to the euen as thou desirest. And her doughter was made whole, euen at that same houre.
Matthew 15:29 Then Iesus went awaye from thence, and came vnto the sea of Galile, and went vp into a mountaine, and sate doune there.
Matthew 15:30 And much people came vnto him, hauynge with them, halt, blynd, domme, maymed, and other many: and cast them doune at Iesus fete. And he healed them,
Matthew 15:31 in so muche that the people wondred to se the domme speake, the maymed whole, the halt to go, and the blynde to se, And they glorified the God of Israel.
Matthew 15:32 Then Iesus called hys disciples to hym & sayd I haue compassion on the people, because they haue continued with me now .iij. dayes & haue nought to eate, and I wil not let them departe fasting, lest they perish in the waie.
Matthew 15:33 And his disciples sayd vnto hym, whence shoulde we get so muche breadde in the wildernes, as should suffice so great a multitude?
Matthew 15:34 And Iesus sayde vnto them: How many loues haue ye? And they sayde: seuen, and a fewe litle fishes.
Matthew 15:35 And he commaunded the people to sit doune on the grounde:
Matthew 15:36 and toke the seuen loues and the fishes, and gaue thankes, and brake them and gaue to hys disciples, & the disciples gaue them to the people.
Matthew 15:37 And they dyd all eate and were suffised. And they toke vp of the broken meate that was lefte .vij. baskettes full.
Matthew 15:38 And yet thei that eate were .iiij.M. men, beside women and chyldren.
Matthew 15:39 And he sent away the people & toke ship & came into the parties of Magdala.

CHAPTER: 16

Matthew 16:1 Then came the Phariseis and Saduceis, and dyd tempte hym, desiring hym to shew them some signe from heauen.
Matthew 16:2 He aunswered and saide vnto them. At euen ye saye, we shall haue fayre wedder, and that because the skye is reed:
Matthew 16:3 and in the mornynge ye saye: to daye shalbe foule wedder, & that because the skie is cloudy and redde. O ye hypocrites ye can discerne the fashion of the skie and can ye not discerne the signes of the times
Matthew 16:4 The froward nacion and aduouterous seketh a signe: and there shal no nother signe be geuen vnto them, but the signe of the prophet Ionas So lefte he them, and departed.
Matthew 16:5 And when his disciples were come to the otherside of the water, they had forgotten too take bread with them.
Matthew 16:6 Then Iesus sayd vnto them: Take hede and beware of the leuen of the Phariseis and of the Saduces.
Matthew 16:7 And thei thoughte in theim selues sayinge: because we haue brought no breade wyth vs.
Matthew 16:8 When Iesus vnderstode that, he sayd vnto them? O ye of litle fayth, why are your myndes cumbred because ye haue brought no bread?
Matthew 16:9 Do ye not yet perceyue, neither remember those fyue loues when there were .v.M. men, & how many baskettes toke ye vp:
Matthew 16:10 Neyther the seuen loues when there were .iiij. thousand, and how many baskettes toke ye vp?
Matthew 16:11 Why perceyue ye not then, that I spake not vnto you of bread, when I sayde: beware of the leuen of the Pharises and of the Saduces.
Matthew 16:12 Then vnderstode they, howe that he had not them beware of the leuen of breade: but of the doctrine of the Phariseis and of the Saduces.
Matthew 16:13 When Iesus came into the costes of the citie whych is called Cesarea Philippi, he axed his disciples sayinge: whome do men saye that I the sonne of man am?
Matthew 16:14 They sayde: some saye that thou arte Ihon Baptist, some Helyas, som Ieremias, or one of the Prophetes.
Matthew 16:15 He sayde vnto them: but whome saye ye that I am?
Matthew 16:16 Simon Peter aunswered and sayde: Thou arte Christ the sonne of the liuynge God.
Matthew 16:17 And Iesus aunswered and sayde to hym: happy arte thou Symon the sonne of Ionas, for fleshe & bloude hath not opened vnto the that, but my father which is in heauen.
Matthew 16:18 And I saye also vnto the that thou arte Peeter: and vpon thys rocke I wil buylde my congregacion. And the gates of hell shall not preuayle against it.
Matthew 16:19 And I wil geue vnto the, the keyes of the kyngdome of heauen, and whatsoeuer thou bindest vpon earth shalbe bounde in heauen, and whatsoeuer thon lowsest on earth shalbe lowsed in heauen.
Matthew 16:20 Then he charged hys disciples, that they should tell no man, that he was Iesus Christ.
Matthew 16:21 From that time forth Iesus beganne to shew vnto hys disciples, how that he must go vnto Ierusalem, and suffer many thinges of the elders, and of the hygh priestes, and of the scribes, and must be kylled: and ryse agayne the thyrde daye.
Matthew 16:22 But Peter toke hym asyde, and beganne to rebuke hym saying: master fauer thy selfe: thys shall not come vnto the.
Matthew 16:23 Then tourned he about and sayd vnto Peeter: come after me Sathan, thou offendest me, because thou sauorest not godly thynges, but worldly thynges.
Matthew 16:24 Iesus then sayde to hys disciples. If anye man will folow me, let hym forsake hym selfe, and take vp hys crosse and folowe me.
Matthew 16:25 For whosoeuer will saue hys lyfe, shall loose it. And whosoeuer shall loose hys lyfe for my sake shall finde it.
Matthew 16:26 What shall it proffet a man though he shoulde wynne al the whole world if he loose hys awne soule? Or els what shall a man geue to redeme his soule agayne withall?
Matthew 16:27 For the sonne of man shall come in the glorye of hys father, wyth hys aungels: & then shall he rewarde euery man accordyng to his dedes.
Matthew 16:28 Verely I saye vnto you, some there be among them that here stande, whiche shall not taste of death, till they shall haue sene the sonne of man come in hys kyngdom.

CHAPTER: 17

Matthew 17:1 And after .vi. dayes Iesus toke Peter and Iames and Ihon his brother, and broughte them vp into an hygh mountayne oute of the waye,
Matthew 17:2 and was transfigured before them, and his face did shyne as the sunne and hys clothes were as whyte as the light:
Matthew 17:3 & behold there appeared vnto theim Moyses & Helyas, talkyng with hym.
Matthew 17:4 Then aunswered Peter and sayd to Iesus: master here is good beyng for vs. If thou wilt, let vs make here thre tabernacles, one for the, & one for Moses, and one for Helyas.
Matthew 17:5 Whyle he yet speake, beholde a bryght cloude shadowed theim. And beholde there came a voyce out of the cloude, sayinge: this is my deare sonne, in whome I delite heare hym.
Matthew 17:6 And when the disciples hearde that, they fell on theyr faces and were soore afrayed.
Matthew 17:7 And Iesus came and touched them, and saide: arise and be not afrayed.
Matthew 17:8 And when they loked vp, they sawe no man saue Iesus onely.
Matthew 17:9 And as they came doune from the mountayne, Iesus charged them sayinge: se that ye shewe the vision to noman, vntyll the sonne of man be rysen agayne from death.
Matthew 17:10 And hys disciples axed of hym saying: Why then say the Scribes, that Helyas must first come?
Matthew 17:11 Iesus aunswered and sayde vnto them Helias shall first come and restore all thynges.
Matthew 17:12 And I say vnto you that Helyas is come already, and they knewe hym not: but haue done vnto hym whatsoeuer they lusted. In lykewise shal also the sonne of man suffer of them.
Matthew 17:13 Then the disciples perceiued that he spake vnto them of Ihon Baptist.
Matthew 17:14 And when they were come to the people, there came to hym a certayne man, and kneled doune to hym, and sayde:
Matthew 17:15 Master haue mercy on my sonne for he is francticke, and is sore vexed. For ofte tymes he falleth into the fire: and ofte into the water.
Matthew 17:16 And I broughte hym to thy disciples, and thei could not heale him.
Matthew 17:17 Iesus aunswered and sayde: O generation faythles and croked: howe longe shall I be wt you? how longe shal I suffre you? bryng him hydder to me.
Matthew 17:18 And Iesus rebuked the deuel, & he came out of hym. And the chylde was healed euen that same houre.
Matthew 17:19 Then came the disciples to Iesus secretly and sayd: Why coulde not we cast hym out?
Matthew 17:20 Iesus sayd vnto them: Because of your vnbelefe. For I saye verely vnto you: if ye hadde faith as a grayn of a mustard seede, ye should say vnto thys mountayne, remoue hence too yonder place, and it shoulde remoue, neyther shoulde any thyng be impossible for you too do.
Matthew 17:21 Howe be it this kynde goeth not out, but by prayer and fastynge.
Matthew 17:22 As they passed the tyme in Galile, Iesus sayde vnto them: the sonne of man shalbe betrayed into the handes of men,
Matthew 17:23 and they shall kyll hym, and the thyrde daye he shall ryse agayne. And they sorowed greatly.
Matthew 17:24 And when they were come to Capernaum they that were wont to gadre poll money, came to Peter and sayde: Doeth your master paye tribute?
Matthew 17:25 He sayd: yea. And when he was come into the house. Iesus spake fyrst to him, sayinge: What thinkest thou Simon? of whom do the kynges of the earth take tribute or pol money? of their chyldren, or of straungers?
Matthew 17:26 Peter sayde vnto hym: of straungers. Then sayde Iesus vnto hym agayne: Then are the chyldren fre.
Matthew 17:27 Neuerthelesse, lest we should offende them: go to the sea and caste in thyne angel, and take the fish that first cometh vp: & when thou hast opened hys mouth, thou shalt fynde a pece of twenty pence: that take and paye for me and the.

CHAPTER: 18

Matthew 18:1 The same tyme the disciples came vnto Iesus sayinge: who is the greatest in the kyngdom of heauen
Matthew 18:2 Iesus called a chylde vnto hym, and set hym in the middes of them:
Matthew 18:3 and sayde. Verely I saye vnto you: excepte ye tourne, and become as chyldren, ye cannot enter into the kyngedome of heauen.
Matthew 18:4 Who soeuer therfore humble hym selfe as thys chylde, the same is the greatest in the kyngedom of heauen.
Matthew 18:5 And whosoeuer receyueth suche a chylde in my name, receyueth me.
Matthew 18:6 But whosoeuer offende one of these litelone, whych beleue in me: it were better for hym, that a milstone were hanged about his necke, and that he were drowned in the depth of the sea.
Matthew 18:7 Wo be vnto the worlde because of offences. Howe be it, it cannot be auoyded but that offences shall be geuen. Neuerthelesse woo be to the man, by whome the offence cometh.
Matthew 18:8 Wherfore if thy hande or thy fote offende the, cut hym of and cast hym from the. It is better for the to enter into lyfe halte or maymed, rather then thou shouldest hauinge two handes or two fete, be cast into euerlastynge fyre.
Matthew 18:9 And if also thyne eye offende the, plucke hym out and cast hym from the. It is better for the to entre into lyfe with one eye, then hauyng two eyes to be cast into hell fyre.
Matthew 18:10 Se that ye not dispise not one of these litelones. For I saye vnto you, that in heauen their aungels alwaies behold the face of my father which is in heauen.
Matthew 18:11 Yea, and the sonne of man is come to saue that whych is lost.
Matthew 18:12 Howe thynke ye? If a man haue an hundred shepe, & one of them be gone astray, doth he not leaue nynty and nyne in the mountaynes, and go & seke that one whych is gone astraye.
Matthew 18:13 If it happen that he fynde him, verely I say vnto you: he reioyseth more of that shepe, then of the nyntye and nyne, which went not astray.
Matthew 18:14 Euen so it is not the wil of your father in heauen, that one of these litelons shoulde perish.
Matthew 18:15 Moreouer, if thy brother trespase agaynst the, Go and tell hym hys fault betwene hym and the alone. If he heare the, thou hast wonne thy brother.
Matthew 18:16 But if he heare the not, then take yet with the one or two, that in the mouthe of two or thre witnesses, all thynges may be stablished.
Matthew 18:17 If he heare not them, tell it vnto the congregacion. If he heare not the congregacion, take hym as a Heathen man, & as a publican.
Matthew 18:18 Verely I saye vnto you, whatsoeuer ye bynde on earth, shalbe bounde in heauen. And whatsoeuer ye lowse on erth, shalbe lowsed in heauen.
Matthew 18:19 Agayne I say vnto you, that if two of you shall agre in earth vpon any maner thyng whatsoeuer they shall desire: it shalbe geuen them of my father whyche is in heauen.
Matthew 18:20 For where two or thre are gathered together in my name, there am I in the middes of them.
Matthew 18:21 Then came Peter to hym, & sayde: master howe ofte shall I forgeue my brother, if he synne agaynst me, seuen tymes?
Matthew 18:22 Iesus sayde vnto hym: I say not vnto the seuen times: but seuenty times seuen tymes.
Matthew 18:23 Therefore is the kyngedom of heauen lykened vnto a certayne kyng, whithe woulde take a countes of hys seruauntes.
Matthew 18:24 And when he had begon to recken: one was broughte vnto hym: which ought hym ten thousand talentes,
Matthew 18:25 whome because he had noughte to paye, hys master commaunded him to be solde, and his wyfe, and hys chyldren, and all that he had, & payment to be made.
Matthew 18:26 The seruaunt fel doune and besought hym sayinge: Syr geue me respyte, and I will paye it euery whyt.
Matthew 18:27 Then had the Lord pitye on that seruaunt, & lowsed him and forgaue hym the dette.
Matthew 18:28 And the sayd seruaunt went out & found one of hys felowes, which ought him an hundred pence, & layed handes on him, & toke hym by the throote sayinge: paye me that thou owest.
Matthew 18:29 And hys felowe fell doune & besoughte hym, saying: haue pacience with me, and I wil pay the all.
Matthew 18:30 But he woulde not, but wente and cast hym into pryson till he shoulde pay the det.
Matthew 18:31 When hys other felowes sawe what was done, they were very sory, and came and told vnto theyr Lord all that had happened.
Matthew 18:32 Then his Lorde called hym, and sayde vnto hym. O euill seruaunt I forgaue the al that det, because thou praiest me:
Matthew 18:33 was it not mete also that thou shouldest haue had compassion on thy felow, euen as I had pitie on the?
Matthew 18:34 And his lord was wroth and deliuered him to the iaylers, til he should paye all that was due to hym.
Matthew 18:35 So likewyse shal my heauenly father do vnto you except ye forgeue with your hertes, eache one to hys brother theyr trespasses.

CHAPTER: 19

Matthew 19:1 And it came to passe when Iesus had finished those sayinges, he gat him from Galile, and came into the coostes of Iury beyonde Iordan,
Matthew 19:2 and much people folowed hym, and he healed them there.
Matthew 19:3 Then came vnto him the Pharises, tempting him, & saying to hym: Is it lawful for a man to put away his wyfe for all maner of causes?
Matthew 19:4 He aunswered and sayde vnto them: Haue ye not reade, howe that he whiche made man at the beginnyng, made them man and woman
Matthew 19:5 and sayd: for this thynge, shall a man leaue father and mother & cleaue vnto his wyfe, & thei twayne but one flesh.
Matthew 19:6 Wherefore now are they not twaine, but one fleshe. Let not man therefore put a sunder, that whiche God hath couppled together.
Matthew 19:7 Then sayd they to him: why did Moyses commaund to geue a testimoniall of diuorcement, & to put her awaye?
Matthew 19:8 He sayde vnto them: Moyses because of the hardnes of youre hertes suffred you to put away your wyfes: But from the beginning it was not so.
Matthew 19:9 I say therfore vnto you, whosoeuer putteth awaye hys wyfe, (except it he for fornicacion) & marieth another, breaketh wedloke. And whosoeuer maryeth her, which is diuorced, doth commit aduoutry.
Matthew 19:10 Then sayde his disciples to him: if the matter be so betwene man and wyfe, then is it not good to marye.
Matthew 19:11 He sayde vnto them: all men can not awaye with that sayinge, saue they to whome it is geuen.
Matthew 19:12 There are chaste whiche were so borne out of theyr mothers bealy. And there are chaste whiche be made of men. And there be chast which haue made them selues chaste for the kyngdom of heauens sake. He that can take it let hym take it.
Matthew 19:13 Then were brought to him iong chyldren, that he should put his handes on them & praye. And the disciples rebuked them.
Matthew 19:14 But Iesus sayd suffer the chyldren and forbid them not to come to me: for of suche is the kyngdome of heauen.
Matthew 19:15 And when he had put his handes on them he departed thence.
Matthew 19:16 And beholde one came and saide to him: good master, what good thinge shall I do, that I maye haue eternall lyfe?
Matthew 19:17 He sayde to him: why callest thou me good? there is none good but one, & that is God. But if thou wilt enter into lyfe, kepe the commaundementes,
Matthew 19:18 The other sayd to him: Which And Iesus sayde: Breake no wedloke, kyll not, steale not: beare not false witues,
Matthew 19:19 honoure father and mother, and loue thy neyghboure as thy selfe.
Matthew 19:20 And the iong man sayd vnto him: I haue obserued all these thynges from my youth, what lacke I yet?
Matthew 19:21 And Iesus sayde vnto him, if thou wilt be perfecte go and sell that thou haste, and geue it to the poore, and thou shalt haue treasure in heauen, and come and folowe me.
Matthew 19:22 When the ionge man hearde that saying: he went away mournynge. For he had great possessions.
Matthew 19:23 Then Iesus sayd vnto his disciples: Verely I saye vnto you: it is harde for a riche man to enter into the kyngdom of heauen.
Matthew 19:24 And moreouer I saye vnto you, it is easier for a Camel to go thorow the eye of a nedle, then for a ryche man to entre into the kyngdom of God
Matthew 19:25 When his disciples hearde that, thei were exceadingly amased saying: who then can be saued?
Matthew 19:26 Iesus beheld them and sayde vnto them: with men this is impossible, but with God al thynges are possible.
Matthew 19:27 Then aunswered Peeter and sayde vnto hym: Beholde we haue forsaken all and folowed the, what shall we haue?
Matthew 19:28 Iesus sayde vnto them: Verely I saye vnto you: when the sonne of man shall sit in the seate of hys maiestie, yea, which folow me in the second geueracion, shall sitte also vpon .xij. seates, and iudge the .xij. tribes of Israel.
Matthew 19:29 And whosoeuer forsaketh houses, or brethren, or systers, other father or mother, or wyfe or chyldren, or landes, for my names sake, the same shal receyue an .C. folde, & shal enherite euerlasting life.
Matthew 19:30 Many that are firste shall be last, and the last shalbe the first.

CHAPTER: 20

Matthew 20:1 For the kyngedom of heauen is lyke vnto an housholder, which went out early in the mornynge to hyre labourers into hys vyneyarde.
Matthew 20:2 And he agreed with the labourers for a peny a daye, and sent them into hys vyneyarde.
Matthew 20:3 And he went out about the .iij. houre, and saw other standing ydel in the market place,
Matthew 20:4 and sayd vnto them, go ye also into my vineyard: and whatsoeuer is right, I wil geue you. And they went theyr waye.
Matthew 20:5 Agayn he went out about the sixt and nynth houre and did likewise.
Matthew 20:6 And he went out about the eleuenth houre, and founde other standynge ydel, and sayde vnto theim: Why stande ye here all the day ydell?
Matthew 20:7 They sayde vnto hym: because no man hath hyred vs. He sayde to them go ye also into my vyneyarde, & whatsoeuer is right, that shall ye receyue.
Matthew 20:8 When euen was come, the Lorde of the vineyarde sayde vnto hys Stewarde: call the labourers, and geue them their hyer, beginning at the laste, tyll thou come to the first.
Matthew 20:9 And they whiche were hyred about the eleuenth houre, came and receyued euery man a peny.
Matthew 20:10 Then came the first, supposing that they should receyue more, and they lykewise receyued euery man a peny.
Matthew 20:11 And when they had receyued it, they murmured agaynst the good man of the house
Matthew 20:12 saying: These laste haue wrought but one houre, and thou haste made theym equall vnto vs whiche haue borne the burthen, and heat of the daye.
Matthew 20:13 He aunswered to one of them, saying: frende I do the no wrong: diddest thou not agre with me for a peny?
Matthew 20:14 Take that which is thy duety, and go thy waye, I will geue vnto thys laste as muche as to the.
Matthew 20:15 Is it not lawful for me to do as me lusteth with myne owne? Is thyne eye euel because I am good?
Matthew 20:16 So the laste shalbe firste, and the first shalbe laste. For many are called, and few be chosen.
Matthew 20:17 And Iesus ascended to Ierusalem and toke the .xij. disciples a parte in the way, and sayde to them:
Matthew 20:18 Beholde we go vp to Ierusalem, and the sonne of man shalbe betrayed vnto the chief priestes and vnto the scribes: and they shal condemne hym to death,
Matthew 20:19 and shall deliuer hym to the gentels, to be mocked, to be scourged, & to be crucified, and the thirde daye he shall rise agayne.
Matthew 20:20 Then came to him the mother of Zebedes chyldren with her sonnes, worshippyng hym and desiring a certayn thinge of hym.
Matthew 20:21 And he saide vnto her: what wilt thou haue? She said vnto hym: Graunt that these my two sonnes maye sitte, the one on thy right hande, and the other on the lift hande in thy kyngdome
Matthew 20:22 Iesus aunswered and sayde: Ye wotte not what ye are. Are ye able to drinke of the cup that I shall drynke of: and to be baptised with the baptisme that I shalbe baptised wt?
Matthew 20:23 They aunswered to hym: that we are. And he sayde vnto them: Ye shall drynke of my cup, & shal be baptised with the baptisme that I shalbe baptised with. But to sit on my right hande and on my lifte hande, is not myne to geue: but to them for whome it is prepared of my father.
Matthew 20:24 And when the ten hearde this, they disdayned at the two brethren.
Matthew 20:25 But Iesus called them vnto hym and sayd: Ye know that the Lordes of the gentils haue domination ouer them. And they that are great, exercyse power ouer them.
Matthew 20:26 It shall not be so amonge you. But whosoeuer wil be great amonge you, let hym be your minister,
Matthew 20:27 and whosoeuer wil be chief, let hym be your seruaunt,
Matthew 20:28 euen as the sonne of man came not to be minnistred vnto, but to minister, and to geue his life for the redempcion of many.
Matthew 20:29 And as they departed from Hiericho, much people folowed hym.
Matthew 20:30 And beholde two blynd men sitting by the way syde, when thei heard Iesus passe by, cryed saying: Thou Lord the sonne of Dauid haue mercy on vs.
Matthew 20:31 And the people rebuked theym: because they shoulde holde their peace. But they cried the more sayinge: Haue mercy on vs thou Lord which art the sonne of Dauid.
Matthew 20:32 Then Iesus stode styll, & called them, and sayde: What will ye that I shoulde do to you?
Matthew 20:33 Thei sayde to him: Lorde, that our eyes maye be opened.
Matthew 20:34 Iesus had compassion on them, and touched their eyes. And immediatly their eyes receiued sight. And thei folowed him.

CHAPTER: 21

Matthew 21:1 When they drewe nygh vnto Ierusalem, and were come too Bethphage, to mount Oliuete: then sent Iesus two of his disciples,
Matthew 21:2 sayinge to them. Go into the towne that lyeth ouer agaynste you, and anone ye shal fynde an Asse bound, & her colte with her: lose them, and bringe them vnto me.
Matthew 21:3 And if any man saye ought vnto you, saye ye that the Lord hath nede of them: and streyght waye he will let them go.
Matthew 21:4 All this was done, to fulfill that whiche was spoken by the Prophet saying:
Matthew 21:5 Tel ye the doughter of Sion: beholde thyne kyng cometh vnto the meke, and sitting vpon an Asse and a colte, the fote of an Asse vsed to the yooke.
Matthew 21:6 The disciples went and did as Iesus commaunded them,
Matthew 21:7 & brought the Asse and the colte, and put on theym theyr clothes, and set him thereon.
Matthew 21:8 And many of the people spred their garmentes in the way. Other cut doune braunches from the trees, and strawed them in the waye.
Matthew 21:9 Moreouer the people that went before, and they also that came after, cryed sayinge: Hosanna to the sonne of Dauid. Blessed be he that cometh in the name of the Lorde Hosanna in the hyest.
Matthew 21:10 And when he was come into Ierusalem all the cytye was moued sayinge: who is thys?
Matthew 21:11 And the people sayd: this is Iesus the prophet of Nazareth a citie of Galile.
Matthew 21:12 And Iesus wente into the temple of God, and caste out all them that soulde and bought in the temple, & ouerthrewe the tables of the money chaungers, & the seates of them that solde doues,
Matthew 21:13 and sayde to them: It is writen, my house shalbe called the house of prayer. But ye haue made it a denne of theues.
Matthew 21:14 And the blind and the halt came to hym in the temple and he healed them.
Matthew 21:15 When the chiefe priestes sawe the marueylles that he dyd, and the chyldren criynge in the temple and saying: Hosanna to the sonne of Dauid, they disdayned,
Matthew 21:16 and sayde vnto hym: hearest thou what these saye? Iesus sayde to them, yea. Haue ye neuer reade, of the mouth of babes and suckelynges thou hast ordeyned prayse?
Matthew 21:17 And he lefte them, and wente out of the cytye vnto Bethanye, and had hys abydynge there.
Matthew 21:18 In the mornynge as he retourned into the cytie agayn, he hungred,
Matthew 21:19 and spyed a fygge tree in the waye, and came to it, and found nothynge thereon, but leaues onely, and sayed to it, neuer frute growe on the hence forwardes. And anone the figge tre wyddered away
Matthew 21:20 And when hys disciples sawe that, they marueyled sayinge: How sone is the fygge tree wyddered awaye?
Matthew 21:21 Iesus answered, and sayd vnto them: Verelye I say vnto you: if ye shal haue fayth, and shall not dout ye shall not onely do that which I haue done to the fygge tree but also yf ye shall saye vnto thys mountayne, take thy selfe awaye and cast thy selfe into the sea it shall be done.
Matthew 21:22 And whatsoeuer ye shall axe in prayer (yf ye beleue) ye shall receyue it.
Matthew 21:23 And when he was come into the temple, the chiefe Priestes and the elders of that people came vnto hym as he was teachynge, and sayde. By what auctoritie doest thou these thynges and who gaue the thys power?
Matthew 21:24 Iesus answered, and sayed vnto them: I also wil axe of you a certayne questyon, whiche yf ye assoyle me, I in lyke wyse wyll tell you by what authoritie I do these thynges.
Matthew 21:25 The baptisme of Iohn whence was it: from heauen or of men? Then they reasoned amonge themselues, sayinge: yf we shall saye from heauen, he wyll laye vnto vs: why dyd ye not then beleue hym?
Matthew 21:26 But and yf we shall saye of men, then feare we the people. For all men helde Iohn as a Prophete.
Matthew 21:27 And they answered Iesus and sayed: we cannot tell. And he lykewyse sayd vnto them: neyther tell I you by what authoritie I do these thynges.
Matthew 21:28 What saye ye to thys? A certayne man had two sonnes, and came to the elder and sayde: sonne go and worke to daye in my vyneyarde.
Matthew 21:29 He answered and sayde, I wyll not: but after warde repented and wente.
Matthew 21:30 Then came he to the seconde, and sayed lykewyse. And he answered and sayed: I wyll syr: yet wente not.
Matthew 21:31 Whether of them twayne dyd the wyll of the father? And they sayde vnto hym: the fyrst. Iesus sayde vnto them: verelye I saye vnto you, that the Publycans and the harlotes shall come into the kyngedome of God before you.
Matthew 21:32 For Iohn came vnto you in the waye of ryghtuousnes, and ye beleued hym not. But the Publicans and the harlotes beleued hym. And yet ye (thoughe ye sawe it) were not yet moued wyth repentaunce, that ye myght afterwarde haue beleued hym.
Matthew 21:33 Herken another similitude. There was a certayne housholder, which planted a vyneyard, and hedged it rounde aboute and made a wynepresse in it, and buylt a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went into a straunge countrey.
Matthew 21:34 And when the tyme of the frute drewe neare, he sente hys seruauntes to the husbandmen to receyue the fruytes of it.
Matthew 21:35 And the husbandmen caughte hys seruauntes and bet one, kylled another, and stoned another.
Matthew 21:36 Agayne he sent other seruauntes, mo then the fyrste, and they serued them lykewyse.
Matthew 21:37 But last of all, he sent vnto them hys owne sonne, sayinge: they wyll feare my sonne.
Matthew 21:38 But when the husbandmen sawe the sonne, they sayde amonge them selues. Thys is the heyre: come let vs kyll hym, and let vs take hys enheritaunce to oure selues.
Matthew 21:39 And they caughte hym and thruste him out of the vyneyard, and slewe hym.
Matthew 21:40 When the Lorde of the vyneyard cometh, what wyll he do with those husbandmen?
Matthew 21:41 They sayed vnto hym: he wyll cruellye destroye those euyll persons, and wyll let out hys vyneyarde vnto other husbandmen, which shall delyuer hym the frute at tymes conuenient.
Matthew 21:42 Iesus sayde vnto them: dyd ye neuer reade in the scriptures. The stone which the buylders refused, the same is set in the principall parte of the corner: thys was the Lordes doynge, and it is meruelous in oure eyes.
Matthew 21:43 Therfore saye I vnto you the kyngdome of God shalbe taken from you, and shalbe gyuen to the gentyles, whiche shall brynge forth the frutes of it.
Matthew 21:44 And whosoeuer shall fall ou thys stone, he shalbe broken, but on whosoeuer it shall fall vpon, it wyll grynde hym to powder.
Matthew 21:45 And when the chiefe priestes and pharyses hearde these similitudes, they perceyued that he spake of them.
Matthew 21:46 And they wente aboute to laye handes on hym, but they feared the people, because they toke hym as a Prophete.

CHAPTER: 22

Matthew 22:1 And Iesus answered, and spake vnto them agayne in symylytudes sayinge.
Matthew 22:2 The kyngdome of heauen is like vnto a certayne kynge, whiche maryed hys sonne,
Matthew 22:3 and sent forth hys seruauntes to call them that were byd to the wedding, & they woulde not come.
Matthew 22:4 Agayne he sent forth other seruauntes saynge. Tell them which are bydden: beholde I haue prepared my dyner, myne oxen and my fatlynges are kylled, and all thinges are redy, come vnto the mariage.
Matthew 22:5 But they made lyght of it, and went theyr wayes: one to hys ferme place, an other about hys marchaundyse,
Matthew 22:6 the remnaunt toke hys seruauntes and intreated them vngodly and slewe them.
Matthew 22:7 When the kynge hearde that, he was wrothe and sente forthe hys warryers and destroyed those murtherers and brent vp theyr citie.
Matthew 22:8 Then sayde he to hys seruauntes: the wedding was prepared. But they which were bidden: were not worthye.
Matthew 22:9 Go ye therfore out into the hye waies, & as many as ye finde byd them to the mariage.
Matthew 22:10 The seruauntes went out into the hye wayes, and gaddered together as many as they could fynde. Both good & bad, and the weddynge was furnyshed with gestes.
Matthew 22:11 Then the kynge came in, to viset the gestes, and spyed there a man which had not on a weddynge garment,
Matthew 22:12 and sayd vnto hym, frend howe fortuned it that thou camest in hyther, and hast not on a weddinge garmente? And he was euen speachlesse.
Matthew 22:13 Then sayed the kynge to hys mynisters: take and bynde hym hande and fote, and caste hym into vtter darcknes, there shal be weping and gnashing of teeth.
Matthew 22:14 For manye are called and fewe be chosen.
Matthew 22:15 Then went the pharises and toke counsell how they myght tangle hym in hys wordes.
Matthew 22:16 And they sent vnto hym theyr discyples with Herodes seruauntes sayinge: Mayster, we knowe that thou art true, & teachest the waye of God truely: neither carest for any man, for thou considerest not mennes estate.
Matthew 22:17 Tel vs therfor how thinkest thou. Is it lawful to giue tribute vnto Cesar or not?
Matthew 22:18 Iesus perceyued theyr wickednes, & sayd: Why tempt ye me ye hypocrites?
Matthew 22:19 Let me se the tribute money. And they toke him a peny.
Matthew 22:20 And he sayd vnto them: whose is thys ymage & superscripcion?
Matthew 22:21 They sayed vnto him: Cesars. Then sayed he vnto them: Gyue therfore to Cesar, that which is Cesars: And gyue vnto God, that which is Goddes.
Matthew 22:22 When they hearde that they maruayled, and left hym, and went theyr waye.
Matthew 22:23 The same day the Saduces came to hym (which say that there is no resurreccion) axed him
Matthew 22:24 saying: Mayster, Moyses bad, yf a man dye hauyng no chyldren, that the brother marye hys wyfe, and reyse vp seed vnto hys brother.
Matthew 22:25 There were with vs seuen brethren, and the fyrst maryed and dyseased without yssue and left hys wyfe vnto his brother.
Matthew 22:26 Like wyse the second and the thyrde vnto the seuenth.
Matthew 22:27 Last of all the woman dyed also.
Matthew 22:28 Nowe in the resurreccyon whose wyfe shall she be of these seuen? For all had her.
Matthew 22:29 Iesus answered & sayd vnto them: ye are deceyued and vnderstande not the scriptures, nor yet the power of God.
Matthew 22:30 For in the resurrection they nether marye nor are maryed: but are as the angels in heauen.
Matthew 22:31 As touchyng the resurreccion of the dead: haue ye not reade what is sayd vnto you of God which sayth:
Matthew 22:32 I am Abrahams God, and Isaacks God. & the God of Iacob? God is not the God of the dead, but of the liuynge.
Matthew 22:33 And when the people hearde that, they were astonyed at hys doctrine.
Matthew 22:34 When the Pharises had hearde, how that he had put the Saduces to silence, they drewe together,
Matthew 22:35 and one of them whiche was a doctoure of lawe, axed a question temptyng hym and sayinge:
Matthew 22:36 Mayster which is the chief commaundement in the lawe?
Matthew 22:37 Iesus sayd to him: Loue the Lord thy God with all thyne herte, and with all thy soule, and with al thy mynd.
Matthew 22:38 This is the fyrst and the chiefe commaundement.
Matthew 22:39 And there is another lyke vnto thys. Loue thy neyghboure as thy selfe.
Matthew 22:40 In these two commaundementes hange all the lawe & the Prophetes.
Matthew 22:41 Whyle the pharyses were gaddered together. Iesus axed them
Matthew 22:42 saying: what thynke ye of Christ? Whose sonne is he? They sayed vnto him: the sonne of Dauid.
Matthew 22:43 He sayed vnto them: how then doeth Dauid in sprite, call him Lorde, sayenge:
Matthew 22:44 The Lorde sayed to my Lord sit on my righthande: tyl I make thyne enemyes thy fotestole.
Matthew 22:45 If Dauid call hym Lorde, how is he than hys sonne?
Matthew 22:46 And none coulde aunswere hym agayne one worde, neyther durste any from that daye forth axe him any more question.

CHAPTER: 23

Matthew 23:1 Then spake Iesus to the people, & to hys disciples
Matthew 23:2 sayinge: The Scribes and the Phariseis sit in Moyses seate.
Matthew 23:3 All therfore whatsoeuer they bid you obserue, that obserue and do, but after their workes do not,
Matthew 23:4 for they say and do not. Yea, and they bynd heauy burthens and greuous to be borne and lay them on mens shoulders: but they them selfs will not heaue at them with one of theyr fyngers.
Matthew 23:5 All their workes thei do for to be sene of men. They set abroade theyr philateries, & make large borders on theyr garmentes,
Matthew 23:6 and loue to sit vppermoste at feastes, and to haue the chiefe seates in the Synagoges,
Matthew 23:7 and gretynges in the markettes, and too be called of men Rabbi.
Matthew 23:8 But ye shall not suffer youre selues to be called Rabbi. For one is your master, that is to witte Christ, and all ye are brethreu.
Matthew 23:9 And call no man your father vpon the earth, for there is but one your father, & he is in heauen.
Matthew 23:10 Be not called masters: for there is but one your master: and he is Christ.
Matthew 23:11 He that is greatest amonge you: shalbe your seruaunt.
Matthew 23:12 But whosoeuer exalteth hym selfe: shalbe brought lowe, and he that humbleth hym selfe, shalbe exalted.
Matthew 23:13 Wo be vnto you Scribes and Phariseis, hypocrites, for ye shut vp the kyngdome of heauen before men: ye youre selues go not in, neyther suffer ye them that come to enter in.
Matthew 23:14 Wo be vnto you Scribes and Phariseis, hypocrites, ye deuoure wyddowes houses, & that vnder a coloure of praieng long prayers wherfore ye shall receyue great damnacion.
Matthew 23:15 Wo be vnto you Scribes and Phariseis hypocrites: which compasse sea and lande, to brynge one into youre belefe: and when he is brought ye make hym two folde more the chyld of hell: then ye your selues are.
Matthew 23:16 Wo be vnto you blynde guydes, whyche say whosoeuer sweare by the temple, it is nothing, but whosoeuer sweared by the golde of the temple: he offendeth.
Matthew 23:17 Ye fooles and blind, whither is greater, the golde, or the temple that sanctifieth the gold?
Matthew 23:18 And whosoeuer sweareth by the aultare, it is nothynge: but whosoeuer sweareth by the offeryng that lyeth on the aulter, offendeth.
Matthew 23:19 Ye fooles and blynde, whither is greater the offerynge, or the aulter whiche sanctifieth the offeryng?
Matthew 23:20 Whosoeuer therfore sweareth by the aultare, sweareth by it and by all that thereon is.
Matthew 23:21 And whosoeuer sweareth by the temple, sweareth by it and by hym that dwelleth therin.
Matthew 23:22 And he that sweareth by heauen sweareth by the seate of God, and by him that sitteth thereon.
Matthew 23:23 Wo be to you Scribes and Phariseis, hypocrites, which tythe mynte, anyse and commen, and leaue the wayghtyer matters of the lawe vndone: iudgement, mercy, and faythe. These ought ye to haue done, and not to haue lefte the other vndone.
Matthew 23:24 Ye blynde guydes whiche strayne out a gnat, and swallowe a cammell.
Matthew 23:25 Wo be to you Scribes and Pharises hypocrites, which make cleane the vtter side of the cuppe, & of the platter: but within they are ful of bribery and excesse.
Matthew 23:26 Thou blynd Pharisei, clense first the ynneside of the cup & platter, that the outside of them may be clene also.
Matthew 23:27 Wo be to you Scribes and Phariseis hypocrytes, for ye are lyke vnto paynted tombes, whiche appeare beautifull outwarde, but are within full of dead bones and of all filthines.
Matthew 23:28 So are ye, for outwarde ye apeare righteouse vnto men, when within, ye are full of hypocresie and iniquitie.
Matthew 23:29 Wo be vnto you Scribes and Phariseis hypocrites, ye buylde the tombes of the Prophetes and garnysh the sepulchres of the righteouse,
Matthew 23:30 and saye: if we had bene in the dayes of our fathers, we woulde not haue bene parteners with them in the bloude of the Prophetes.
Matthew 23:31 So then ye be witnesses to your selues, that ye are the chyldren of them whyche kylled the Prophetes.
Matthew 23:32 Fulfil ye likewyse the measure of your fathers.
Matthew 23:33 Ye serpentes and generacion of vppers howe shoulde ye scape the damnacion of hell?
Matthew 23:34 Wherfore, behold I send vnto you Prophetes, wise men, & Scribes. Of them ye shal kyl and crucifye: and of them ye shall scourge in your synagoges, and persecute from citye to citye
Matthew 23:35 that vpon you may come all the ryghtuous bloude that was shede vpon the earth, from the bloude of ryghtuous Abel, vnto the bloude of Zacharias the sonne of Barachias, whom ye slewe betwene the tempel and the aulter.
Matthew 23:36 Verely I say vnto you, al these things shall lyght vpon this generation.
Matthew 23:37 Ierusalem, Ierusalem which killest prophetes, and stone them which are sent to the: howe often would I haue gathered thy children together: as the henne gathered her chikens vnder her winges, but ye would not.
Matthew 23:38 Beholde your habitation shalbe left vnto you desolate.
Matthew 23:39 For I saye to you, ye shall not se me hence forth tyll that ye saye blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 24

Matthew 24:1 And Iesus went out and departed from the temple: and his disciples came to hym for to shew him the building of the temple.
Matthew 24:2 Iesus sayde vnto them: Se ye not all these thinges? Verely I say vnto you there shal not be here left one stone vpon another that shall not be cast doune.
Matthew 24:3 And as he sate vpon the mounte Oliuet: his disciples came vnto him secretlye saying. Tell vs when these thinges shalbe: and what sygne shalbe of thy comminge and of the ende of the worlde?
Matthew 24:4 And Iesus aunswered and sayd vnto them: take hede that no man deceyue you.
Matthew 24:5 For many shal come in my name sayng: I am Christe: and shall deceyue many.
Matthew 24:6 Ye shall heare of warres? and of the fame of warres: but se that ye be not troubled. For all these thinges muste come to passe, but the ende is not yet.
Matthew 24:7 For nacion shall ryse against nacion and realme against realme: and ther shalbe pestylence, honger and earth quakes in certayne places?
Matthew 24:8 All these are the begynnynge of sorowes.
Matthew 24:9 Then shall they put you to trouble, and shall kyll you: and ye shalbe hated of all nacions for my names sake.
Matthew 24:10 And then shall manye be offended, and shal betray one another, and shall hate one the other.
Matthew 24:11 And manye false prophetes shall aryse, and shall deceyue manye.
Matthew 24:12 And because iniquite shall haue the vpper hande the loue of manye shall abate.
Matthew 24:13 But he that endureth to the ende, the same shall be safe.
Matthew 24:14 And this glad tydinges of the kingdome shalbe preached in all the worlde, for a wytnes vnto all nacions: & then shal the ende come.
Matthew 24:15 When ye therfore shall se the abhomination that betokeneth desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophete, stande in the holye place (let hym that readeth it, vnderstande it)
Matthew 24:16 then let theim which be in Iurye, flye into the mountaines.
Matthew 24:17 And let him which is on the house toppe not come doune to fetche anye thinge out of his house.
Matthew 24:18 Neither let him which in is the fielde returne backe to fetche his clothes.
Matthew 24:19 Wo in those daies to theim that are with childe, and to them that geue sucke.
Matthew 24:20 But praye that youre flyghte be not in the Winter, neyther on the saboth daye.
Matthew 24:21 For then shalbe great trybulacion such as was not from the beginninge of the worlde to this tyme, nor shalbe:
Matthew 24:22 yea, and except those dayes should be shortened, there shoulde no fleshe be saued: but for the chosens sake, those daies shalbe shortened.
Matthew 24:23 Then if anye man shall saye vnto you: lo here is Christe, or there is christ: beleue it not.
Matthew 24:24 For there shall aryse false Christes, and false prophetes, and shall do great myracles and wonders. In so much that if it were possyble the very electe should be deceiued.
Matthew 24:25 Take hede, I haue tolde you before.
Matthew 24:26 Wherfor if they shal saye vnto you: beholde he is in the deserte, in the secrete places beleue not.
Matthew 24:27 For as the lyghteninge cometh out of the east, and shyneth into the west, so shal the comminge of the sonne of man be.
Matthew 24:28 For whersoeuer a dead carkes is, euen thither wyl egles resort.
Matthew 24:29 Immediatly after the trybulations of those dayes, shall the sonne be darkened: and the mone shall not gyue hyr lyght, and the starre shal fall from heauen, & the powers of heauen shal moue.
Matthew 24:30 And then shal apeare the sygne of the sonne of man in heauen. And then shall all the kynredes of the earth morne, and they shall se the sonne of man come in the cloudes of heauen with power and great glorye.
Matthew 24:31 And he shall sende his aungels with the greate voyce of a trompe, and they shall gader together his chosen from the foure windes, and from the one ende of the worlde to the other.
Matthew 24:32 Learne a symylytude of the fygge tre: when his braunches are yet tendre, and his leaues spronge, ye knowe that sommer is nye,
Matthew 24:33 so lykewyse ye, when ye se all these thynges, be ye sure that it is neare euen at the dores.
Matthew 24:34 Verely I say vnto you, that this generation shal not passe tyll all these be fulfylled.
Matthew 24:35 Heauen & earth shal perishe, but my wordes shal abide.
Matthew 24:36 But of that daye and houre knoweth no man, no not the aungels of heauen, but my father onelye.
Matthew 24:37 As the tyme of Noe was, so lykewyse shal the commynge of the sonne of man be.
Matthew 24:38 For as in the dayes before the floude, they did eate & drinke, mary and were maried, euen vnto the daye that Noe entred into the shippe,
Matthew 24:39 & knew of nothinge, tyll the floude came and toke them all awaye. So shal also the comminge of the sonne of man be.
Matthew 24:40 Then two shall be in the fielde, the one shalbe receyued, and the other shalbe refused,
Matthew 24:41 two shalbe grindinge at the myll, the one shalbe receyued, and the other shalbe refused.
Matthew 24:42 Wake therfor, because ye knowe not what houre your maister wyl come.
Matthew 24:43 Of this be sure, that if the good man of the house knewe what houre the these woulde come, he would suerlye watche, and not suffer his house to be broken vp.
Matthew 24:44 Therfore be ye also redye, for in the houre ye thinke he woulde not, wyll the sonne of man come.
Matthew 24:45 Yf there be anye faythful seruaunt and wyse, whome his maister hath made rueler ouer his housholde to geue them meate in season conuenient:
Matthew 24:46 happy is that seruaunt whom his maister (when he cometh) shall fynde so doyinge.
Matthew 24:47 Verelye I saye vnto you, he shall make hym ruler ouer all hys goodes.
Matthew 24:48 But and if that euyll seruaunt shall saye in his herte, my maister wyll defer hys commynge,
Matthew 24:49 and begynne to smyte his felowes, yea, and to eate and to drinke with the dronken:
Matthew 24:50 that seruauntes maister wyll come in a daye when he loketh not for him, and in an houre that he is not ware of,
Matthew 24:51 and wyll deuide hym, and geue him his rewarde with hipocrites. There shalbe weping and gnashing of tethe.

CHAPTER: 25

Matthew 25:1 Then the kingdome of heauen shalbe lykened vnto ten virgins, which toke their lampes and went to mete the bridegrom,
Matthew 25:2 Fyue of them were folyshe, & fyue were wise.
Matthew 25:3 The folyshe toke theyr lampes, but toke none oyle with them.
Matthew 25:4 But the wise toke oyle with them in their vessels with their lampes also.
Matthew 25:5 Whyle the brydegrome taried, al slombred and slepte.
Matthew 25:6 And euen at midnight there was a crye made: beholde, the brydegrome cometh, goo out againste hym.
Matthew 25:7 Then all those virgins arose, and prepared their lampes.
Matthew 25:8 And the folishe sayed to the wise: gyue vs of your oyle for oure lampes go out.
Matthew 25:9 But the wyse aunswered sayinge not so, least there be not ynough for vs and you: but go rather to them that sell & by for your selues.
Matthew 25:10 And whyle they went to bye the brydegrome came: and they that were redie, went in wyth hym to the weddinge, and the gate was shut vp.
Matthew 25:11 Afterwardes cam also the other virgins sayinge: maister maister, open to vs.
Matthew 25:12 But he aunswered and sayd: verely I say vnto you: I knowe not you
Matthew 25:13 watche therfore: for ye knowe neither the daye nor yet the houre when the sonne of man shall come.
Matthew 25:14 Lykewyse as a certayne man, redye to take iorney to a straunge countre, called hys seruauntes and delyuered to them his goodes.
Matthew 25:15 And vnto one he gaue fyue talentes, to another .ij. and to another one: to euery man after his abylite, and straight waye departed.
Matthew 25:16 Then he that had receyued the .v. talentes, went and bestowed them and wan other fyue talentes.
Matthew 25:17 Likewise he that receiued two, gained other two.
Matthew 25:18 But he that receiued the one, wente and digged a pit in the earth and hid his maisters money.
Matthew 25:19 After a longe season the Lorde of those seruauntes came and rekened with them.
Matthew 25:20 Then came he that had receyued .v. talentes, and brought other .v. talentes, sayinge: maister thou delyuerest vnto me fyue talentes beholde I haue gained with them fyue talentes mo.
Matthew 25:21 Then his maister sayde vnto him: Well good seruaunt and faithfull. Thou hast bene faythfull in litle, I wyll make the rueler ouer muche enter in into thy maisters ioye.
Matthew 25:22 Also he that receiued .ij. talentes, came and sayed mayster thou deliuerest vnto me twoo talentes, beholde I haue won two other talentes with them.
Matthew 25:23 And his maister sayde vnto hym, well good seruaunt and faithfull. Thou hast bene faithfull in litle, I wyll make the ruler ouer much: go in into thy maisters ioye.
Matthew 25:24 Then he which had receiued the one talent, came & sayde, maister, I consydered that thou waste an harde man, which repest were thou sowest not, & gadderest where thou strawest not,
Matthew 25:25 and was therfore afraide, and went and hid thy talente in the earth: beholde, thou hast thyne owne.
Matthew 25:26 His maister aunswered and said vnto hym: thou euyll seruaunte and slouthful, thou knewest that I repe wher I sowed not, and gadder wher I strawed not:
Matthew 25:27 thou oughtest therfore to haue had my money to the chaungers, then at my commynge shoulde I haue receyued myne owne with vauntage.
Matthew 25:28 Take therfore the talent from him, and giue it vnto him which hath ten talentes.
Matthew 25:29 For vnto euerye man that hathe shalbe geuen, and he shall haue aboundaunce, and from hym that hath not, shall be taken awaye, euen that he hath.
Matthew 25:30 And caste that vnprofytable seruaunt into vtter darcknes: there shalbe wepinge & gnashinge of tethe.
Matthew 25:31 When the sonne of man cometh in hys glorye, and all the holye aungels with him, then shall he sytte vpon the seate of his glory,
Matthew 25:32 and before him shall be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a shephearde deuideth the shepe from the gootes.
Matthew 25:33 And he shall set the shepe on his right haude, and the gootes on his lyfte.
Matthew 25:34 Then shal the kinge saye to them on his right hand. Come ye blessed chyldren of my father, enheryte ye the kingdome prepared for you from the begynninge of the worlde.
Matthew 25:35 For I was an hungred & ye gaue me meate. I thirsted and ye gaue me drinke. I was herbourles and ye lodged me. I was naked and ye clothed me.
Matthew 25:36 I was sycke and ye visyted me. I was in pryson and ye came vnto me.
Matthew 25:37 Then shal the rightuous aunswere him sayinge, maister, when sawe we the an houngred, & fede the, or a thyrst, & gaue the drinke
Matthew 25:38 when sawe we the herborles, and lodged the? or naked and clothed the?
Matthew 25:39 or when sawe we the syke or in pryson and came vnto the?
Matthew 25:40 And the kinge shall aunswere and saye vnto theym: verelye I saye vnto you: in as much as ye haue done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye haue done it vnto me.
Matthew 25:41 Then shall the kinge saye vnto them that shalbe on the lyfte hande. Departe from me ye cursed, into euerlastinge fyre, which is prepared for the deuyll and hys angels.
Matthew 25:42 For I was an hungred and ye gaue me no meate, I thyrsted and ye gaue me no drynke,
Matthew 25:43 I was herbourles, and ye lodged me not, I was naked and ye clothed me not, I was sicke and in pryson, and ye vysited me not.
Matthew 25:44 Then shal they answere him, sayinge: mayster when sawe we the an hungred, or a thyrst or herbourles, or naked, or sicke, or in pryson, and dyd not minister vnto the.
Matthew 25:45 Then shall he answere them, and saye: Verelye I saye vnto you, in as much as ye dyd it not to one of these little ones: ye dyd it not vnto me.
Matthew 25:46 And these shall go into euerlasting payne. And the righteouse into lyfe eternall.

CHAPTER: 26

Matthew 26:1 And it came to passe, when Iesus had finyshed all these sayinges, he sayed vnto hys disciples.
Matthew 26:2 Ye know that after two dayes shalbe easter, and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered to be crucifyed.
Matthew 26:3 Then assembled together the chiefe priestes and the scrybes and the elders of the people to the palaice of the hye priest, called Cayphas,
Matthew 26:4 and helde a counsell, howe they myghte take Iesus by sutteltie, and kyl hym.
Matthew 26:5 But they sayed, not on the holy daye, lest any vproure aryse amonge the people.
Matthew 26:6 When Iesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
Matthew 26:7 there came to him a woman, which had an alabaster boxe of precious oyntment, and poured it on hys heade, as he sate at the bourde.
Matthew 26:8 When hys discyples sawe that, they had indignacyon, sayinge: what neded thys waste?
Matthew 26:9 Thys oyntment myght haue bene wel solde, and geuen to the poore.
Matthew 26:10 When Iesus vnderstode that, he sayed vnto them: why trouble ye the woman? she hath wrought a good worke vpon me.
Matthew 26:11 For ye shall haue poore folke alwaies with you, but me shall ye not haue alwayes.
Matthew 26:12 And in that she casted thys oyntmente on my bodye, she dyd it to burye me with al.
Matthew 26:13 Verelye I saye vnto you, wheresoeuer thys gospell shalbe preached throughout al the world, there shal also thys that she hath done, be told for a memorial of her.
Matthew 26:14 Then one of the twelue called Iudas Iscaryoth went vnto the chiefe priestes,
Matthew 26:15 and sayd: What wyll ye geue me, and I wyll delyuer him vnto you? And they appoynted vnto him thyrtye peces of syluer.
Matthew 26:16 And from that tyme he sought oportunite to betraye hym.
Matthew 26:17 The fyrst day of swete bread the disciples came to Iesus sayinge vnto hym: where wylt thou that we prepare for the to eate the paschall lambe?
Matthew 26:18 And he sayde: go into the cytye vnto suche a man, & saye to hym: the mayster sayth my tyme is at hande, I wyll kepe myne easter at thy house wyth my disciples.
Matthew 26:19 And the discyples dyd as Iesus had appoynted them, and made redy the easter lambe.
Matthew 26:20 When the euen was come, he sate doune with the .xij.
Matthew 26:21 And as they dyd eate, he sayed: Verelye I saye vnto you, that one of you shal betraye me.
Matthew 26:22 And they were excedynge sorowfull, and beganne euery one of them to saye vnto hym: is it I mayster?
Matthew 26:23 He answered & sayed: he that deppeth hys hand wyth me in the dish the same shall betraye me.
Matthew 26:24 The sonne of man goeth as it is written of hym: but wo be to that man, by whome the sonne of man shalbe betrayed. It had ben good for that man, yf he had neuer bene borne.
Matthew 26:25 Then Iudas whiche betrayed him, answered and sayde: is it I mayster? He sayed vnto hym: thou hast sayed.
Matthew 26:26 As they dyd eate, Iesus toke bread and gyue thankes, brake it and gaue it to the discyples and sayed: Take, eate, thys is my body.
Matthew 26:27 And he toke the cup, & thanked, and gaue it them, saying: drynke of it euery one:
Matthew 26:28 For thys is my bloude of the newe testament, that shalbe shedde for many, for the remissyon of synnes.
Matthew 26:29 I saye vnto you: I wyll not drinke henceforth of this frute of the vyne tree, vntyll that daye, when I shall drinke it newe wyth you in my fathers kyngdome.
Matthew 26:30 And when they had sayde grace, they went oute into mounte oliuete.
Matthew 26:31 Then sayd Iesus vnto them: all ye shall be offended by me thys nyght. For it is written. I wyll smyte the shepehearde, and the shepe of the flocke shall be scattered abroade.
Matthew 26:32 But after I am rysen agayne, I wyll goo before you into Galile.
Matthew 26:33 Peter answered and sayd vnto hym, thoughe all men should be offended by the yet would I neuer be offended.
Matthew 26:34 Iesus sayde vnto hym: Verelye I saye vnto the that thys same nyghte before the cocke crowe thou shalte denye me thryse.
Matthew 26:35 Peter sayed vnto him: Yf I should dye with the, yet would I not denye the, lykewyse also sayed all the discyples.
Matthew 26:36 Then went Iesus with them into a place whiche is called Gethsemane, and sayde vnto the disciples: sit ye here whyle I go and praye yonder.
Matthew 26:37 And he toke with hym Peter and the two sonnes of Zebede, and began to waxe sorowful, and to be in an agonye.
Matthew 26:38 Then said Iesus vnto them: my soule is heauy euen to the death. Tary ye here & watche with me.
Matthew 26:39 And he went a lytell aparte, and fell flat on hys face and prayed sayinge: O my father, yf it be possible, let thys cup passe from me: neuerthelesse not as I wyll, but as thou wilte.
Matthew 26:40 And he came vnto the discyples, and founde them a slepe, & sayd to Peter: what, could ye not watche with me one houre:
Matthew 26:41 watche and praye, that ye fall not into temptacion. The spirite is ready, & the fleshe is weake.
Matthew 26:42 He wente awaye once more, & prayed, sayinge: O my father, yf thys cup can not passe awaye from me, but that I drinke of it, thy wyl be fulfylled.
Matthew 26:43 And he came and founde them a slepe agayne. For theyr eyes were heauye.
Matthew 26:44 And he lefte them, and went agayne and prayed the thyrde tyme, sayinge the same wordes.
Matthew 26:45 Then came he to hys discyples and sayde vnto them: Slepe hence forth and take youre reste. For lo the houre is at hande, and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered into the handes of synners.
Matthew 26:46 Ryse, let vs be goynge: beholde, he is at hand that shall betraye me.
Matthew 26:47 Whyle he yet spake: lo Iudas one of the twelue came, and with hym a great multitude with sweardes and staues, sent from the chiefe priestes and elders of the people.
Matthew 26:48 And he that betrayed hym, had geuen them a token, saying: whosoeuer I kysse, that same is he, laye handes on hym.
Matthew 26:49 And forthe wt al he came to Iesus, and sayed: hayle mayster and kyssed hym.
Matthew 26:50 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: frende, wherfore arte thou come? Then came they, and layed handes on Iesus, & toke him.
Matthew 26:51 And behold, one of them which were with Iesus, stretched out hys hande, and drue hys swerde, and stroke a seruaunt of the hye priest and smote of hys eare.
Matthew 26:52 Then sayed Iesus vnto hym: put vp thy swearde into hys place. For all that laye hand on the swearde, shal perysh with the swerd.
Matthew 26:53 Eyther thynkest thou that I can not nowe praye to my father, and he shal geue me more then .xij. legyons of Angelles?
Matthew 26:54 But how then shoulde the scriptures be fulfylled: for so must it be.
Matthew 26:55 The same tyme sayde Iesus to the multitude: ye be come out as it were vnto a thief with sweardes and staues, for to take me. I sat daylye teachynge in the temple amonge you, and ye toke me not.
Matthew 26:56 Al this was done that the scriptures of the Prophetes myght be fulfylled.
Matthew 26:57 Then all the disciples forsoke hym and fled. And they toke Iesus, and ledde hym to Cayphas the hye Priest, where the Scribes & the Elders were assembled.
Matthew 26:58 And Peter folowed him a farre of vnto the hye priestes palayce: and went in and sat with the seruauntes, to se the ende.
Matthew 26:59 The chiefe priestes and the elders, and all the counsell, sought false wytnes agaynst Iesus, for to put hym to death,
Matthew 26:60 but founde none in so muche that when manye false wytnesses came yet founde they none. At the laste came two false wytnesses,
Matthew 26:61 and sayed: Thys fellowe sayed: I can destroye the temple of God and buylde it agayne in thre dayes.
Matthew 26:62 And the chief priest arose, and sayd to hym: answerest thou nothynge? How is it that these beare wytnes agaynst the?
Matthew 26:63 But Iesus held hys peace: And the chief Priest answered and sayed to hym: I charge the in the name of the liuynge God, that thou tell vs whyther thou be Christ the sonne of God.
Matthew 26:64 Iesus sayd to him thou hast sayed. Neuertheles I say vnto you, hereafter shall ye se the sonne of men sittynge on the ryght hand of power, and come in the cloudes of the skye.
Matthew 26:65 Then the hye Priest rent hys clothes sayinge: He hath blasphemed: what nede we of anye more wytnesses? Beholde nowe ye haue heard hys blasphemy
Matthew 26:66 what thynke ye? They answered and said: he is worthy to dye.
Matthew 26:67 Then spat they in hys face and boffeted hym wyth fistes. And other smot hym with the palme of theyr handes
Matthew 26:68 on the face, sayinge tell vs thou Christ who is he that smote the?
Matthew 26:69 Peter sate without in the palayce. And a damsell came to him saying: Thou also wast with Iesus of Galile:
Matthew 26:70 but he denyed before them al sayinge: I wote not what thou sayst.
Matthew 26:71 When he was gone oute into the poorche, another wenche sawe hym, and sayde vnto them that were there. Thys felowe was also with Iesus of Nazareth,
Matthew 26:72 and agayne he denyed with an oth that he knew not the man.
Matthew 26:73 And after a whyle came vnto hym they that stode by & sayde vnto Peter: surely thou art euen one of them, for thy speache bewrayeth the.
Matthew 26:74 Then beganne he to corse and to sweare that he knew not the man. And immediatly the cocke crewe.
Matthew 26:75 And Peter remembred the wordes of Iesu whiche sayed vnto hym: before the cocke crowe, thou shalt deny me thryse. And went out at the dores and wept bitterlye.

CHAPTER: 27

Matthew 27:1 When the morning was come, al the chief priestes & the elders of the people held a counsell agaynste Iesus, to put hym to death,
Matthew 27:2 & broughte hym bounde and delyuered hym vnto Poncius Pilate the debitie.
Matthew 27:3 Then when Iudas whiche betrayed him, saw that he was condemned, he repented him selfe, and brought agayne the .xxx. plates of syluer to the chiefe priestes and elders
Matthew 27:4 saying: I haue synned betrayinge the innocent bloud. And they sayde: what is that to vs? Se thou to that.
Matthew 27:5 And he caste doune the syluer plates in the temple, and departed, and wente, and honge hym selfe.
Matthew 27:6 And the chief priestes toke the syluer plates, & sayed: it is not lawfull for to putte them into the treasury, because it is the pryce of bloude.
Matthew 27:7 And they toke counsell, and bought wyth them a potters fylde to bury straungers in.
Matthew 27:8 Wherfore that fylde is called the fylde of bloude vntyll thys day.
Matthew 27:9 Then was fulfylled that which was spoken by Ieremy the Prophete saying: and they toke thyrty syluer plates the pryce of hym that was valewed, whom they bought of the chyldren of Israell.
Matthew 27:10 and they gaue them for the potters fylde: as the Lorde appoynted me.
Matthew 27:11 Iesus stode before the debitie: and the debytie axed hym saying: Art thou the Kynge of the Iewes? Iesus sayed vnto hym: Thou sayest,
Matthew 27:12 and when he was accused of the chief priestes & elders he answered nothynge.
Matthew 27:13 Then sayed Pylate vnto him: hearest thou not how many thynges they laye agaynst the?
Matthew 27:14 And he answered hym to neuer a word: in so muche that the debitie marueyled greatly.
Matthew 27:15 At that feast, the debitye was wont to delyuer to the people a prysoner, whom they would desyre.
Matthew 27:16 He had then a notable prysonner called Barrabas.
Matthew 27:17 And when they were gathered together. Pylate sayde to them whether wyl ye that I let lose vnto you Barrabas or Iesu, whiche is called Christe?
Matthew 27:18 For he knewe well that for enuye they had delyuered hym.
Matthew 27:19 When he was set doune to geue iudgement hys wyfe sent to hym saying: haue thou nothing to do with that iust man. For I haue suffered manye thynges thys daye in a dreame about hym.
Matthew 27:20 But the chief priestes and the elders had perswaded the people, that they shulde axe Barrabas and destroye Iesus.
Matthew 27:21 Then the debitye answered and sayd vnto them: whether of the twayne wyll ye that I let lose vnto you? And they sayed: Barrabas
Matthew 27:22 Pylate sayed vnto them: what shall I do then with Iesus whiche is called Christ? They all sayed vnto hym: let hym be crucifyed.
Matthew 27:23 Then sayed the debitie: what euyll hath he done? And they cried the more sayinge: let hym be crucifyed.
Matthew 27:24 When Pilate sawe that he preuayled nothyng but the more busynes was made, he toke water and washed his handes before the people sayinge I am innocent of the bloude of this iust persone, or on your perille be it.
Matthew 27:25 Then aunswered al the people & sayed, his bloude be on vs and on oure children.
Matthew 27:26 Then let he Barrabas louse vnto them, and schourged Iesus, and deliuered hym to be crucyfyed.
Matthew 27:27 Then the souldiers of the debytye toke Iesus to the common hall, and gathered to hym all the companye.
Matthew 27:28 And they strypped him, and put on him a purpyll roobe,
Matthew 27:29 and platted a croune of thornes & put vpon his head, and a reed in his ryght hande, & bowed their knees before him and mocked hym, sayinge: hayle kinge of the Iewes,
Matthew 27:30 and spitted vpon hym & toke the reed and smote him on the head.
Matthew 27:31 And when they had mocked hym: they toke the robe of hym agayn, and put his owne rayment on hym, and lead him awaye to crucyfye hym.
Matthew 27:32 And as they came out, they found a man of Cyren named Symon: him they compelled to beare his crosse.
Matthew 27:33 And when they came vnto the place, called Golgotha (that is to saye: a place of dead mens sculles)
Matthew 27:34 they gaue hym veneger to drynke mengled with gall. And when he had tasted therof: he woulde not drinke.
Matthew 27:35 When they had crucifyed hym: they parted his garmentes, and did cast lottes, to fulfyll that was spoken by the prophete. They deuided my garmentes amonge them, and vpon my vesture dyd cast lottes.
Matthew 27:36 And they sate and watched him there.
Matthew 27:37 And they set vp ouer his head the cause of his death written. This is Iesus the kinge of the Iewes.
Matthew 27:38 And ther were two theues crucifyed with him one on the right hande, and another on the lyfte.
Matthew 27:39 They that passed by, reuyled hym wagginge their heades
Matthew 27:40 & sayinge: Thou that destroyest the temple of God and buyldest it in thre dayes: saue thy selfe. If thou be the sonne of God: come doune from the crosse.
Matthew 27:41 Lykewise also the hye priestes mockynge hym with the scrybes and elders sayde.
Matthew 27:42 He saued other, him selfe he can not saue. If he be the kinge of Israel let him now come doune from the crosse, and we wyll beleue him.
Matthew 27:43 He trusted in God, let hym deliuer hym now, if he wyl haue him: for he sayde I am the sonne of God.
Matthew 27:44 That same also the theues which were crucified with him cast in his teth.
Matthew 27:45 From the syxte houre was there darcknes ouer all the lande vnto the ninthe houre.
Matthew 27:46 And aboute the ninthe houre Iesus cryed with a loude voice sayinge: Eli Eli lama sabathani. That is to saye, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
Matthew 27:47 Some of them that stode ther, when they hearde that, saied. This man called for Helias.
Matthew 27:48 And straight waye one of them ranne & toke a sponge and fylled it full of veneger, and put it on a rede, and gaue him to drinke.
Matthew 27:49 Other sayed, let be: let vs se whither Helias wyll come and delyuer hym.
Matthew 27:50 Iesus cryed agayne with a loude voyce and yeldeth vp the ghost.
Matthew 27:51 And beholde the vayle of the tempell dyd rent in twayne from the toppe to the bottome and the earth dyd quake, and the rockes did rent,
Matthew 27:52 and graues did open, and the bodies of manye saynctes which slept arose
Matthew 27:53 & came out of the graues after his resurreccion: and came into the holy citie and appered vnto manye.
Matthew 27:54 When the Centurion and they that were with hym watchinge Iesus, sawe the earth quake and those thinges whiche happened they feared greatly sayinge: Of a surtye this was the sonne of God.
Matthew 27:55 And many women were there, beholding him a farre of, which folowed Iesus from Galile, ministring vnto him.
Matthew 27:56 Among which was Marye Magdalena and Marye the mother of Iames & Ioses, and the mother of Zebedes children.
Matthew 27:57 When the euen was come, there came a riche man of Aramathia named Ioseph, which same also was Iesus disciple.
Matthew 27:58 He wente to Pilate and begged the bodye of Iesus, Then Pilate commaunded the body to be deliuered.
Matthew 27:59 And Ioseph toke the body, & wrapped it in a cleane linnen cloth,
Matthew 27:60 & put it in his newe tombe: which he had hewen out, euen in the rocke and rolled a great stone to the dore of the sepulchre and departed.
Matthew 27:61 And ther was Marye Magdalene and the other Mary syttynge ouer agaynste the sepulchre.
Matthew 27:62 The nexte daye that foloweth good fryday the hye pryestes and phariseis gothe them selues to Pilate
Matthew 27:63 and sayd: Syr, we remembre that this deceyuer sayed whyle he was yet alyue. After thre daies I will aryse agayne.
Matthew 27:64 Commaunde therfore that the sepulchre be made sure vntyll the thirde daye lest peraduenture his disciples come, and steale him away, and saye vnto the people, he is rysen from death, & the last errourre be worste then the fyrste.
Matthew 27:65 Pylate sayde vnto them: Take watche men: Go, and make it as sure as ye can.
Matthew 27:66 And they went and made the sepulchre sure with watche men, and sealed the stone.

CHAPTER: 28

Matthew 28:1 The Saboth daye at euen which dauneth the morowe after the saboth. Mary Magdalene, & the other Marye came to se the sepulchre.
Matthew 28:2 And beholde there was a great earthquake. For the aungell of the Lorde descended from heauen: & came & rowled backe the stone from the dore, and sat vpon it.
Matthew 28:3 His countenaunce was lyke lyghtnyng, & his raymente whyte as snowe.
Matthew 28:4 And for feare of him the kepers were astonnied and became as dead men.
Matthew 28:5 The aungel aunswered & sayd to the women: feare ye not. I knowe that ye seke Iesus, whiche was crucifyed:
Matthew 28:6 he is not here: he is rysen as he sayd. Come & se the place where the Lord was put,
Matthew 28:7 & go quickly & tel hys discyples that he is rysen from death. And behold, he wil go before you into Galile, there ye shall se hym. Lo, I haue tolde you.
Matthew 28:8 And thei departed quickly from the sepulchre with feare & greate ioye: & dyd runne to bring hys disciples word.
Matthew 28:9 And as they went to tell hys disciples: beholde, Iesus met them saying al hayle. And they came & helde him by the fete and worshypped him.
Matthew 28:10 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: be not afrayd. Go and tel my brethren that they go into Galile, & there shal they se me.
Matthew 28:11 When they were gone: beholde, some of the kepers came into the citye, & shewed vnto the hye Priestes all the thynges that were happened.
Matthew 28:12 And they gathered them together with the elders, and toke counsel, & gaue large money vnto the souldiers,
Matthew 28:13 sayinge: Saye that his discyples came by night, & stole hym away whyle ye slept:
Matthew 28:14 and yf thys come to the rulers eares, we wyll pease him, & saue you harmles.
Matthew 28:15 And they toke the money & did as thei were taughte. And this saiynge is noysed amonge the Iewes vnto thys daye.
Matthew 28:16 Then the .xi. disciples wente away into Galile, into a mountayne wher Iesus had appointed them.
Matthew 28:17 And when they sawe hym they worshipped hym. But some of them doubted.
Matthew 28:18 And Iesus came and spake vnto them saiynge: all power is geuen vnto me in heauen and in earth.
Matthew 28:19 Go therfore & teache all nacyons, baptisyng them in the name of the father, and the sonne, & the holye ghoste.
Matthew 28:20 Teachyng then to obserue all thynges whatsoeuer I commaunded you, And lo I am with you alwaye, euen vntyll the ende of the worlde.

BOOK: Mark

CHAPTER: 1

Mark 1:1 The begynning of the gospell of Iesu Christ, the sonne of God,
Mark 1:2 as it is written in the prophetes. Beholde, I send my messenger before thy face which shal prepare thy waye before the
Mark 1:3 The voyce of a cryer in the wildernes prepare the waye of the Lord: make hys pathes strayghte.
Mark 1:4 Iohn dyd baptyse in the wyldernes, and preache the baptisme of repentaunce: for the remissyon of synnes.
Mark 1:5 And all the lande of Iury and they of Ierusalem wente out vnto him, & were all baptysed of hym in the riuer Iordan: confessyng theyr synnes.
Mark 1:6 Iohn was clothed with camylles heare, & with a gerdyll of a skyn about hys loynes. And he dyd eate locustes, and wilde honey,
Mark 1:7 & preached saiynge: a stronger then I commeth after me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to stoupe doune, and vnlose.
Mark 1:8 I haue baptysed you with water: but he shal baptyse you with the holye ghost.
Mark 1:9 And it came to passe in those dayes, that Iesus came from Nazareth, a citye of Galile: and was baptysed of Iohn in Iordan.
Mark 1:10 And assone as he was come out of the water Iohn saw heauen open, and the holy ghost descendynge vpon him lyke a doue.
Mark 1:11 And there came a voyce from heauen: Thou arte my dere sonne in whom I delyte.
Mark 1:12 And immediatly the spirite draue hym into wyldernes,
Mark 1:13 & he was there in the wyldernes .xl. dayes, and was tempted of Sathan, & was with wylde beastes. And the Aungels minystred vnto hym.
Mark 1:14 After Iohn was taken, Iesus came into Galyle, preachynge the gospell of the kyngedom of God,
Mark 1:15 and sayinge: the tyme is come, & the kyngdome of God is at hande, repente & beleue the Gospell.
Mark 1:16 And as he walked by the sea of Galile, he saw Simon & Andrew hys brother, castyng nettes into the sea, for they were fishers.
Mark 1:17 And Iesus sayde vnto them: folowe me, and I wyll make you fishers of men:
Mark 1:18 And strayghtwaye they forsoke theyr nettes, and folowed hym.
Mark 1:19 And when he had gone a lyttell further thence, he sawe Iames the sonne of Zebede, & Iohn hys brother, euen as they were in the shyppe mendynge theyr nettes.
Mark 1:20 And anone he called them. And they left theyr father Zebede in the shyppe with hys hyred seruauntes, & went theyr waye after hym.
Mark 1:21 And they entred into Capernaum: & straight waye on the Saboth dayes, he entred into the synagoge & taught.
Mark 1:22 And they merueyled at hys learning. For he taught them as one that had power with hym, and not as the scrybes.
Mark 1:23 And there was in theyr Synagoge a man vexed with an vncleane spirite, that cryed
Mark 1:24 saiyng: let be: what haue we to do with the thou Iesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy vs, I knowe the what thou arte, euen the holye of God.
Mark 1:25 And Iesus rebuked him, saying: hold thy peace, and come out of hym.
Mark 1:26 And the vncleane spirite tare hym, & cryed with a loude voyce, and came out of hym.
Mark 1:27 And they were al amased, in so muche that they demaunded one of another, amonge them selues saying: what thyng is thys? what newe doctryne is this? For he commaundeth the foule spirites with power, and they obeye hym.
Mark 1:28 And immediatly hys fame spred abroade throughoute al the regyon borderynge on Galile.
Mark 1:29 And forth with, assone as they were come out of the synagoge, they entred into the house of Simon and Andrew, with Iames and Iohn
Mark 1:30 & Symons mother in law lay sicke of a fewer. And anone they told him of her.
Mark 1:31 And he came and toke her by the hande, and lyfte her vp, & the fewer forsoke her by and by: and she ministred vnto them.
Mark 1:32 And at euen when the sunne was doune, they brought to hym all that were dyseased, & them that were possessed with deuyls.
Mark 1:33 And al the cytye gathered together at the dore,
Mark 1:34 & he healed many that were sicke of dyuers dyseases. And he cast out manye deuyls, and suffered not the deuyls to speake, because they knew hym.
Mark 1:35 And in the mornyng very early, Iesus arose and went oute into a solytarye place, & there prayed.
Mark 1:36 And Simon and they that were wyth hym folowed after him.
Mark 1:37 And when they had founde hym, they sayed vnto hym: al men seke for the.
Mark 1:38 And he sayed vnto them: let vs go into the next townes, that I maye preach there also: for truely I came out for that purpose.
Mark 1:39 And he preached in theyr synagoges, throughoute all Galile, and caste the deuyls out.
Mark 1:40 And there came a leper to hym, besechinge hym, and kneled doune vnto hym, and sayde to hym: yf thou wylt, thou cannest make me cleane.
Mark 1:41 And Iesus had compassyon on hym, and put forth hys hande, touched hym, & sayd to hym: I wyl, be thou cleane.
Mark 1:42 And assone as he had spoken, immediatly the leprosy departed from hym, & he was clensed.
Mark 1:43 And he charged hym, and sent him awaye forthwith
Mark 1:44 and sayde vnto hym: Se thou say nothyng to any man: but get the hence, and shewe thy selfe to the priest, and offer for thy clensing, those thinges whiche Moyses commaunded, for a testimonial vnto them.
Mark 1:45 But he (assone as he departed) beganne to tell many thynges, & to publyshe the dede: in so muche that Iesus coulde no more openlye enter into the citie, but was without in desert places. And they came to him from euerye quarter.

CHAPTER: 2

Mark 2:1 After a feawe dayes, he entred into Capernaum agayne, & it was noysed that he was in a house
Mark 2:2 And anone many gathered together, in so muche that now there was no rome to receyue them: no, not so much as about the dore. And he preached the worde vnto them.
Mark 2:3 And there came vnto hym that brought one sicke of the palsie, borne of foure men.
Mark 2:4 And because they coulde not come nye to hym for preace, they vncouered the rofe of the house, where he was. And when they had broken it open, they let doune the bed where in the sicke of the palsye laye.
Mark 2:5 When Iesus saw their fayth, he sayed to the sicke of the palsie, sonne thy synnes are forgeuen the.
Mark 2:6 And there were certayne of the scrybes, sittynge there and reasonynge in theyr hertes:
Mark 2:7 how doth thys felowe so blaspheme? Who can forgeue synnes, but God onelye?
Mark 2:8 And immediatly when Iesus perceyued in hys spirite, that they so reasoned in them selues, he said vnto them why thinke ye suche thynges in your hertes?
Mark 2:9 Whether is it easyer to saye to the sicke of the palsie, thy synnes are forgeuen the: or to saye: aryse, take vp thy bed, and walke?
Mark 2:10 That ye maye knowe that the sonne of man hath power in earth to forgeue synnes, he spake vnto the sicke of the palsye:
Mark 2:11 I saye vnto the, aryse and take vp thy bedde, and get the hence into thyne owne house.
Mark 2:12 And by and by he arose, toke vp the bedde, & wente forthe before them all: in so muche that they were all amased, and glorifyed God sayinge: we neuer saw it on thys fasshyon.
Mark 2:13 And he wente agayne vnto the sea, and all the people resorted vnto hym, and he taughte them.
Mark 2:14 And as Iesus passed by, he sawe Leuye the sonne of Alphey syt at the recepte of custome, and sayde vnto hym: folowe me. And he arose, and folowed hym.
Mark 2:15 And it came to passe as Iesus sate at meate in his house, many publicans and synners sate at meat also with Iesus and hys discyples. For there were many that folowed hym.
Mark 2:16 And when the Scrybes and pharyses sawe hym eate wyth Publicans and synners, they sayde vnto hys discyples: howe is it that he eateth and drinketh with Publicans and synners?
Mark 2:17 When Iesus heard that, he sayde vnto them: The whole haue no nede of the phisicyon, but the sicke. I came not to call the righteous, but the synners to repentaunce.
Mark 2:18 And the discyples of Iohn and the Pharyses dyd faste; and therfore came and sayde vnto hym. Why do the disciples of Iohn and of the Pharyses fast, and thy discyples fast not.
Mark 2:19 And Iesus sayde vnto them: can the chyldren of a weddyng faste, whyles the brydegrome is with them. As longe as they haue the brydegrome wyth them they cannot fast.
Mark 2:20 But the dayes wil come when the bridegrome shalbe taken from them, & then shal they fast in those dayes.
Mark 2:21 Also no man soweth a pece of newe clothe vnto an olde garment, for then taketh he away the newe pece from the olde, and so is the rente worsse.
Mark 2:22 In lyke wyse no man poureth newe wyne into olde vessels, for yf he do, the newe wyne breaketh the vessels, and the wyne runneth oute, & the vessels are marred. But newe wyne must be poured into newe vessels.
Mark 2:23 And it chaunsed that he went thorowe the corne fieldes on the Saboth daye: and hys discyples as they wente on theyr way, began to plucke the eares of corne.
Mark 2:24 And the Pharyses sayde vnto hym: beholde, why do they on the Saboth dayes that which is not lawful?
Mark 2:25 And he sayde to them: haue ye neuer rede what Dauid dyd, when he had nede, & was an hungred both he and they that were with hym?
Mark 2:26 Howe he went into the house of God in the dayes of Abiathar the hye prieste, and dyd eate the halowed loues, which is not lawfull to eate, but for the priestes onely: and gaue also to them, whiche were with hym?
Mark 2:27 And he sayde to them: the Saboth daye was made for man, & not man for the Saboth daye.
Mark 2:28 Wherfore the sonne of man is Lorde euen of the Saboth daye.

CHAPTER: 3

Mark 3:1 And he entred agayne into the synagoge, & there was a man there whiche had a wyddred hande.
Mark 3:2 And they watched him to se, whether he woulde heale him on the Saboth daye, that they myght accuse hym.
Mark 3:3 And he sayde vnto the man whiche had the widdred hande: aryse and stand in the myddes.
Mark 3:4 And he sayde to them: whether is it lawful to do a good dede on the Saboth dayes, or an euyll? to saue lyfe or kyll? But they held theyr peace.
Mark 3:5 And he loked rounde aboute on them angerly, mournynge on the blindnes of theyr hertes, & said to the man: stretch forth thyne hand. And he stretched it out. And hys hande was restored euen as whole as the other.
Mark 3:6 And the Pharyses departed, and strayght waye gathered a counsel with them that belonged to Herode agaynste hym that they might destroye hym.
Mark 3:7 And Iesus auoyded with hys disciples to the sea. And a great multitude folowed him from Galile, and from Iurie,
Mark 3:8 and from Hierusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyonde Iordane, & they that dwelled aboute Tyre and Sydon, a great multitude: whiche when they had hearde what thynges he dyd came vnto hym.
Mark 3:9 And he commaunded hys disciples, that a shypp shoulde wayte on hym, because of the people, leste they shoulde throunge him.
Mark 3:10 For he had healed many, in so much that they preased vpon hym, for to touche hym as manye as had plages.
Mark 3:11 And when the vncleane spirites sawe hym: they fell doune before hym, and cryed, sayinge: thou art the sonne of God
Mark 3:12 And he straytly charged them that they should not vtter hym.
Mark 3:13 And he wente vp into a mountayne, and called vnto hym whome he woulde, and they came vnto hym.
Mark 3:14 And he ordeyned the .xij. that they shoulde be with hym, & that he myghte sende them to preache,
Mark 3:15 and that they myghte haue power to heale sicknesses, and to caste oute deuyls.
Mark 3:16 And he gaue Simon, to name Peter.
Mark 3:17 And he called Iames the sonne of Zebede and Iohn, Iames brother, and gaue them Boanarges to name: whiche is to saye, the sonnes of thounder,
Mark 3:18 and Andrew, and Philip, & Bartelmew, and Mathew, & Thomas, & Iames the sonne of Alphey & Taddeus, & Symon of Cane,
Mark 3:19 and Iudas Iscaryoth, which same also betrayed hym. And they came into an house,
Mark 3:20 & the people assembled together agayne, so greately that they had not leasure so much as to eate bread.
Mark 3:21 And when they that longed vnto hym hearde of it, they went out to holde him. For they thought he had bene besyde hym selfe.
Mark 3:22 And the scribes which came from Ierusalem, sayde: he hathe Beelzebub, and by the power of the chiefe deuyll casteth out deuyls.
Mark 3:23 And he called them vnto hym, and sayd vnto them in similitudes. How can Sathan dryue out Satan?
Mark 3:24 For if a realme be deuyded agaynst it selfe, that realme can not endure.
Mark 3:25 Or yf a house be deuyded against it selfe, that house cannot continue:
Mark 3:26 So yf Satan make insurreccyon agaynst hym selfe and be deuyded, he can not contynue, but is at an ende.
Mark 3:27 No man can enter into a strong mans house and take awaye hys goodes, except he fyrste bynd that stronge man, and then spoyle hys house.
Mark 3:28 Verely I saye vnto you: al synnes shalbe forgeuen vnto mens children and blaspheme wherwith they blaspheme:
Mark 3:29 But he that blasphemeth the holye ghost, shall neuer haue forgeuenes, but is in daunger of eternal damnacion,
Mark 3:30 because they said: he had an vncleane spirite.
Mark 3:31 Then came his mother and his brethren, & stode wtout, and sent vnto hym & called hym.
Mark 3:32 And the people sate about him, & said vnto him: beholde thy mother and thy brethren seke for the without.
Mark 3:33 And he answered them saying: who is my mother and my brethren?
Mark 3:34 And he loked rounde about on hys disciples, which sate in compasse about him, & sayd: behold my mother & my brethren.
Mark 3:35 For whosoeuer doth the wil of god he is my brother, my syster, and mother.

CHAPTER: 4

Mark 4:1 And he began agayn to teache by the sea side. And he gathered together vnto him muche people, so greatly that he entred into a shyp, & sate in the sea, and all the people was by the sea side on the shoore.
Mark 4:2 And he taughte them manye thynges in similitudes: and sayde vnto them in hys doctrine.
Mark 4:3 Herken. Beholde, there went out a sower to sow.
Mark 4:4 And it fortuned as he sowed, that some fell by the waye syde, & the fowles of the ayre came & deuoured it vp.
Mark 4:5 Some fell on stony grounde, where it had not muche earth, & by & by sprang vp, because it had not depth of earthe,
Mark 4:6 but assone as the sonne was vp it caught heath, and because it had not roting widdred awaye.
Mark 4:7 And some fell among the thornes, and the thornes grew vp & choked it so that it gaue no frute.
Mark 4:8 And some fell vpon good ground, & dyd yeld frute, some thyrty folde, some sixtie folde, and some an hundred folde.
Mark 4:9 And he sayd vnto them: He that hath eares to heare, let hym heare.
Mark 4:10 And when he was alone, they that were aboute hym with the .xij. axed hym of the similitude,
Mark 4:11 & he sayd vnto them: To you it is geuen to knowe the mysterye of the kyngedome of God. But vnto them that are without: shal al thynges be done in similitudes:
Mark 4:12 that when they se, they shall se, and not dyscerne, and when they heare, they shal heare, and not vnderstand leste at any tyme they shoulde tourne: & theyr synnes shoulde be forgeuen them,
Mark 4:13 and he said vnto them: Perceyue ye not thys similitude? howe then shoulde ye vnderstand all other similitudes?
Mark 4:14 The sower soweth the word,
Mark 4:15 and they that are by the wayes side, where the worde is sowen, are they to whome assone as they haue hearde it, Satan cometh immediatly, & taketh awaye the worde that was sowen in theyr hartes.
Mark 4:16 And lykewyse they that are sowen on the stonye grounde, are they which when they haue hearde the worde, atonce receyue it with gladnes,
Mark 4:17 yet haue no rotes in them selues: and so endure but a tyme: and anone as trouble and persecucyon aryseth for the wordes sake, they fall immediatlye.
Mark 4:18 And they that are sowen amonge the thornes; are suche as heare the worde,
Mark 4:19 and the care of thys worlde & the dysceythfulnes of ryches & the lustes of other thynges, enter in, and choke the worde: and it is made vnfrutefull.
Mark 4:20 And those that were sowed in good grounde are they that heare the worde, & receyue it, & bryng forth frute, some thyrty fold, some sixtye folde, some an hundred folde.
Mark 4:21 And he sayd vnto them: is the candle lighted, to be put vnder a bushell, or vnder the table, and not rather to be put on a candelstick?
Mark 4:22 For there is nothyng so preuy, that shall not be opened: neyther so secrete, but that it shall come abroade.
Mark 4:23 Yf any man haue eares to heare let hym heare.
Mark 4:24 And he sayde vnto them: take hede what ye heare. With what measure ye mete, with the same shall it be measured vnto you agayne. And vnto you that heare, shall more be geuen.
Mark 4:25 For vnto him that hath, shall it be geuen: and from hym that hath not shall be taken away: euen that he hath.
Mark 4:26 And he sayde: so is the kyngdome of God euen as yf a man shoulde sowe sede in the grounde,
Mark 4:27 and shoulde slepe and ryse vp night and daye, and the sede shoulde spryng & grow vp, he not ware.
Mark 4:28 For the earth bryngeth forth frute of her selfe: fyrst the blade, then the eares, after that full corne in the eares.
Mark 4:29 And assone as the frute is broughte forth, anone he thrusteth in the sykell, because the heruest is come.
Mark 4:30 And he sayde: where vnto shal we lyken the kyngdome of God? or with what comparison shall we compare it?
Mark 4:31 It is lyke a grayne of mustarde sede, which when it is sowen in the earth, is the least of all seedes that be in the earth:
Mark 4:32 but after that it is sowen, it groweth vp and is greatest of al herbes and beareth great braunches, so that the foules of the ayre maye dwell vnder the shadowe of it.
Mark 4:33 And with many suche similitudes he preached the worde vnto them, after as they myghte heare it.
Mark 4:34 And withoute similitude spake he nothyng vnto them. But when they were apart he expounded all thynges to hys disciples.
Mark 4:35 And the same daye when euen was come he sayde vnto them: Let vs passe ouer vnto the other syde.
Mark 4:36 And they lefte the people and toke hym euen as he was in the shyppe. And there were also with hym other shyppes.
Mark 4:37 And there arose a greate storme of wynde and dashed the waues into the shyppe, so that it was full.
Mark 4:38 And he was in the sterne a slepe on a pelowe. And they awoke hym, and sayde to hym: Mayster carest thou not that we peryshe?
Mark 4:39 And he rose vp, and rebuked the wynd and sayed vnto the sea: peace and be styll. And the wynde alayed, and there folowed a great calme.
Mark 4:40 And he sayde vnto them: Why are ye so fearfull? howe is it that ye haue no faythe?
Mark 4:41 And they feared excedynglye, and sayed one to another: What felowe is thys. For both wynde and sea obeye hym.

CHAPTER: 5

Mark 5:1 And they came ouer to the other syde of the sea into the countre of Gaderenites.
Mark 5:2 And when he was come oute of the shyppe, there met hym oute of the graues a man possessed of an vncleane spirite,
Mark 5:3 whiche had hys abydyng among the graues. And no man coulde bynde him: no not with chaynes,
Mark 5:4 because that when he was often bounde with fetters and chayns, he plucked the chayns a sunder, & brake the fetters in peces. Neyther coulde any man tame him.
Mark 5:5 And alwayes both nyght and daye he cryed in the mountaynes & in the graues, and bet hym self with stones.
Mark 5:6 When he had spyed Iesus a far of, he ranne & worshypped hym
Mark 5:7 and cryed with a loude voyce, and sayde: what haue I to do with a loude voyce, and sayde: what haue I to do with the Iesus the sonne of the most hyest God? I requyre the in the name of God that thou torment me not.
Mark 5:8 For he had sayde vnto hym: come out of the man thou foule spirite.
Mark 5:9 And he axed him: what is thy name. And he answered sayinge: my name is Legyon, for we are manye.
Mark 5:10 And he prayed hym instantly, that he woulde not sende them awaye out of the countre.
Mark 5:11 And there was there nye vnto the mountaynes a great herde of swyne fedyng,
Mark 5:12 and al the deuyls besought hym, saying: sende vs into the herde of swyne, that we may enter into them.
Mark 5:13 And anone Iesus gaue them leaue. And the vncleane spirites went out and entred into the swyne. And the herde startled, and ranne hedlynge into the sea. They were aboute two .M. swyne & they were drouned in the sea.
Mark 5:14 And the swyne herdes fleed, and tolde it in the cytye, and in the countre. And they came out for to se what had happened:
Mark 5:15 and came to Iesus, and sawe hym that was vexed with the fende, and had the legion syte, both clothed and in hys ryght mynde, & were afrayed,
Mark 5:16 And they that sawe it, tolde them how it had happened to him that was possessed with the deuyl: and also of the swyne.
Mark 5:17 And they beganne to praye hym, that he woulde departe from their coostes.
Mark 5:18 And when he was come into the shyppe, he that hadde the deuel, prayed hym that he might be with him.
Mark 5:19 How beit, Iesus woulde not suffer him, but sayde vnto him: go home into thine owne house and to thy frendes, and shewe them what greate thinges the Lord hath done vnto the, and how he had compassion on the.
Mark 5:20 And he departed, & began to publishe in the ten cyties what great thinges Iesus had done vnto him, and all men did meruayll.
Mark 5:21 And when Iesus was come ouer agayne by ship vnto the otherside, much people gathered vnto him, and he was nye vnto the sea.
Mark 5:22 And beholde, there came one of the rulers of the Sinagoges, whose name was Iarius: and when he sawe him, he fell doune at his fete,
Mark 5:23 & besought hym greatly sayinge: my doughter lyeth at point of death, I woulde thou wouldest come and laye thy hande on her, that she might be safe and lyue.
Mark 5:24 And he went with hym, and muche people folowed him, & thronged him.
Mark 5:25 And there was a certayn woman, whiche was diseased of an yssue of bloude .xij. yeres,
Mark 5:26 and had suffred many thynges of many phisicions, and had spent all that she had, and felte none amendement at all, but wexed worse & worse.
Mark 5:27 When she had herde of Iesus: she came into the preace behinde hym, and touched hys garment.
Mark 5:28 For she thought: if I maye but touch his clothes, I shalbe whole.
Mark 5:29 And streightway her fountayne of bloude was dryed vp, and she felft in her bodye, that she was healed of the plague.
Mark 5:30 And Iesus immediatly felte in hym selfe, the vertu that went out of hym, and tourned him rounde about in the preace, & sayde: who touched my clothes?
Mark 5:31 And his disciples sayde vnto him: seist thou the people thruste the, and yet axest, who did touche me?
Mark 5:32 And he loked rounde about, for to se her that had done that thing.
Mark 5:33 The woman feared and trembled (for she knew what was done within her) and she came and fell doune before him, and tolde the trueth of euery thinge.
Mark 5:34 And he sayde to her: Doughter, thy faythe hath made the whole: go in peace, and by whole of thy plage.
Mark 5:35 Whyle he yet spake, there came frome the ruler of the Synagoges house, certayn which sayde: thy doughter is dead: why diseasest thou the maister any further?
Mark 5:36 Assone as Iesus herd that worde spoken, he sayd vnto the ruler of the Synagoge: be not afrayed, onely beleue.
Mark 5:37 And he suffred no man to folow him mo then Peter and Iames and Ihon the brother of Iames.
Mark 5:38 And he came vnto the house of the ruler of the Synagoge, and sawe the wondringe, & them that wepte and wayled greatly,
Mark 5:39 & went in and sayde vnto them: why make ye this a do and wepe? The mayden is not dead, but slepeth.
Mark 5:40 And thy laught him to scorne. Then he put them all out, and toke the father & the mother of the mayden, & them that were with hym, and entred in where the mayden laye,
Mark 5:41 & toke the mayden by the hande, and sayd vnto her: Talitha cumi: which is by interpretacion: mayden I saye vnto the aryse.
Mark 5:42 And streyght the mayden arose, and went on her fete. For she was of the age of twelue yeres. And thei were astonyed at it out of measur.
Mark 5:43 And he charged them straytely that no man shoulde know of it, and commaunded to geue her meate.

CHAPTER: 6

Mark 6:1 And he departed thence, & came into hys owne countre, and hys disciples folowed him.
Mark 6:2 And when the Sabboth daye was come, he began to teache in the Sinagoge And many that heard him were astonied, and sayde: From whence hath he these thinges? & what wysedome is this that is geuen vnto him? and suche vertues that are wroughte by his handes?
Mark 6:3 Is not this that carpenter Maries sonne, the brother of Iames and Ioses, & of Iuda and Simon? and are not his systers here with vs? And thei were offended by him.
Mark 6:4 And Iesus sayde vnto them: a Prophet is not dispised but in his owne countre, and amonge his owne kinne, and amonge them that are of the same housholde.
Mark 6:5 And he could there shewe no miracles, but layd his handes vpon a few sicke folke and healed them.
Mark 6:6 And he merueyled at their vnbelefe. And he went about by the tounes that lay on euery side, teachyng.
Mark 6:7 And he called the .xij. and began to sende them, two and two, and gaue them power ouer vncleane spirites.
Mark 6:8 And commaunded them, that they should take nothinge vnto their iorney saue a rod onely: Neyther scrippe, neither bread, neither money in their pourses:
Mark 6:9 but shoulde be shood wyth sandals. And that they should not put on two cootes.
Mark 6:10 And he sayde vnto them: wheresoeuer ye enter into an house, there abide till ye departe thence.
Mark 6:11 And whosoeuer shal not receyue you nor heare you, when ye departe thence, shake of the dust: that is vnder your fete, for a witnesse vnto them. I say verely vnto you, it shalbe easier for Zodome and Gomoree at the daye of iudgement, then for that citie.
Mark 6:12 And they went out and preached, that thei should repent:
Mark 6:13 and they cast out many deuils. And they anointed many that were sicke with oyle and healed them.
Mark 6:14 And kynge Herode hearde of hym (for his name was spred abroade) & sayde: Ihon Baptist is rysen agayne from death, and therefore myracles are wrought by him.
Mark 6:15 Other sayde: it is Helyas: and some sayde: it is a Prophet: or as one of the Prophetes.
Mark 6:16 But when Herode hearde of hym, he sayde: it is Ihon whome I beheaded, he is rysen from death agayne.
Mark 6:17 For Herode him selfe had sent forth, & had taken Ihon, and bounde him and cast him into pryson for Herodias sake, whiche was hys brother Philippes wyfe: For he had maried her.
Mark 6:18 Ihon sayd vnto Herode: It is not lawful for the to haue thy brothers wyfe.
Mark 6:19 Herodias layed wayte for him, and woulde haue killed him, but she could not.
Mark 6:20 For Herode feared Iohan, knowinge that he was a iust man and an holy: and gaue him reuerence: and when he hearde hym, he did many thynges, and heard him gladly.
Mark 6:21 But when a conuement daye was come: Herode on his byrth day made a supper to the lordes, captaynes, and chief estates of Galile.
Mark 6:22 And the doughter of the sayd Herodias came in and daunsed, and pleased Herode, and them that sate at bourde also. Then the kyng sayde vnto the mayden: axe of me what thou wilt, & I wil geue it the.
Mark 6:23 And he sware to her, whatsoeuer thou shalt axe of me, I wil geue it the, euen vnto the halfe of my kyngdome.
Mark 6:24 And she went forth & sayde to her mother: what shal I axe? And she said: Ihon Baptistes head.
Mark 6:25 And she came in straight way with haste vnto the kynge, and axed saying: I wil that thou geue me by and by in a charger the head of Ihon Baptist.
Mark 6:26 And the kynge was excedinge sory: howbeit, for his othes sake, and for their sakes, whiche sate at supper also, he woulde not put her beside her purpose.
Mark 6:27 And immediatly the kynge sent the hang man, and commaunded his headde to be brought in. And he went and beheaded hym in the pryson,
Mark 6:28 and brought his head in a charger, and gaue it to the mayden, and the maiden gaue it to her mother.
Mark 6:29 And when his disciples heard of it, they came and toke vp his body, and put it in a tombe.
Mark 6:30 And the apostles gathered them selues together to Iesus, & tolde him all thinges, bothe what they had done, & what they had taught.
Mark 6:31 And he sayde vnto them: Come ye a parte into the wildernes and rest a while. For there were many commers and goers, that they had no leasure so muche as to eate.
Mark 6:32 And he went by ship out of the wai into a desert place.
Mark 6:33 But the people spied them when they departed: & many knew him and ranne afote thither out of all cyties, and came thither before them, & came together vnto hym.
Mark 6:34 And Iesus went out and sawe muche people, and had compassion on them, because they were lyke shepe, whyche had no shepeherd. And he beganne to teache them many thinges.
Mark 6:35 And when the daye was now farre spent, his disciples came vnto him saying: this is a deserte place,
Mark 6:36 and nowe the daye is farre passed, let them departe, that they maye go into the countrey roundabout, and into the tounes and bye them bread, for they haue nothing to eate.
Mark 6:37 He aunswered and sayd vnto them: geue ye them to eate. And they sayd vnto him: shal we go and bye .ij.C. peny worth of bread and geue them to eate?
Mark 6:38 He sayde vnto them: howe many loues haue ye? Go and loke. And when they had serched they sayde: fyue and .ij. fishes
Mark 6:39 And he commaunded them to make them all sit doune by companyes vpon the grene grasse.
Mark 6:40 And they sat doune, here a rowe and there a rowe, by hundredes, and fifties.
Mark 6:41 And he toke the .v. loues and the .ij. fishes, and loked vp to heauen, and blessed and brake the loues & gaue them to his disciples to put before theym: and the .ij. fishes he deuided amonge them all.
Mark 6:42 And they all did eate and were satisfied.
Mark 6:43 And they toke vp .xij. baskettes ful of the gobbettes and of the fishes.
Mark 6:44 And they that eate were aboute fyue thousand men.
Mark 6:45 And strayghtwaye he caused his disciples to go into the ship, and to goo ouer the water before vnto Bethsaida, whyle he sent away the people.
Mark 6:46 And assone as he had sent them away, he departed into a mountayne to pray.
Mark 6:47 And when euen was come, the ship was in the middes of the sea, and he alone on the lande,
Mark 6:48 and he sawe them troubled in rowing, for the winde was contrary vnto them. And about the fourth quarter of the night he came vnto them walking vpon the sea, and woulde haue passed by them.
Mark 6:49 When they sawe hym walking vpon the sea, they supposed it hadde bene a spirite and cried out:
Mark 6:50 for they all sawe hym, and were afrayed. And anone he talked with them, and sayde vnto them. Be of good chere, it is I, be not afrayed.
Mark 6:51 And he went vp vnto them into the ship, and the wynd ceased, and they were sore amased in them selues beyonde measure, and meruayled.
Mark 6:52 For they remembred not of the loues, because their hertes were blynded.
Mark 6:53 And they came ouer and went into the lande of Genezareth, and drue vp into the hauen.
Mark 6:54 And assone as they were come out of the ship, strayght they knewe hym,
Mark 6:55 and ran forth thorowout all the region round about, and began to cary aboute in beddes all that were sicke, to the place where they herde tell he was.
Mark 6:56 And whether so euer he entred into townes, cities, or vilages, they layed theyr sicke in the stretes and prayed hym, that they might touche, and it were but the hemme of his vesture. And as many as touched hym were safe.

CHAPTER: 7

Mark 7:1 And the Phariseis came together vnto hym, and diuers of the Scribes, which came from Hierusalem.
Mark 7:2 And when they sawe certayne of hys disciples eate breade with commen handes (that is to say wt vnwashen handes) they complayned.
Mark 7:3 For the Phariseis and all the Iewes, except thei wash their handes ofte, eate not obseruinge the tradicions of the elders.
Mark 7:4 And when they come from the market, except they wash they eate not. And many other thinges therbe whyche they haue taken vpon them to obserue, as the wasshyng of the cuppes and cruses, and of brasen vessels, and of tables.
Mark 7:5 Then axed hym the Phariseis and Scribes, why walke not thy disciples accordynge to the tradicions of the elders, but eate breade with vnwashen handes?
Mark 7:6 He aunswered and sayde vnto them: well prophecied Esayas of you hypocrites, as it is wryten: This people honoureth me with theyr lippes, but their hert is farre from me:
Mark 7:7 In vayne they worship me, teachynge doctrines whyche are nothyng but the commaundementes of men.
Mark 7:8 For ye laye the commaundement of God apart, and obserue the tradicions of men, as the washyng of cruses and of cuppes, and many other suche lyke thinges ye do.
Mark 7:9 And he sayde vnto them: wel, ye caste aside the commaundement of God too maintayne your owne tradicions.
Mark 7:10 For Moyses sayd: Honour thy father and thy mother: and whosoeuer curseth father or mother, let him dye for it.
Mark 7:11 But ye saye a man shall saye to father or mother Corban: whiche is, that thou desirest me to helpe the with, is geuen God.
Mark 7:12 And so ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father or his mother,
Mark 7:13 makynge the worde of God of none effect, thorowe youre owne tradicions, which you haue ordeyned. And many suche thinges ye do.
Mark 7:14 And he called all the people vnto hym, and sayde to them. Herken to me, euery one of you and vnderstande.
Mark 7:15 There is nothinge without a man that can defile him when it entereth into him: but those thinges which procede out of hym are those, which defile the man.
Mark 7:16 If any man haue eares to heare, let hym heare.
Mark 7:17 And when he came into an house from the people his disciples axed him of the similitude
Mark 7:18 And he sayde to them: Are ye so without vnderstanding. Do ye not yet perceyue that, whatsoeuer thinge from without entreth into a man it can not defile him,
Mark 7:19 because it entreth not into his herte, but into his bealy: and goeth out into the draught that pourgeth out all meates.
Mark 7:20 And he sayde that defileth a man, whiche cometh out of a man.
Mark 7:21 For from within, euen out of the herte of men, procede euel thoughtes: aduoutry, fornication, murther,
Mark 7:22 theft, coueteousnes, wickednes, deceyte: vncleanenesse and a wicked eye, blasphemy, pryde, folishenes:
Mark 7:23 all these euell thinges come from within and defile a man.
Mark 7:24 And from thense he rose and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and entered into an house, and would that no man should haue knowen: but he could not be hyd.
Mark 7:25 For a certayn woman, whose doughter had a foule spirite hearde of him, and came & fell at hys fete.
Mark 7:26 The woman was a Greke out of Syrophenicia, and she besought him that he woulde caste out the deuel out of her doughter.
Mark 7:27 And Iesus sayde vnto her: let the chyldren firste be fedde. For it is not mete, to take the chyldrens bread and to cast it vnto whelpes.
Mark 7:28 She aunswered & sayde vnto him: euen so master, neuerthelesse the whelpes also eate vnder the table of the chyldrens cromes.
Mark 7:29 And he sayde vnto her: for this saying go thy waye, the deuell is gone out of thy doughter.
Mark 7:30 And when she was come home to her house, she founde the deuell departed, & her doughter lying on the bed.
Mark 7:31 And departed agayne from the coostes yf Tire and Sidon, and came to the sea of Galile, thorow the middest of the coostes of the .x. cyties.
Mark 7:32 And they brought vnto him one that was deafe, and stambred in his speache, and praied him to lay his hand vpon him.
Mark 7:33 And he toke him a side from the people, and put his finger in his eares, and did spitte and touched hys tonge,
Mark 7:34 and loked vp to heauen, and sighted & sayde vnto him: Ephata, that is to say be opened.
Mark 7:35 And straight way his eares were opened and the stringe of hys tougue was losed, and he spake playne.
Mark 7:36 And he commaunded them that they shoulde tell no man. But the more he forbad them, so muche the more a greate deale they published it:
Mark 7:37 and were beyonde measure astonyed, sayinge: He hath done all thinges well, and hath made both the deafe to heare & the domme to speake.

CHAPTER: 8

Mark 8:1 In those dayes when there was a very great company, and had nothinge to eate. Iesus called his disciples to hym and sayde vnto them:
Mark 8:2 I haue compassion on this people, because they haue nowe bene with me thre dayes, and haue nothing to eate.
Mark 8:3 And if I shoulde send them away fastynge to theyr owne houses, they should faynte by the waye. For diuers of them came from farre.
Mark 8:4 And his disciples aunswered him: wher might a man haue bread here in the wildernes to satisfie these?
Mark 8:5 And he asked them: how many loues haue ye? They sayde seuen.
Mark 8:6 And he commaunded the people to sit doune on the grounde. And he toke the seuen loues, gaue thankes, brake, & gaue to his disciples to set before them. And they did set them before the people.
Mark 8:7 And they had a few small fishes. And he blessed them and commaunded them also to be set before them:
Mark 8:8 And they ate and were suffised. And they toke vp of the broken meate that was left seuen baskettes full.
Mark 8:9 And they that eate were in numbre about foure thousande. And he sent them awaye.
Mark 8:10 And anone he entered into a shyp with his disciples, and came into the partes of Dalmanutha.
Mark 8:11 And the Phariseis came forth and began to despute with hym, sekynge of him a signe from heauen, & tempting him.
Mark 8:12 And he syghed in his spirite and sayed: why doeth this generacion seke a signe. Verely I saye vnto you, there shal no signe be geuen vnto this generation.
Mark 8:13 And he left them and went into the shyp agayne, and departed ouer the water.
Mark 8:14 And they had forgotten to take bread with them, neyther had they in the shyp with them more then one lofe.
Mark 8:15 And he charged them sayng: Take hede of the leuen of the Phariseis, & of the leuen of Herode.
Mark 8:16 And they reasoned among them selues saying: we haue no bread.
Mark 8:17 And when Iesus knew that, he sayd vnto them: why take ye thought because ye haue no bread perceyue ye not yet, neyther vnderstande? Haue ye your hertes yet blynded?
Mark 8:18 Haue ye eyes and se not? and haue ye eares and heare not? Do ye not remember?
Mark 8:19 When I brake .v. loues among .v.M. How many baskettes ful of broken meate toke ye vp? They sayde vnto him twelue.
Mark 8:20 When I brake seuen among .iiij. thousande. How many baskettes of the leuynges of broken meate toke ye vp? They sayde, seuen.
Mark 8:21 And he sayde vnto them: How is it that ye vnderstande not?
Mark 8:22 And he came to Bethsaida, & they brought a blynde man vnto him, and desired him to touche him.
Mark 8:23 And he caughte the blynde by the hande, and leade hym out of the toune, & spat in his eyes, and put his handes vpon him, & axed hym whyther he saw oughte.
Mark 8:24 And he loked vp and sayde: I se the men: for I se them walke, as they were trees.
Mark 8:25 After that he put his handes agayne vpon his eyes, and made hym se. And he was restored to hys sight: and saw euery man clerely.
Mark 8:26 And he sent him home to his house saying: neyther go into the town, nor tell it to any in the towne.
Mark 8:27 And Iesus went out and his disciples into the townes that longe to the cytye called Cesarea Philippi. And by the way he axed hys disciples saying: whom do men say that I am?
Mark 8:28 And they aunswered: some say that thou arte Ihon Baptist: some say Helias: and some, one of the Prophetes.
Mark 8:29 And he sayde vnto them: But whome saye ye that I am? Peter aunswered and sayd vnto hym: Thou art very Christ
Mark 8:30 And he charged them: that they should tel no man of him.
Mark 8:31 And he began to teache them: howe that the sonne of man must suffer many thinges, and should be reproued of the elders and of the priestes and scribes, and be killed, and after thre dayes ryse agayne.
Mark 8:32 And he spake that saying openly. And Peter toke him a syde, & beganne to chyde him.
Mark 8:33 Then he tourned about, and loked on his disciples and rebuked Peter saying: Go after me Sathan. For thou sauerest not the thynges of God, but the thynges of men.
Mark 8:34 And he called the people vnto hym, wyth his disciples also, and sayde vnto them: Whosoeuer will folowe me, let hym forsake hym self, and take vp his crosse and folow me.
Mark 8:35 For whosoeuer wil saue his lyfe. shall lowse it. But whosoeuer shal lowse his life for my sake and the gospels: the same shall saue it.
Mark 8:36 What shall it profite a man, if he shoulde wynne all the worlde, and lowse his owne soule?
Mark 8:37 or els what shall a man geue, to redeme his soule agayne?
Mark 8:38 Whosoeuer therfore shalbe ashamed of me and of my wordes, among this aduouterous and synfull generacion, of hym shall the sonne of man be ashamed when he cometh in the glory of hys father with the holy aungels.

CHAPTER: 9

Mark 9:1 And he sayd vnto them: Verely I saye vnto you: There be some of them that stande here, whiche shall not taste of death tyll they haue sene the kyngedom of God come wyth power.
Mark 9:2 And after .vi. dayes Iesus toke Peter, Iames and Iohan, and leade them vp into an hye mountayne oute of the waye alone & he was transfigured before them.
Mark 9:3 And hys rayment did shyne, and was made very whyte, euen as snowe: so whyte as no fuller can make vpon the earth.
Mark 9:4 And there apeared vnto them Helyas with Moyses, & they talke with Iesu.
Mark 9:5 And Peter aunswered and sayde to Iesu: Master here is a good beyng for vs, let vs make thre tabernacles, one for the, one for Moyses, and an other for Helyas.
Mark 9:6 And yet he wyste not what he sayde, for they were afrayde.
Mark 9:7 And there was a cloude that shadowed them. And a voyce came out of the cloud saying: This is my deare sonne, heare hym.
Mark 9:8 And sodenly, they loked rounde aboute them, and sawe no man more then Iesus only with them.
Mark 9:9 And as they came doune from the hyll, he charged theym that they shoulde tell no man what they had sene, tyl the sonne of man were rysen from death agayne.
Mark 9:10 And they kepte the saying with them, and demaunded one of another, what that rising from death agayn should meane?
Mark 9:11 And they axed him sayinge: Why then saye the Scribes that Helyas must firste come
Mark 9:12 He aunswered and sayde vnto them: Helias verely shal first come and restore all thinges. And also the sonne of man as it is written, shall suffer many thynges, and shalbe set at nought.
Mark 9:13 Moreouer I saye vnto you that Helyas is come, and they haue done vnto hym whatsoeuer pleased theym, as it is written of hym.
Mark 9:14 And he came to hys disciples, & saw muche people about them, and the Scribes disputing with them.
Mark 9:15 And strayght waye all the people when they behelde hym, were amased, & ranne to hym, and saluted hym.
Mark 9:16 And he sayde vnto the Scribes: what dispute ye with them?
Mark 9:17 And one of the company aunswered & said: Master, I haue broughte my sonne vnto the which hath a domme spirite.
Mark 9:18 And whensoeuer he taketh hym, he teareth hym, and he fometh and gnasheth with hys tethe, & pyneth away. And I spake to thy disciples that they should caste him out, and they coulde not.
Mark 9:19 He aunswered him and sayd: O generation without fayth, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I suffer you? Brynge hym vnto me.
Mark 9:20 And they broughte hym vnto him. And assone as the spirite saw him, he tare him. And he fell doune on the grounde, walowing and fomynge.
Mark 9:21 And he axed his father: howe long is it ago, sence this hath happened him? And he sayde, of a chylde:
Mark 9:22 & ofte times casteth him into the fyre, and also into the water too destroye him. But if thou canste do anything, haue mercy on vs, and helpe vs.
Mark 9:23 And Iesus sayd vnto him: yea, if thou couldest beleue, al thinges are possible to him that beleueth.
Mark 9:24 And strayght way the father of the chylde cryed with teares saying: Lorde I beleue, helpe myne vnbelefe.
Mark 9:25 When Iesus sawe that the people came runnyng together vnto him, he rebuked the foule spirit, saying vnto him: Thou domme & deaf spirite, I charge the come out of him, & enter no more into him.
Mark 9:26 And the spirit cryed & rent him sore, and came out. And he was as one that had bene dead, in so much that many sayd, he is dead.
Mark 9:27 But Iesus caught his hande and lyft him vp: and he rose.
Mark 9:28 And when he was come into the house, his disciples axed him secretly why could not we cast him out?
Mark 9:29 And he sayed vnto them: this kynde can by no nother meanes come forth but by prayer and fastinge.
Mark 9:30 And they departed thence, and toke theyr iorney through Galile, and he would not that any man should haue knowen it.
Mark 9:31 For he taught his disciples, and sayde vnto them: the sonne of man shalbe deliuered into the handes of men, and they shall kyll hym, and after that he is kylled he shall ryse agayne the thyrde daye.
Mark 9:32 But they wiste not what that saying meante, and were afrayed to axe hym.
Mark 9:33 And he came to Capernaum. And when he was come into an house, he axed theym: what was it that ye disputed betwene you by the waye?
Mark 9:34 And they helde theyr peace: for by the waye they reasoned among them selues, who should be the chiefest.
Mark 9:35 And he sate doune and called the twelue vnto hym, and sayde vnto them: if any man desire to be first, the same shal be last of all, & seruaunt vnto all.
Mark 9:36 And he toke a chylde, & set him in the middes of them: & toke hym in his armes and sayde vnto them:
Mark 9:37 Whosoeuer receyueth any such a chyld in my name receyueth me. And whosoeuer receyueth me, receyueth not me, but him that sent me.
Mark 9:38 Ihon aunswered him saying: Maister, we sawe one castinge out deuels in thy name whiche foloweth not vs and we forbade hym, because he foloweth vs not.
Mark 9:39 But Iesus sayd forbid him not. For there is no man that shall do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speake euill of me.
Mark 9:40 Whosoeuer is not agaynste you, is on your part.
Mark 9:41 And whosoeuer shall geue you a cuppe of water to drinke for my names sake, because ye belonge to Christe, verelye I saye vnto you, he shall not lowse his rewarde.
Mark 9:42 And whosoeuer shall offende one of these litelons, that beleue in me, it were better for him that a milstone were hanged aboute hys necke, & that he were caste into the sea.
Mark 9:43 Wherfore if thy hande offende the, cut hym of. It is better for the, to enter into lyfe maymed, then hauing two handes, go into hel, into fyre that neuer shal be quenched,
Mark 9:44 where their worme dyeth not, and the fyre neuer goeth out.
Mark 9:45 Likekewise if thy fote offende the, cut him of. For it is better for the to go halt into life, then hauinge two fete to be caste into hell, into fyre that neuer shalbe quenched:
Mark 9:46 where their worme dyeth not, and the fyre neuer goeth out.
Mark 9:47 Euen so if thyne eye offende the, plucke him out. It is better for the to go into the kyngedome of God with one eye, then hauing two eies to be cast into hel fyre:
Mark 9:48 where their worm dieth not, and the fyre neuer goeth out.
Mark 9:49 Euery man therfore shalbe salted wyth fyre. And euery sacrifice shalbe seasoned with salt,
Mark 9:50 Salt is good. But if the salt be vnsauery what shall ye sate therwith? Se that ye haue salt in your selues, & haue peace amonge your selues, one with another.

CHAPTER: 10

Mark 10:1 And he rose from thence, & wente into the coostes of Iury, through the region that is beyond Iordan. And the people resorted vnto him a fresh, and as he was wont he taught them agayn.
Mark 10:2 And the phariseis came & axed him a question: whether it were lawfull for a man to put away his wife: to proue him.
Mark 10:3 And he aunswered and sayd vnto them: What did Moyses bid you do?
Mark 10:4 And they sayde: Moyses suffred to write a testimoniall of deuorcement, and to put her awaye.
Mark 10:5 And Iesus aunswered and sayde vnto them: For the hardnes of your hertes he wrote this precept vnto you.
Mark 10:6 But at the first creacion God made them man and woman.
Mark 10:7 And for this thinges seke shall man leaue his father and mother, & byde by hys wyfe,
Mark 10:8 and they twayne shall be one fleshe. So then are they nowe not twayne but one fleshe.
Mark 10:9 Therfore what God hath coupled, let not man separate:
Mark 10:10 And in the house hys discyples axed hym agayne of the matter.
Mark 10:11 And he sayed vnto them: Whosoeuer putteth awaye hys wyfe and maryeth an other breaketh wedlocke to her ward
Mark 10:12 And yf a woman forsake her husbande & be maryed to an other she commytteth aduoutrye.
Mark 10:13 And they brought chyldren to hym, that he should touche them. And hys disciples rebuked those that brought them.
Mark 10:14 When Iesus sawe that he was displeased, and sayed to them. Suffer the chyldren to come vnto me, and forbyd them not. For of suche is the kyngdom of God.
Mark 10:15 Verely I saye vnto you: whosoeuer shall not receyue the kyngedome of God, as a chylde, he shall not enter therein.
Mark 10:16 And he toke them vp in hys armes, and put hys handes vpon them and blessed them.
Mark 10:17 And when he was come into the way, there came one runnyng and kneled to him, & axed hym: good mayster, what shall I do, that I maye enheret eternall lyfe?
Mark 10:18 Iesus sayed vnto hym: why callest thou me good? There is none good but one, which is God.
Mark 10:19 Thou knowest the commaundementes: breake not matrimonye: kyll not: steale not: beare not false witnes: defraude no man: honour thy father & mother.
Mark 10:20 He aunswered to hym: mayster all these I haue obserued from my youth.
Mark 10:21 Iesus behelde hym, and had a fauoure to him: and sayed vnto hym: one thynge is lackynge vnto the. Go and sell all that thou haste, and geue to the poore, and thou shalte haue treasure in heauen, and come and folowe me, and take vp thy crosse.
Mark 10:22 But he was discomforted with that saying, and went awaye mournynge, for he had greate possessyons.
Mark 10:23 And Iesus loked rounde about, and sayed vnto hys discyples: what an harde thynge is it for them that haue rychesse, to enter into the kyngedome of God.
Mark 10:24 And hys disciples were astonyed at his wordes. But Iesus answered agayne, and sayed vnto them: chyldren howe harde is it for them, that truste in rychesse, to enter into the kyngdome of God.
Mark 10:25 It is easyer for a camell to go thorowe the eye of a nedle, then for a ryche man to enter into the kyngdom of God.
Mark 10:26 And they were astonyed out of measure, sayinge betwene them selues: who then can be saued
Mark 10:27 Iesus loked vpon them & sayde: with men it is vnpossyble, but not with God, for with God all thynges are possyble.
Mark 10:28 And Peter beganne to saye vnto hym: Lo, we haue forsaken all, and haue folowed the.
Mark 10:29 Iesus aunswered and sayed: Verely I say vnto you: there is no man that forsaketh house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wyfe, other chyldren, or landes for my sake & the Gospels,
Mark 10:30 which shall not receyue an hundred folde now in this lyfe: houses, & brethren and systers, and mothers, and chyldren, and landes wyth persecucyons, and in the worlde to come eternal lyfe.
Mark 10:31 Many that are first, shal be last, and the laste shall be fyrste.
Mark 10:32 And they were in the waye goynge vnto Hierusalem. And Iesus wente before them: and they were amased, and as they folowed, they were afrayed. And Iesus toke the twelue agayne, and began to tell them what thynges shoulde happen vnto hym.
Mark 10:33 Beholde, we go vp to Hierusalem and the sonne of man shalbe delyuered into the handes of the hye priestes, and vnto the Scribes: and they shall condempne hym to death, and shall delyuer hym to the gentyls:
Mark 10:34 and they shal mocke him, & schourge him and spyte vpon hym, and kyl hym. And the thyrd daye he shall ryse agayne.
Mark 10:35 And then Iames & Iohn the sons of zebede came vnto hym, sayinge: Mayster, we would that thou shouldest do for vs whatsoeuer we desyre.
Mark 10:36 He sayed vnto them: what woulde ye I shoulde do vnto you?
Mark 10:37 They sayed to hym: graunte vnto vs that we may sitte one on thy ryght hande, and the other on thy lifte hande, in thy glory.
Mark 10:38 But Iesus sayed vnto them: Ye wote not what ye axe. Can ye drinke of the cuppe that I shall drinke of, and be baptysed in the baptime that I shalbe baptised in?
Mark 10:39 And they sayde vnto hym: that we can. Iesus sayde vnto them: ye shal drinke of the cup that I shall drinke of, and be baptysed with the baptysme that I shalbe baptysed in:
Mark 10:40 but to sit on my ryght hande, and on my lift hande is not myne to geue, but to them for whom it is prepared.
Mark 10:41 And when the .x. hearde that they began to dysdayne at Iames and Iohn.
Mark 10:42 But Iesus called them vnto hym, and sayde to them: Ye knowe that they whiche seme to beare rule amonge the gentyls, raygne as lordes ouer them. And they that be great among them, exercyse authoritie ouer them.
Mark 10:43 So shall it not be among you, but whosoeuer of you wil be great among you shalbe your minister.
Mark 10:44 And whosoeuer wilbe chiefe, shalbe seruaunt vnto al.
Mark 10:45 For euen the sonne of man came not to be mynystred vnto, but to minister & to geue hys lyfe for the redempcyon of many.
Mark 10:46 And they came to Hierico: and as he went out of Hierico with hys discyples, and a great numbre of people, Barthymeus the sonne of Chimeus whiche was blynde, sate by the hye wayes syde begginge.
Mark 10:47 And when he hearde, that it was Iesus of Nazareth, he beganne to crye and to saye: Iesus the sonne of Dauid, haue mercye on me.
Mark 10:48 And many rebuked him that he shoulde holde hys peace. But he cryed the more a great deale: Thou sonne of Dauid haue mercye on me.
Mark 10:49 And Iesus stode styl, and commaunded hym to be called. And they called the blinde, sayinge vnto hym: Be of good comforte: ryse, he calleth the.
Mark 10:50 And he threwe awaye hys clooke, and rose, and came to Iesus.
Mark 10:51 And Iesus aunswered and sayde vnto hym: What wylte thou that I do vnto the. The blynde sayed vnto hym: Mayster that I myght se.
Mark 10:52 Iesus sayde vnto hym: Go thy waye, thy faith hath saued the. And by and by he receyued hys sight, and folowed Iesus in the waye.

CHAPTER: 11

Mark 11:1 And when they came nye to Hierusalem vnto Bethphage and Bethanye, besydes mount Olyuete, he sent two of hys discyples,
Mark 11:2 and sayde vnto them: Go your wayes into the toune that is ouer agaist you. And assone as ye be entred into it, ye shal fynde a coolte tied, whereon neuer man sate: loose hym, and brynge hym hyther.
Mark 11:3 And yf any man say vnto you: why do ye so? Saye that the Lorde hath nede of hym: and strayghte waye he wyll sende hym hyther.
Mark 11:4 And they wente theyr waye, & founde a coolte tyed by the dore without in a place where two wayes met, and they losed hym.
Mark 11:5 And dyuers of them that stode there, sayd vnto them: What do ye lowsyng the coolte?
Mark 11:6 And they sayed vnto them euen as Iesus had commaunded them. And they let them go.
Mark 11:7 And they broughte the coolt to Iesus, and caste theyr garmentes on hym: & he sate vpon hym.
Mark 11:8 And manye spredde theyr garmentes in the way. Other cut doune braunches of the trees, and strawed them in the waye
Mark 11:9 And they that before, & they that folowed, cryed, saying Hosanna: blessed be he that commeth in the name of the Lord.
Mark 11:10 Blessed be the kyngdome that commeth in the name of hym that is Lord of our father Dauid. Hosanna in the hyest.
Mark 11:11 And the Lorde entred into Hierusalem, & into the temple. And when he had loked round aboute vpon all thynges, and nowe the euen tyde was come, he wente oute vnto Bethany with the twelue.
Mark 11:12 And on the morowe when they were come oute from Bethany, he hungred,
Mark 11:13 and spied a fygge tree a farre of hauing leaues: and wente to se whether he myghte fynde any thynge theron. But when he came therto, he founde nothyng but leaues: for the tyme of fygges was not yet.
Mark 11:14 And Iesus aunswered & sayd to it: neuer man eate frute of the here after whyle the world standeth. And hys discyples hearde it.
Mark 11:15 And they came to Hierusalem. And Iesus went into the temple, and beganne to cast out sellers, and byers in the temple, & ouerthrewe the tables of the money chaungers, & the stoles of them that solde doues,
Mark 11:16 and woulde not suffer that anye man caryed a vessell through the temple.
Mark 11:17 And he taught saying vnto them: is it not wryten: my house shall be called the house of prayer vnto al nacions? But ye haue made it a den of theues.
Mark 11:18 And the Scrybes & hye Priestes hearde it: and soughte howe to destroy him. For they feared hym, because al the people marueyled at his doctrine.
Mark 11:19 And when euen was come, he wente oute of the citye.
Mark 11:20 And in the mornynge as they passed by, they sawe the fygge tree dryed vp by the rotes.
Mark 11:21 And Peter remembred, & sayd vnto him: maister, behold the figge tree which thou cursedest, is wythered away.
Mark 11:22 And Iesus aunswered, and sayed vnto them: Haue confydence in God.
Mark 11:23 Verelye I saye vnto you, that whosoeuer shall saye to thys mountayne: take awaye thy selfe, and caste thy selfe into the sea, and shall not wauer in hys herte, but shall beleue that those thynges whiche he sayeth, shall come to passe, whatsoeuer he sayeth, shalbe done to hym.
Mark 11:24 Therfore I saye vnto you, whatsoeuer ye desyre when ye praye, beleue that ye shall haue it, and it shall be done vnto you.
Mark 11:25 And when ye stande, and pray, forgeue, yf ye haue any thyng agaynst any man, that youre father also which is in heauen, may forgeue you your trespasses.
Mark 11:26 n/a
Mark 11:27 And they came agayne to Hierusalem. And as he walked in the temple, there came to him the hye priestes and the Scribes & the elders,
Mark 11:28 and sayed vnto hym: by what authoritie doest thou these thynges? And who gaue the thys authoritie to do these thynges?
Mark 11:29 Iesus aunswered and sayed vnto them: I wyll also axe of you a certayne thynge: and aunswere ye me, and I wyll tell you by what authorite I do these thynges.
Mark 11:30 The baptisme of Iohn was it from heauen, or of menne? Aunswere me.
Mark 11:31 And they thoughte in them selues, sayinge: yf we shall saye, from heauen: he wyl saye then: why dyd ye not beleue hym?
Mark 11:32 But yf we shall saye, of men, then feare we the people. For al men counted Iohn that he was a very Prophet.
Mark 11:33 And they aunswered and sayd vnto Iesus: we can not tell. And Iesus aunswered and sayed vnto them, neyther wyll I tell you, by what authoritie I do those thynges.

CHAPTER: 12

Mark 12:1 And he began to speake vnto them in simylitudes. A certayne man planted a vyneyarde, and compaste it wyth an hedge, and ordeyned a wyne presse, & buylde a tower in it. And let it oute to hyre vnto housband men, & went into a straunge countreye.
Mark 12:2 And when the tyme was come, he sente to the tenauntes a seruaunte, that he myghte receyue of the tenauntes of the frute of the vyneyarde.
Mark 12:3 And they caughte hym, and sent him awaye emptye.
Mark 12:4 And moreouer he sente vnto them another seruaunte, and at hym they cast stones, & brake hys head, & sent hym agayne all to reuyled.
Mark 12:5 And agayne he sente an other and hym they kylled: and manye other, beatynge some, and kyllyng some.
Mark 12:6 Yet had he one sonne whom he loued tenderlye, hym also he sente at the laste vnto them, saiynge: they wyll feare my sonne.
Mark 12:7 But the tenauntes sayed amonge them selues: thys is the heyre: come let vs kyll hym, and the enheritaunce shall be ours.
Mark 12:8 And they toke hym, & kylled hym, & cast hym out of the vyneyarde.
Mark 12:9 What shall then the Lorde of the vyneyarde do? He wyll come and destroye the tenauntes, and let oute the vynearde to other.
Mark 12:10 Haue ye not read thys scrypture? The stone which the buylders dyd refuse, is made the chiefe stone in the corner:
Mark 12:11 thys was done of the Lorde, and is merueylouse in our eyes.
Mark 12:12 And they wente aboute to take hym. But they feared the people. For they perceyued that he spake that similitude agaynste them. And they lefte hym.
Mark 12:13 And they sente vnto hym certayne of the Pharyseis with Herodes seruauntes to take hym in hys wordes.
Mark 12:14 And assone as they were come, they saied vnto him: maister, we know that thou arte true, and carest for no man: for considerest not the degre of men, but teacheste the waye of God truly. Is it lawfull to paye trybute to Cesar or not.
Mark 12:15 Oughte we to geue, or ought we not to geue? He vnderstode theyr simulacyon, and sayde vnto them: Why tempte you me? Brynge me a peny that I maye se it.
Mark 12:16 And they broughte. And he sayde vnto them: Whose is thys Image and superscripcion? And they sayde vnto hym: Cesars
Mark 12:17 And Iesus aunswered and sayde vnto them: Then geue to Cesar that which belongeth to Cesar: and to God that whiche pertayneth to God. And they meruayled at hym.
Mark 12:18 Then came the Saduces vnto hym, which saye: there is no resurreccyon, and they axed hym, sayinge:
Mark 12:19 Mayster, Moyses wrote vnto vs, yf anye mannes brother dye: and leaue his wyfe behynde hym, and leaue no chyldren, that then hys brother shoulde take hys wyfe, and rayse vp seed vnto hys brother.
Mark 12:20 There were seuen brethren: and the fyrst toke a wyfe and when he dyed, he lefte no seede behynde hym.
Mark 12:21 And the seconde toke her and dyed: neyther lefte any seede. And the thyrde lykewyse.
Mark 12:22 And seuen had her, and lefte no seede behynd them. Laste of all the wyfe dyed also.
Mark 12:23 In the resurreccyon then, when they shal ryse agayne whose wyfe shall she be of them? For seuen had her to wyfe.
Mark 12:24 Iesus aunswered and sayed vnto them: Are ye not therfore deceyued, and vnderstande not the scryptures, neyther the power of GOD?
Mark 12:25 For when they shall ryse agayne from death, they neyther marye, nor are maryed, but are as the Aungels which are in heauen.
Mark 12:26 As touchynge the dead, that they shall ryse agayne: haue ye not reade in the boke of Moyses, how in the bushe god spake to him sayinge: I am the God of Abraham, & God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob?
Mark 12:27 He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the lyuyng. Ye are therfore greatly deceyued,
Mark 12:28 And there came one of the Scribes that had hearde them, disputynge together, & perceyued, that he had aunswered them well, and axed hym: Whiche is the fyrste of all the commaundementes?
Mark 12:29 Iesus aunswered hym: the fyrst of al the commaundementes is. Heare Israel: The Lorde God is one Lorde.
Mark 12:30 And thou shalt loue the Lorde thy God with all thyne herte, and wyth all thy soule, & with al thy mynde, and with all thy strength. Thys is the fyrste commaundement.
Mark 12:31 And the seconde is lyke vnto this: Thou shalte loue thy neyghboure as thy self. There is none other commaundement greater then these.
Mark 12:32 And the Scribe sayd vnto him: wel master thou haste sayde the trueth, that there is one God, & that there is none but he.
Mark 12:33 And to loue hym with all the herte, and with al the mynd, and with all the soule, & with all the strength. and to loue a mans neyghbour as hym selfe, is a greater thyng then all burntoffrynges & sacrifices.
Mark 12:34 And when Iesus sawe that he aunswered discretly, he sayde vnto him: Thou art not farre from the kyngdom of God. And no man after that, durst axe him any question.
Mark 12:35 And Iesus aunswered & sayde, teachynge in the temple: how say the scribes that Christe is the sonne of Dauid?
Mark 12:36 for Dauid him self inspired with the holy ghost, sayde: The Lorde sayde to my Lorde, sit on my righthand til I make thyne enemyes thy foote stole.
Mark 12:37 Then Dauid him selfe calleth him Lord: & by what meanes is he then his sonne? And much people hearde him gladly.
Mark 12:38 And he sayd vnto them in his doctrine: beware of the Scribes, which loue to go in longe clothinge and loue salutations in the market places,
Mark 12:39 & the chief seates in synagoges, and to sit in the vppermoste roumes at feastes
Mark 12:40 & deuoure wydowes houses, and that vnder a coloure of long praiyng. These shall receyue greater dampnacion.
Mark 12:41 And Iesus sat ouer agaynst the treasurye, and behelde howe the people put money into the treasurye. And many that were ryche, cast in muche.
Mark 12:42 And there came a certayne poore wydowe, and she threwe in two mites, which make a farthynge.
Mark 12:43 And he called vnto hym hys discyples, and sayde vnto them. Verely I saye vnto you, that thys poore wydowe hath caste more in, then all they whiche haue caste into the treasury.
Mark 12:44 For they all dyd caste in of theyr superfluyte, but she of her pouertye dyd cast in all that she had, euen all her liuinge.

CHAPTER: 13

Mark 13:1 And as he went out of the temple one of hys disciples sayde vnto hym: Maister, se what stones, & what buyldynges are here.
Mark 13:2 And Iesus aunswered, and sayd vnto hym: Seest thou these greate buyldinges? There shall not be left one stone vpon another, that shall not be throwen doune.
Mark 13:3 And as he sate on mounte Olyuete, ouer agaynst the temple, Peter, & Iames, & Iohn, & Andrewe axed hym secretelye:
Mark 13:4 tell vs, when shall these thynges be? And what is the sygne when all these thynges shalbe fulfylled?
Mark 13:5 and Iesus aunswered them, and began to saye: take hede leste any man deceyue you.
Mark 13:6 For manye shall come in my name, sayinge: I am Christ, and shall deceyue manye.
Mark 13:7 When ye shal heare of warre, and tydynges of warre, be ye not troubled. For suche thynges muste nedes be. But the ende is not yet.
Mark 13:8 For there shall nacyon aryse agaynst nacyon, and kingdom agaynst kyngdome. And there shalbe earthquakes in all quarters, & famyshment and troubles. These are the begynnynge of sorowes.
Mark 13:9 But take ye hede to your selues. For they shall brynge you vp to the counsels, and into the synagoges, & ye shall be beaten: ye & shalbe broughte forthe rulers & kynges for my sake for a testimoniall vnto them.
Mark 13:10 And the Gospel muste fyrste be publyshed amonge all nacyons.
Mark 13:11 But when they leade you, and present you, take no thoughte afore hande, what ye, shal saye, neither ymagin: but whatsoeuer is geuen you at the same tyme, that speake. For it shall not be ye that shall speake, but the holy ghost.
Mark 13:12 Ye, and the brother shal deliuer the brother to death, and the father the sonne, and the children shall ryse agaynst theyr fathers and mothers, and shal put them to death.
Mark 13:13 And ye shal be hated of all men for my names sake. But whosoeuer shall endure vnto the ende, the same shalbe safe.
Mark 13:14 Moreouer, when ye se the abhomynacyon that betokeneth desolacion, whereof is spoken by Daniel the Prophet, stande where it oughte not, let hym that readeth vnderstand, then let them that be in Iurye, fle to the mountaynes.
Mark 13:15 And let hym that is on the house top, not descended doune into the house, neither enter therein, to fetche any thynge oute of hys house.
Mark 13:16 And let hym that is in the fielde: not tourne backe agayne vnto the thynges, which he lefte behynde hym for to take hys clothes with hym.
Mark 13:17 Woo is then to them that are with chyld, and to them that geue soucke in those dayes.
Mark 13:18 But praye, that your flight be not in the winter.
Mark 13:19 For there shalbe in those dayes such trybulacyon, as was not from the beginning of creatures whiche God created, vnto thys time, neyther shalbe.
Mark 13:20 And except that the Lord shoulde shorten those dayes, no man shoulde be saued. But for the electes sake which he hath chosen, he hath shortened those dayes.
Mark 13:21 And then, yf any man say to you: lo, here is Christ, lo, he is there: beleue not,
Mark 13:22 for false Christes shal ryse, and false prophetes, and shall shewe myracles and wondres, to deceyue yf it were possible, euen the elect.
Mark 13:23 But take ye hede: beholde I haue shewed you all thynges before.
Mark 13:24 Moreouer in those dayes, after that trybulacyon, the sonne shall waxe darke, and the moone shal not geue her light,
Mark 13:25 and the starres of heauen shall fal: and the powers which are in heauen shall moue.
Mark 13:26 And then shall they se the sonne of man comyng in the cloudes with great power and glorye.
Mark 13:27 And then shal he send hys angels, & shall gather together his electe from the foure wyndes, and from the one ende of the worlde to the other.
Mark 13:28 Learne a symylytude of the fygge tree. When hys braunches are yet tender, & hathe brought forth leaues: ye know that the somer is neare,
Mark 13:29 so in like maner when ye se these thinges come to passe: vnderstande, that it is nye euen at the dores.
Mark 13:30 Verelye I saye vnto you, that thys generacyon shall not passe, tyll all these thynges be done.
Mark 13:31 Heauen and earth shal passe, but my wordes shall not passe.
Mark 13:32 But of the daye & houre knoweth no man: no not the Aungels whiche are in heauen neyther the sonne him selfe saue the father onelye.
Mark 13:33 Take hede, watche and pray, forth ye know not when the tyme is.
Mark 13:34 As a man whiche is gone into a straunge countreye, and hath left hys house, and geuen authorite to his seruauntes, and euerye man hys worke, and commaunded the porter to watche.
Mark 13:35 Watche therfore, for ye knowe not when the mayster of the house wyll come: whether at euen, or at mydnyght: whether at the cocke crowynge or in the dawnynge,
Mark 13:36 leste yf he come sodenlye, he shoulde fynde you slepynge.
Mark 13:37 And that I saye vnto you: I saye vnto all men, watche.

CHAPTER: 14

Mark 14:1 After two dayes folowed easter and the dayes of swete breade. And the hye priestes and the scrybes soughte meanes howe they myght take hym by crafte, and put hym to death.
Mark 14:2 But they sayde: Not in the feast daye least any busynes aryse among the people.
Mark 14:3 When he was in Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, euen as he sate at meate ther came a woman hauynge an alabaster boxe of oyntment called narde, that was pure & costly, and she brake the boxe and powred it on hys head.
Mark 14:4 And there were some that were not content in them selues, and sayd: what neded this waste of oyntment?
Mark 14:5 For it myght haue bene solde for more then thre hundred pence, & bene geuen vnto the poore. And they grudged agaynste her.
Mark 14:6 And Iesus sayde: let her be in reste, why troubled ye her? she hath done a good worke on me.
Mark 14:7 For ye shall haue poore men with you alwayes, & whensoeuer ye wyll, ye maye do them good, but me ye shal not haue alwayes.
Mark 14:8 She hath done that she coulde: she came afore hande to anoynte my body to hys buryenge warde.
Mark 14:9 Verelye I saye vnto you: where soeuer this gospel shall be preached throughout the whole worlde, this also that she hath done shalbe rehearsed in remembraunce of her.
Mark 14:10 And Iudas Ischarioth one of the twelue went awaye vnto the hye priestes, to betraye hym vnto them.
Mark 14:11 When they hearde that, they were glad, and promysed that they woulde geue hym money. And he sought howe he myghte conuenientlye betraye hym.
Mark 14:12 And the fyrst daye of swete bread: when men after the pascall lambe, hys discyples sayed vnto him: where wilt thou that we go & prepare that thou mayest eat the easter lambe?
Mark 14:13 And he sente forthe two of his disciples, and sayed vnto them: Go ye into the citye: and there shal a man mete you bearynge a pycher of water, folowe him.
Mark 14:14 And whyther soeuer he goeth in, say ye to the good man of the house: the maister axeth: where is the gest chambre, where I shall eat the easter lambe wt my disciples.
Mark 14:15 And he wyll shew you a great parloure, paued & prepared: there make readye for vs.
Mark 14:16 And his discyples went forth, and came to the citie, and founde as he had sayd vnto them: & made ready the easter lambe.
Mark 14:17 And at euen he came with the twelue
Mark 14:18 and as they sate at borde, and eate. Iesus sayd: Verelye I saye vnto you: that one of you shal betraye me, whiche eateth with me.
Mark 14:19 And they beganne to mourne, and to say to him one by one: is it I? and another sayde: is it I?
Mark 14:20 He aunswered, and sayde vnto them: It is one of the .xij. & the same deppeth with me in the platter.
Mark 14:21 The sonne of man goeth as it is written of hym, but woo be to that man, by whom the sonne of man is betrayed: good were it for hym, yf that man had neuer bene borne.
Mark 14:22 And as they eate. Iesus toke bread, blessed and brake & gaue to them & sayd: Take, eat, this is my body.
Mark 14:23 And he toke the cup, gaue thankes, & gaue it to them, & they all dranke of it.
Mark 14:24 And he sayed vnto them: This is my bloud of the new Testament which is shed for many.
Mark 14:25 Verely I saye vnto you: I wyll drinke no more of thys frute of the vyne, vntil that day, that I drinke it newe in the kingdome of God.
Mark 14:26 And when they had grace, they went out to mount Oliuete.
Mark 14:27 And Iesus sayde vnto them. All ye shalbe offended through me this night. For it is written: I wyll smyte the shepeherde, and the shepe shalbe scattered.
Mark 14:28 But after that I am rysen agayne: I wyll go into Galile before you.
Mark 14:29 Peter sayd vnto him. And though all men should be offended, yet woulde not I.
Mark 14:30 And Iesus said vnto hym: Verelye I saye vnto the, this daye euen in thys nyghte before the cocke crowe twyse, thou shalte denye me thryse.
Mark 14:31 And he spake boldelyer: no, yf I shoulde dye wt the I wyll not deuye the. Lykewyse also sayde they all.
Mark 14:32 And they came into a place named Gethsemanye, and he sayde to hys discyples: Syt ye here, whyle I go a parte and praye.
Mark 14:33 And he toke with him Peter, Iames, and Iohn, & he began to waxe abashed, and to be in an agonye,
Mark 14:34 and said vnto them: My soule is very heauye euen vnto the death: tarye here & watche.
Mark 14:35 And he wente forthe a litle and fell doune on the grounde, and prayed: that yf it were possyble, the houre myght passe from hym.
Mark 14:36 And he sayde: Abba father, all thynges are possyble vnto the, take awaye this cup from me. Neuerthelesse, not that I wyll but that thou wylte, be done.
Mark 14:37 And he came, and founde them slepynge, and sayd to Peter: Symon slepest thou? Couldest not thou watche wt me one houre?
Mark 14:38 watche ye, and praye leaste ye enter into temptacyon, the spirite is ready, and the fleshe is weake.
Mark 14:39 And agayne he went away and prayed and spake the same wordes.
Mark 14:40 And he returned and found them a slepe agayn, for theyr eyes were heauy: neither wyste they what to aunswere hym.
Mark 14:41 And he came the thyrde tyme and sayd vnto them: slepe hence forth and take youre ease, it is ynough. The houre is come, beholde the sonne of man shalbe delyuered into the handes of synners.
Mark 14:42 Ryse vp let vs go. Lo, he that betrayeth me, is at hande.
Mark 14:43 And immediatelye whyle he yet spake, came Iudas one of the twelue, and wyth him a great numbre of people wt sweardes & staues from the hyghe Priestes & Scribes & elders.
Mark 14:44 And he that betrayed him, had geuen them a generall token saiyng: whosoeuer I do kysse, he it is: take hym & leade him awaye warely.
Mark 14:45 And assone as he was come, he went straighte waye to hym, and sayed vnto him: mayster, and kyssed him.
Mark 14:46 And they layde theyr handes on hym, and toke him.
Mark 14:47 And one of them that stode by, drue out a swerde & smote a seruaunt of the hye priest, and cut of hys eare.
Mark 14:48 And Iesus aunswered and sayd vnto them: ye be come oute as vnto a thefe with swerdes & with staues, for to take me.
Mark 14:49 I was daylye wt you in the temple teachynge, and ye toke me not: but that the scriptures shoulde be fulfylled.
Mark 14:50 And they all forsoke him, & ranne away.
Mark 14:51 And there folowed him a certayne yong man clothed in linnen vpon the bare, and the yong men caught him,
Mark 14:52 and he lefte hys linnen, and fleed from them naked.
Mark 14:53 And they leed Iesus awaye to the hyest priest of all, & to him came all the hye priestes, and the elders, and the scribes.
Mark 14:54 And Peter folowed him a great waye of euen into the pallaice of the hye priest, and sat with the seruauntes, and warmed hym self at the fyre.
Mark 14:55 And the hye priestes, and al the counsell soughte for witnes againste Iesu to put him to death, & founde none.
Mark 14:56 Yet manye bare false witnes againste him, but theyr witnes agreed not together.
Mark 14:57 And there arose certayne and brought false wytnes agaynst hym, saiinge:
Mark 14:58 We hearde him saye: I will destroy this temple made with handes, & within .iij. dayes I will buylde another made without handes.
Mark 14:59 But theyr wytnes agreed not together.
Mark 14:60 And the hyest priest stode vp amongest them: and axed Iesus, sayinge: answerest thou nothynge? Howe is it that these beare witnes agaynst the?
Mark 14:61 And he helde hys peace, and aunswered nothynge. Agayne the hyest priest axed him, and sayed vnto hym: Arte thou christe the sonne of the blessed?
Mark 14:62 And Iesus sayed: I am. And ye shall se the sonne of man sit on the ryght hande of power, and come in the cloudes of heauen.
Mark 14:63 Then the hyest prieste rent hys clothes, & sayd: What nede we any further of witnesse?
Mark 14:64 ye haue hearde the blasphemy, what thynke ye? And then they all gaue sentence, that he was worth of death,
Mark 14:65 and some began to spit at hym, and to couer hys face, and to beate hym wyth fystes, and to saye vnto him: areade vnto vs? And the seruauntes boffeted hym on the face.
Mark 14:66 And as Peter was beneth in the pallayce, there came one of the wenches of the hyest priest,
Mark 14:67 & when she sawe Peter warmyng him selfe she loked on hym, and sayd: Waste not thou also with Iesus of Nazareth?
Mark 14:68 And he denyed it, saying: I know hym not, neyther wot I what thou sayest. And he wente out into the porche, and the cocke crew.
Mark 14:69 And a damsell saw hym, and agayne beganne to saye to them that stode by: thys is one of them.
Mark 14:70 And he denyed it agayne. And anone after, they that stode by, sayed agayne to Peter: Surely thou art one of them, for thou arte of Galile, and thy speache agreeth therto.
Mark 14:71 And he began to cursse and to sweare, saiynge: I know not this man of whome ye speake.
Mark 14:72 And agayne the cocke crewe, and Peter remembred the worde that Iesus sayed vnto hym: before the cocke crowe twyse, thou shalte denye me thyrse, & began to wepe.

CHAPTER: 15

Mark 15:1 And anone in the daunynge the hye priestes helde a counsel with the elders, and the scribes, and the whole congregacion & bounde Iesus and ledde hym awaye, & delyuered hym to Pilate.
Mark 15:2 And Pylate axed hym: arte thou the kynge of the Iewes? And he aunswered and sayde vnto hym: thou sayest it.
Mark 15:3 And the hyghe Priestes accused him of manye thynges.
Mark 15:4 Wherfore Pylate axeth hym agayne, saying: Answerest thou nothyng? beholde how manye thinges they laye vnto thy charge:
Mark 15:5 Iesus yet aunswered neuer a worde, so that Pylate meruayled.
Mark 15:6 At that feaste Pylate was wonte to delyuer at theyr pleasure a prysoner, whosoeuer they woulde desyre.
Mark 15:7 And there was one named Barrabas, whiche laye bounde with them that made insurreccyon, and the insurreccyon committed murther.
Mark 15:8 And the people called vnto hym, & began to desyre, accordyng as he had euer done vnto them:
Mark 15:9 Pylate aunswered them, & sayd: Wil ye that I lowse vnto you the kyng of the Iewes?
Mark 15:10 For he knew that the hye priestes had deliuered him of enuye.
Mark 15:11 But the hye prestes had moued the people: that he shoulde rather delyuer Barrabas vnto them.
Mark 15:12 And Pylate aunswered agayne, & sayd vnto them: what wyl ye then that I do with hym, whom ye call the kynge of the Iewes?
Mark 15:13 And they cryed agayne: crucifye hym.
Mark 15:14 Pylate said vnto them: what euyl hath he done? And they cryed the more feruentlye: Crucifye hym.
Mark 15:15 And so Pylate wyllyng to content the people, loused them Barrabas, and delyuered Iesus, when he had scourged hym, for to be crucifyed.
Mark 15:16 And the soudyers ledde hym away into the common hall, and called together the whole multytude,
Mark 15:17 and they clothed him wyth purple, and they platted a croune of thornes and crouned hym with al,
Mark 15:18 and began to salute hym: Hayle kynge of the Iewes.
Mark 15:19 And they smote hym on the head with a rede, and spatte vpon hym, and kneled doune & worshipped hym.
Mark 15:20 And when they had mocked hym, they toke the purple of hym, and put hys owne clothes on him, and led him out to crucifye him.
Mark 15:21 And they compelled one that passed by, called Simon of Ciren (which came out of the feld, and was father of Alexander and Rufus) to beare hys crosse.
Mark 15:22 And they broughte hym to a place named Golgotha (which is by interpretacyon, the place of dead mens sculles)
Mark 15:23 and they gaue hym to drynke wyne myngled wyth myrre, but he receyued it not.
Mark 15:24 And when they had crucifyed hym, they parted hys garmentes castynge lotes for them, what euerye man shoulde haue.
Mark 15:25 And it was about the thyrde houre, and they crucyfyed him.
Mark 15:26 And the tytle of hys cause was written: The kynge of the Iewes.
Mark 15:27 And they crucified wt hym two theues, the one on the ryght hande, and the other on his lyft.
Mark 15:28 And the scrypture was fulfylled which sayth: he was counted amonge the wycked.
Mark 15:29 And they that wente by rayled on hym: waggynge their heades and sayinge: A wretche, that destroyest the temple, and buyldest it in thre dayes:
Mark 15:30 saue thy selfe, and come doune from the crosse:
Mark 15:31 Lykewise also mocked him the hye pryestes amonge them selues with the scribes and sayde: he saued other men, hym selfe he can not saue.
Mark 15:32 Let Christe the kinge of Israel now descende from the crosse, that we may se and beleue. And they that were crucyfyed with hym, checked him also.
Mark 15:33 And when the syxte houre was come, darcknes arose ouer all the earth vntyll the ninthe houre.
Mark 15:34 And Iesus cryed with a loude voice saying: Eloi Eloi lamasabaththany, whiche is if it be interpreted, my God my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
Mark 15:35 And some of them that stode by, when they hearde that: saide: behold he calleth for Helias.
Mark 15:36 And one ran and fylled a sponge full of vyneger and put it on a rede, and gaue him to drinke, saying let him alone, let vs se whither Helyas wyll come and take him doune.
Mark 15:37 But Iesus cryeth with a loude voice, and gaue vp the ghost.
Mark 15:38 And the vayle of the temple dyd rent in two peces from the toppe to the bottome.
Mark 15:39 And when the Centurion which stode before him, sawe that he so cried and gaue vp the ghost he sayde: truly this man was the sonne of God.
Mark 15:40 Ther were also women a good waye of beholdyng hym: among whom was Mary Magdalen, and Marye the mother of Iames the lytle, and of Ioses, & Mary Salome:
Mark 15:41 whiche also when he was in Galile, folowed hym, and mynistred vnto hym: and manye other women, whiche came vp with hym vnto Ierusalem:
Mark 15:42 And now when night was come (because it was the euen that goeth before the Saboth)
Mark 15:43 Ioseph of Arimathia a noble Councelloure which also loked for the kyngdome of God, came and went in boldly vnto Pylate, & begged the bodye of Iesu.
Mark 15:44 And Pylate merueyled that he was already deade, and called vnto hym the Centurion, and axed of hym, whether he had bene anye whyle deade.
Mark 15:45 And when he knewe the truth of the Centuryon, he gaue the body to Ioseph.
Mark 15:46 And he bought a lynnen clothe, and toke him doune, and wrapped him in the lynnen clothe, and layde hym in a tombe that was hewen out of the rocke, and rolled a stone vnto the dore of the sepulchre.
Mark 15:47 And Mary Magdalen & Marye Ioses behelde where he was layed.

CHAPTER: 16

Mark 16:1 And when the Saboth was past. Mary Magdalen, and Mary Iacobi, and Salome, boughte odours, that they myghte come & anoynt hym.
Mark 16:2 And very early in the morninge the next daye after the Saboth daye they came to the sepulchre, when the sunne was rysen.
Mark 16:3 And they sayed one to another: who shal rolle vs awaye the stone from the dore of the sepulchre?
Mark 16:4 And when they loked, they sawe howe the stone was rolled awaye: for it was a verye great one.
Mark 16:5 And they wente into the sepulchre, and sawe a yonge man syttyng on the ryght syde, clothed in a long white garment, & they were abashed.
Mark 16:6 And he sayed vnto them, be not afrayed: ye seke Iesus of Nazareth whiche was crucifyed. He is rysen, he is not here. Beholde the place where they put hym.
Mark 16:7 But go your waye, and tell hys discyples and namelye Peter: He wil go before you into Galile, there shal ye se him as he sayde vnto you.
Mark 16:8 And they wente oute quickly, and fled from the sepulchre. For they trembled and were amased. Neyther sayed they anye thynge to anye man, for they were afrayed.
Mark 16:9 When Iesus was rysen the morowe after the Saboth daye, he appeared fyrst to Marye Magdalen, out of whome he cast seuen deuils.
Mark 16:10 And she went and tolde them that were wyth hym as they mourned & wepte.
Mark 16:11 And when they heard that he was alyue, and he had appeared to her, they beleued it not.
Mark 16:12 After that he appered to two of them in a straunge fygure, as they walked and went into the countre.
Mark 16:13 And they wente and tolde it to the remnaunt. And they beleued them neyther.
Mark 16:14 After that he appeared vnto the eleuen, as they sate at meat, and caste in theyr tethe theyr vnbelese and hardnes of hert: because they beleued not them which had sene hym after hys resurreccyon.
Mark 16:15 And he sayed to them: Go ye into all the worlde, and preache the glad tydynges to all creatures,
Mark 16:16 he that beleueth & is baptised, shall be saued. But he that beleueth not, shalbe damned.
Mark 16:17 And these sygnes shall folowe them that beleue. In my name they shall caste oute deuils, & shall speake with newe tonges,
Mark 16:18 & shall kyll serpentes, and yf they drinke any deadly thynge, it shall not hurte them. They shal lay theyr handes on the sycke, and they shal recouer.
Mark 16:19 So then when the Lorde had spoken vnto them: he was receyued into heauen, and is set doune on the ryght hande of God.
Mark 16:20 And they wente forth and preached euerye where. And the Lorde wrought with them, and confyrmed the word wt miracles that folowed.

BOOK: Luke

CHAPTER: 1

Luke 1:1 For asmuche as manye haue taken in hande to compyle a treatyse of those thynges which are surelye knowen amonge vs,
Luke 1:2 euen as they declared them vnto vs, which from the begynnynge sawe theim their selues, and were ministers at the doyinge,
Luke 1:3 I determined also, assone as I had searched out dylygentlye all thinges from the beginning, that then I would write vnto the, good Theophilus:
Luke 1:4 that thou mightest knowe the certaintye of those thynges wherof thou art enfourmed.
Luke 1:5 Ther was in the dayes of Herode kynge of Iurye, a certaine prieste named Zacharias, of the course of Abaia. And his wyfe was of the doughters of Aaron and her name was Elizabeth.
Luke 1:6 Both were perfect before God, and walked in al the lawes and ordinaunces of the Lorde, that no man coulde fynde faute with them.
Luke 1:7 And they had no childe: because that Elyzabeth was barren, and both were well striken in age.
Luke 1:8 And it came to passe, as he executed the priestes office before God, as his course came
Luke 1:9 (accordinge to the custome of the pryestes offyce) his lot was to bourne incense.
Luke 1:10 And wente into the tempell of the Lorde and the whole multytude of the people were without in prayer while incense was a burninge.
Luke 1:11 And ther appeared vnto hym an Aungell of the Lorde standynge on the ryght syde of the altare of incense.
Luke 1:12 And when Zacharias sawe him, he was abashed, and feare came on him.
Luke 1:13 And the aungel sayde vnto him: feare not Zacharye, for thy prayer is heard: And thy wyfe Elysabeth shall beare the a sonne, & thou shalt call his name Iohn,
Luke 1:14 and thou shalt haue ioye and gladnes, and manye shall reioyce at his birth.
Luke 1:15 For he shalbe greate in the syght of the Lorde, and shall neyther drinke wyne nor stronge drinke. And he shalbe fylled with the holy ghost, euen in his mothers wombe:
Luke 1:16 and manye of the children of Israel shal he turne to their Lorde God.
Luke 1:17 And he shall go before hym in the spryte of power of Helyas, to turne the hertes of the fathers to the chyldren and the vnbeleuers to the wisdome of the iust men, to make the people redy for the Lord.
Luke 1:18 And Zacharias sayde vnto the aungel: wherby shal I knowe this? seyinge that I am olde and my wyfe well stricken in yeares.
Luke 1:19 And the aungell aunswered and sayed vnto hym. I am Gabryel that stande in the presence of God, and am sente to speake to the: & shewe the these glad tidinges.
Luke 1:20 And behold thou shalt be dombe, and not able to speake vnto the tyme that these thinges be performed, because thou beleuest not my wordes whiche shalbe fulfylled in their ceason.
Luke 1:21 And the people wayted for Zacharias, and maruayled that he taryed in the temple.
Luke 1:22 And when he came out he coulde not speake to them. Wherby they perceyued that he had sene some vysyon in the temple. And he beckened vnto them, and remayned speacheles.
Luke 1:23 And it fortuned assone as the time of his offyce was out, he departed home into his owne house.
Luke 1:24 And after those dayes his wyfe Elyzabeth conceyued and hid hir selfe .v. monethes, sayinge.
Luke 1:25 This wyfe hath God dealt with me in the dayes when he loked on me, to take from me the rebuke that I suffred amonge men.
Luke 1:26 And in the .vi. moneth the aungell Gabriel was sent from God, vnto a citye of Galile, named Nazareth,
Luke 1:27 to a vyrgin spoused to a man whose name was Ioseph, of the house of Dauid, and the virgins name was Mary.
Luke 1:28 And the aungel wente in vnto her, & sayde Hayle full of grace, the Lorde is with the: blessed art thou amonge women.
Luke 1:29 When she sawe hym, she was abashed at his sayinge: and caste in her mynde what maner of salutacion that shoulde be.
Luke 1:30 And the aungell sayed vnto her: feare not Mary: for thou haste founde grace wyth God.
Luke 1:31 Lo: thou shalt conceyue in thy wombe & shalt beare a sonne, and shalt call his name Iesus.
Luke 1:32 He shalbe greate, and shalbe called the sonne of the hiest. And the Lorde God shal geue to hym the seat of his father Dauid,
Luke 1:33 and he shall raigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, & of his kingdome shall be no ende.
Luke 1:34 Then sayde Mary to the aungell. How shall this be, seyinge I knowe not a man?
Luke 1:35 And the aungell aunswered and sayd vnto her: The holye ghoste shall come vnto the, and the power of the hyest shall ouer shadowe the. Therfore also that holye thynge whiche shall be borne shalbe called the sonne of God.
Luke 1:36 And beholde thy cosyn Elyzabeth hath also conceyued a sonne in her age: & thys is her syxt moneth though she be called barren:
Luke 1:37 for with God can nothing be vnpossyble.
Luke 1:38 And Marye sayde: beholde the hande mayden of the Lord, be it vnto me euen as thou haste said. And the aungel departed from her.
Luke 1:39 And Mary arose in those dayes, & went into the mountaines with hast, into a cytye of Iurye,
Luke 1:40 and entred into the house of Zachary, and saluted Elisabeth.
Luke 1:41 And it fortuned as Elysabeth hearde the salutacion of Marye, the babe spronge in her belly. And Elizabeth was fylled with the holye ghost,
Luke 1:42 and cryed wyth a loude voice, and sayde: Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the frute of thy wombe.
Luke 1:43 And whence happeneth this to me that the mother of my Lorde shoulde come to me?
Luke 1:44 For lo, assone as the voice of thy salutacion sounded in myne eares, the babe sprange in my bellye for ioye.
Luke 1:45 And blessed art thou that beleuedest: for those thinges shall be performed, whiche were tolde the from the Lorde.
Luke 1:46 And Marye sayde: My soule magnifyed the Lorde.
Luke 1:47 And my sprete reioyceth in God my sauiour.
Luke 1:48 For he hath loked on the poore degre of his hande maiden. Beholde now from henceforth shall all generacions cal me blessed.
Luke 1:49 For he that is mightye hath done to me great thinges, and holy is his name.
Luke 1:50 And his mercy is on them that feare hym thorowe out all generacions.
Luke 1:51 He sheweth strength with his arme, he scattereth them that are proude in the ymagynacion of their hertes.
Luke 1:52 He putteth doune the mightye from their seates, and exalteth them of low degre.
Luke 1:53 He fylleth the hongry with good thinges, & sendeth away the ryche empty.
Luke 1:54 He remembreth mercye, and helpeth his sernaunte Israell.
Luke 1:55 Euen as he promysed to our fathers Abraham and to his sede for euer.
Luke 1:56 And Marye abode with her aboute a .iij. moneths, and retourned againe to her owne house.
Luke 1:57 Elyzabeths time was come that she should be delyuered, and she brought forth a sonne.
Luke 1:58 And her neighbours and her cosyne harde tell howe the Lorde had shewed great mercye vpon her, And they reioyceth with her.
Luke 1:59 And it fortuned the .viij. daye, they came to circuncyse the childe, and called his name Zacharias, after the name of his father.
Luke 1:60 How be it his mother aunswered, and sayde: not so, but he shalbe called Ihon.
Luke 1:61 And they saide vnto her: There is none of thy kinne that is named with this name.
Luke 1:62 And they made sygnes to his father: howe he woulde haue him called.
Luke 1:63 And he axeth for writtyng tables, and wrote sayinge: his name is Ihon. And they maruayled al.
Luke 1:64 And his mouthe was opened immediatlye, and his tonge also, and he spake laudinge God.
Luke 1:65 And feare came on all them that dwelt nye vnto them. And all these sayinges were noysed abrode throughout al the hyll country of Iury,
Luke 1:66 and all that hearde them laide them vp in their hartes sayinge: What maner chylde shall this be? And the hande of the Lorde was with him.
Luke 1:67 And his father Zacharias was fylled with the holye ghost, and prophecied sayinge:
Luke 1:68 Blessed be the Lorde God of Israel, for he hath visyted and redemed his people.
Luke 1:69 And hath reysed vp an horne of saluacion vnto vs in the house of his seruaunt Dauid.
Luke 1:70 Euen as he promised by the mouthe of his holye prophetes which were sence the worlde began.
Luke 1:71 That we shoulde be saued from oure enemyes, & from the power of all that hath vs.
Luke 1:72 To fulfyll the mercy promysed to oure fathers, and to remember his holye couenaunt.
Luke 1:73 And to performe the othe which he sware to oure father Abraham,
Luke 1:74 for to geue vs. That we delyuered out of the power of oure enemyes, might serue him without feare
Luke 1:75 all the dayes of our lyfe, in such holynes and ryghtuousnes as are accept before hym.
Luke 1:76 And thou chylde shalt be called the prophete of the hiest: for thou shalt go before the face of the Lorde to prepare his wayes.
Luke 1:77 And to geue knowledge of saluacion vnto his people for the remissyon of synnes.
Luke 1:78 Through the tender mercye of our God, wherby the daye sprynge from on hye hath vysyted vs.
Luke 1:79 To geue lyght to them that sate in darcknes & in shadowe of death, and to guyde oure fete into the waye of peace.
Luke 1:80 And the chylde grewe and wexed stronge in spirite and was in wyldernes tyll the daye came when he shoulde shewe him selfe vnto the Israelytes.

CHAPTER: 2

Luke 2:1 And it chaunced in those dayes: that there wente out a commaundemente from Auguste the Emperour, that al the worlde should be taxed.
Luke 2:2 And this taxynge was the fyrste, and executed when Syrenius was lieftenaunt in Siria.
Luke 2:3 And euerye man wente into his owne citye to be taxed.
Luke 2:4 And Ioseph also ascended from Galyle: out of a cytye called Nazareth, into Iury: vnto the citye of Dauid which is called Bethleem, because he was of the house and lynage of Dauid,
Luke 2:5 to be taxed with Marye his spoused wyfe whiche was with childe.
Luke 2:6 And it fortuned whyle they were there, her tyme was come that she shoulde be deliuered.
Luke 2:7 And she brought forth her first begotten sonne, and wrapped him in swadlynge clothes, and layed him in a maunger, because ther was no roume for them within the ynne.
Luke 2:8 And there were in the same region shepherdes abydinge in the fyelde, and watchinge theyr flocke by night.
Luke 2:9 And lo: the aungel of the Lord stode harde by them, and the brightnes of the Lord shone round about them, and they were sore afrayed.
Luke 2:10 But the aungel sayde vnto them: Be not afrayed. For beholde, I bringe you tydinges of greate ioye that shall come to al the people:
Luke 2:11 for vnto you is borne this day in the citye of Dauid, a sauioure whiche is Christe the Lorde.
Luke 2:12 And take this for a sygne: ye shall fynde the chylde swadled and layed in a maunger.
Luke 2:13 And strayght waye there was with the aungel a multitude of heauenly souldiours, laudinge God and sayinge:
Luke 2:14 Glory to God on hye, and peace on the earth: and vnto men reioysynge.
Luke 2:15 And it fortuned, assone as the aungels were gone awaye from them into heauen, the shepherdes sayed one to another: let vs go euen vnto Bethleem & se this thing that is happened which the Lorde hath shewed vnto vs.
Luke 2:16 And they came with haste: and founde Mary and Ioseph and the babe layed in a maunger.
Luke 2:17 And when they had sene it, they published abroade the sayinge which was tolde them of that chylde.
Luke 2:18 And all that heard it, wondered at those thinges whiche were tolde them of the shepherdes.
Luke 2:19 But Mary kept all those sayinges, and pondered them in her herte.
Luke 2:20 And the shepherdes retourned, praisynge and lauding God for all that they had hearde and sene, euen as it was tolde vnto them.
Luke 2:21 And when the eyght daye was come, that the chylde shoulde be circuncysed, his name was called Iesus, which was named of the aungell before he was conceyued in the wombe.
Luke 2:22 And when the tyme of their puryfycacion (after the lawe of Moyses) was come, they brought him to Ierusalem, to presente hym to the Lorde
Luke 2:23 (as it is wryttem in the lawe of the Lorde: euerye male that fyrst openeth the mattrix, shall be called holye to the Lord)
Luke 2:24 and to offer (as it is sayde in the lawe of the Lorde) a payre of turtel doues or two yonge pygyons.
Luke 2:25 And beholde ther was a man in Hierusalem whose name was Symeon. And the same man was iuste and feared God, and longed for the consolacion of Israel and the holye ghost was in him.
Luke 2:26 And an aunswere was geuen him of the holye ghost, that he shoulde not se death, before he had sene the Lordes Christe.
Luke 2:27 And he came by inspiration into the tempell. And when the father and mother broughte in the childe Iesus, to do for him after the custome of the lawe,
Luke 2:28 then toke he him vp in hys armes and sayed.
Luke 2:29 Lorde. Nowe lettest thou thy seruaunt departe in peace, accordinge to thy promes.
Luke 2:30 For mine eyes haue sene the sauiour sent from the.
Luke 2:31 Which thou hast prepare before the face of all people.
Luke 2:32 A lyght to lighten the gentils and the glorye of thy people Israel.
Luke 2:33 And his father and mother meruayled at those thinges which were spoken of him.
Luke 2:34 And Symon blessed them, & sayd vnto Mary his mother: beholde, this chylde shalbe the fal and resurrection of manye in Israel, & sygne which shalbe spoken againste.
Luke 2:35 And moreouer the swearde shall pearce thy soule, that the thoughtes of manye hertes maye be opened.
Luke 2:36 And ther was a prophetesse, one Anna the doughter of Phanuell of the trybe of Aser which was of a great age, and had liued with her housbande .vij. yeares from her virginitie.
Luke 2:37 And she had bene a weddowe aboute .iiij. score and .iiij. yeares, which went neuer out of the temple, but serued God with fastinge and prayer night & daye.
Luke 2:38 And the same came forth that same houre and praysed the Lorde and spake of him to all that loked for redempcion in Ierusalem.
Luke 2:39 And assone as they had perfourmed al thynges accordynge to the lawe of the Lorde they retourned into Galyle to their owne cytye Nazareth.
Luke 2:40 And the chylde grewe & waxed stronge in spyryte, and was fylled wyth wisdome, & the grace of God was with him.
Luke 2:41 And his father and mother went to Hierusalem euerye yeare at the feaste of easter.
Luke 2:42 And when he was .xij. yeare olde, they went vp to Ierusalem after the custome of the feaste.
Luke 2:43 And when they had fulfilled the dayes, as they returned home, the chylde Iesus bode styll in Ierusalem vnknowinge to his father and mother.
Luke 2:44 For they supposed he had bene in the company, and therfore came a dayes iorneye and sought him amonge their kinsfolke and acquaintaunce.
Luke 2:45 And when thei founde him not, they went backe againe to Ierusalem, & sought hym.
Luke 2:46 And it fortuned after thre dayes that they founde him in the tempell, syttynge in the middes of the doctours, both hearynge them and posynge them.
Luke 2:47 And all that hearde him, meruaylled at his wit and aunswers.
Luke 2:48 And when they sawe him, they were astonyed. And his mother sayde vnto him: sonne, why hast thou thus dealt with vs? Beholde thy father and I haue sought the, sorowing.
Luke 2:49 And he sayed vnto them: howe is it that ye sought me? Wyst ye not that I must go about my fathers busynes?
Luke 2:50 And they vnderstode not the sayinge that he spake to them.
Luke 2:51 And he went with them, and came to Nazareth, and was obedient to them: But his mother kepte al these sayinges in her herte.
Luke 2:52 And Iesus increased in wisdome and age, and in fauoure with God and man.

CHAPTER: 3

Luke 3:1 And in the .xv. yeare of the raygne of Tiberius the Emperoure, Pontius Pilate beiynge lieftenaunte of Iury, and Herode beyinge Tethrarch of Galyle, and hys brother Philippe Tethrarchin Iturea & in the region of Traconytes, and Lysanyas the Tetrarche of Abilene,
Luke 3:2 when Anna and Cayphas were the hye pryestes: the word of God came vuto Iohn the sonne of Zacharias in the wildernes.
Luke 3:3 And he came into all the costes about Iordan, preaching the baptisme of repentaunce for the remissyon of synnes,
Luke 3:4 as it is written in the boke of the sayinges of Esaias the prophete which sayeth. The voyce of a cryer in wildernes, prepare the waye of the Lorde, make hys pathes strayght.
Luke 3:5 Euerye valley shall be fylled, and euerye mountayne and hyll shall be brought lowe. And croked thinges shalbe made straight: and the rough wayes shalbe made smoth:
Luke 3:6 and all fleshe shall se the sauioure sent of God.
Luke 3:7 Then sayde he to the people that were come to be baptysed of him. O generacion of vipers, who hath taught you to flye from the wrath to come?
Luke 3:8 Bringe forth due frutes of repentaunce, and begin not to saye in your selues, we haue Abraham to our father: For I say vnto you God is able of these stones to rayse vp chyldren vnto Abraham.
Luke 3:9 Now also is the axe lyed vnto the rote of the trees, so that euery tree which bringeth not forth good frute shall be hewen doune, and cast into the fyre.
Luke 3:10 And the people axed him sayinge: What shall we do then?
Luke 3:11 He aunswered and sayd vnto theim: He that hath two cotes, let him parte with him that hath none, & he that hath meate let him do lykewyse.
Luke 3:12 Then came there publicans to be baptysed, and sayde vnto hym: Maister, what shall we do?
Luke 3:13 And he sayde vnto them: require nomore then that which is appointed vnto you.
Luke 3:14 The souldioures lykewyse demaunded of him saiynge: and what shall we do? And he sayde to them: Do violence to no man: neither trouble any man wrongfullye: but be content with your wages.
Luke 3:15 As the people were in a doubte, and all men disputed in their hertes of Iohn, whither he were very Christ,
Luke 3:16 Iohn aunswered and sayde to them all: I baptyse you with water, but a stronger then I cometh after me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to vnlouse: he wyll baptyse you with the holye ghost, and with fyre.
Luke 3:17 Which hath his fanne in his hande, and wyll purge his floore, and wyll gather the corne into his barne, but the chaffe wil he burne with fyre that neuer shalbe quenched.
Luke 3:18 And many other thinges in his exhortacion preached he vnto the people.
Luke 3:19 Then Herode the Tetrarche (when he was rebuked of him for Herodias his brothers wyfe and for al the euyls, which Herode had done)
Luke 3:20 added this aboue al, and laied Ihon in prison.
Luke 3:21 And it fortuned as all the people receyued baptisme (And when Iesus was baptised and did praye) that heauen was opened,
Luke 3:22 and the holye ghost came doune in a bodelye shape lyke a done vpon him, and a voyce came from heauen saiynge: thou art my deare sonne, in the do I delyte.
Luke 3:23 And Iesus him selfe was entring the thirthy yeare of his age as men supposed hym to be the sonne of Ioseph. which was the sonne of Hely,
Luke 3:24 which was the sonne of Mathat, which was the sonne of Leui, which was the sonne of Melchi. which was the sonne of Ianna, which was the sonne of Ioseph,
Luke 3:25 which was the sonne of Mattathias, which was the sonne of Amos, which was the sonne of Nasum, which was the sonne of Esli, which was the sonne of Nagge,
Luke 3:26 which was the sonne of Maath, which was the sonne of Matathias, which was the sonne of Semei, which was the sonne of Iosech, which was the sonne of Iuda,
Luke 3:27 which was the sonne of Ioanna, which was the sonne of Rhesia, which was the sonne of Zorobabel, which was the sonne of Salathiel, which was the sonne of Neri,
Luke 3:28 which was the sonne of Melchi, which was the sonne of Addi, which was the sonne of Cosan, which was the sonne of Helmadam, which was the sonne of Hir,
Luke 3:29 which was the sonne of Ieso, which was the sonne of Heliasar, which was the sonne of Ioram, which was the sonne of Mattha, which was the sonne of Leuy,
Luke 3:30 which was the sonne of Simeon, which was the sonne of Iuda, which was the sonne of Ioseph, which was the sonne of Ionam, which was the sonne of Heliachim,
Luke 3:31 which was the sonne of Melca, which was the sonne of Menam, which was the sonne of Mathathan, which was the sonne of Nathan, which was the sonne of Dauid,
Luke 3:32 which was the sonne of Iesse, which was the sonne of Obed, which was the sonne of Boos, which was the sonne of Salmon, which was the sonne of Naason,
Luke 3:33 which was the sonne of Aminadab, which was the sonne of Aram, which was the sonne of Esrom, which was the sonne of Phares, which was the sonne of Iuda,
Luke 3:34 which was the sonne of Iacob, which was the sonne of Isaac, which was the sonne of Abraham, which was the sonne of Tharra, which was the sonne of Nachor,
Luke 3:35 which was the sonne of Saruch, which was the sonne of Ragan, which was the sonne of Phalec, which was the sonne of Heber, which was the sonne of Sala,
Luke 3:36 which was the sonne of Cainan, which was the sonne of Arphaxat, which was the sonne of Sem, which was the sonne of Noe, which was the sonne of Lameth,
Luke 3:37 which was the sonne of Mathusalem, which was the sonne of Enoch, which was the sonne of Iareth, which was the sonne of Malalehel, which was the sonne of Cainan,
Luke 3:38 which was the sonne of Enos, which was the sonne of Seth, which was the sonne of Adam, which was the sonne of God,

CHAPTER: 4

Luke 4:1 Iesus then full of the holye ghost returned from Iordan & was caried of the spyrite into wildernes,
Luke 4:2 and was .xl. dayes tempted of the deuil. And in those dayes eate he nothinge. And when they were ended he afterwarde hungred.
Luke 4:3 And the deuyll sayde vnto him: If thou be the sonne of God, commaunde this stone that it be bread.
Luke 4:4 And Iesus aunswered hym saiynge: It is written, man shall not lyue by bread onlye, but of euerye worde of God.
Luke 4:5 And the deuyl toke him vp into an hye mountayne, and shewed him all the kyngdomes of the worlde euen in the twincklinge of an eye.
Luke 4:6 And the deuyl sayde vnto hym: al this power wyll I geue the euerye whit and the glorye of them for that is delyuered to me & to whomsoeuer I wyl, I geue it:
Luke 4:7 If thou therfore wilt worship me, they shalbe al thine.
Luke 4:8 Iesus aunswered him and sayde. Hence from me Sathan. For it is written: Thou shall honoure the Lord thy God and him onlye serue.
Luke 4:9 And he caryed hym to Ierusalem, and set him on a pynacle of the tempel, and sayde vnto him. If thou be the sonne of God caste thy selfe doune from hence:
Luke 4:10 For it is wrytten. He shall geue his aungels charge ouer the to kepe the
Luke 4:11 and wyth their handes they shal sley the vp that thou dashe not thy fote agaynst a stone.
Luke 4:12 Iesus aunswered and sayde to hym, it is sayde: Thou shalt not tempt the Lorde thy God.
Luke 4:13 Assone as the deuyll had ended all his temptacion, he departed from him for a season.
Luke 4:14 And Iesus retourned by the power of the spyryte into Galile, and there went a fame of hym throughout all the regyon rounde about.
Luke 4:15 And he taught in their synagoges, and was commended of all men.
Luke 4:16 And he came to Nazareth wher he was nourished: and as his custome was, went into the synagoge on the. Sabboth dayes, & stode vp to reade.
Luke 4:17 And there was delyuered vnto hym the boke of the prophete Esayas. And when he had opened the boke, he founde the place wher it was written:
Luke 4:18 The spyryte of the Lorde vpon me, because he hath anointed me: to preache the gospell to the poore he hath sent me, and to heale the broken herted, to preache deliueraunce to the captiue, and syght to the blynde, and frely to set at lyberte them that are brused,
Luke 4:19 and to preache the acceptable yeare of the Lorde.
Luke 4:20 And he closed the boke, and gaue it againe to the mynister, and sate doune. And the eyes of all that were in the synagoge were fastened on him.
Luke 4:21 And he began to saye vnto them. This daye is this scripture fulfylled in youre eares.
Luke 4:22 And all bare him witnes, and wondred at the gracious wordes which proceded out of his mouthe, and saide: Is not this Iosephs sonne?
Luke 4:23 And he sayde vnto them: Ye maye very wel saye vnto me these prouerbe: Phisicon, heale thy selfe. Whatsoeuer we haue hearde done in Capernaum, do the same here lykewyse in thine owne countrye.
Luke 4:24 And he sayed: verely I saye vnto you. No prophete is accepted in his owne countrye.
Luke 4:25 But I tell you of a truthe, manye wydowes were in Israel in the dayes of Helias, when heauen was shut thre yeares & syxe moneths when great fanishment was through out all the lande,
Luke 4:26 and vnto none of them was Helias sent, saue vnto Sarepta besydes Sydon vnto a woman that was a wydowe.
Luke 4:27 And manye lepers were in Israel in the tyme of Helyseus the prophet, and yet none of them was healed, sauinge Naman of Siria.
Luke 4:28 And as many as were in the synagoge when they hearde that, were fylled with wrath:
Luke 4:29 and rose vp, and thrust him out of the citye, & ledde him euen vnto the edge of the hyll, where on their cytye was bult, to cast hym doune hedlynge.
Luke 4:30 But he wente his way euen through the myddes of them.
Luke 4:31 And came into Capernaum a cytye of Galyle, and there taught them on the saboth dayes.
Luke 4:32 And they were astonyed at his doctryne, for his preachinge was wyth power.
Luke 4:33 And in the synagoge ther was a man which had a spyryte of an vncleane deuyll, and cried with a loude voyce
Luke 4:34 saiyng: let me alone, what hast thou to do with vs, thou Iesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroye? I knowe the what thou arte, euen the holye of God.
Luke 4:35 And Iesus rebuked him saiynge: holde thy peace & come out of hym. And the deuyll throwe hym in the myddes of them and came out of hym and hurte hym not.
Luke 4:36 And feare come on them all and they spake amonge them selues saiynge what maner of thinge is this? For with authoryte and power he commaundeth the foule spirites, and they come out.
Luke 4:37 And the fame of him spread abroade through out all places of the country rounde aboute.
Luke 4:38 And he arose vp & came out of the synagoge, and entred into Simons house. And Simons mother in lawe was taken with a great feuer and they made intercessyon to hym for her.
Luke 4:39 And he stode ouer her, and rebuked the feuer, and it left her. And immediatly she arose and mynystred vnto them.
Luke 4:40 When the sunne was doune, all they that had sicke, taken with diuerse dyseases, brought them vnto hym, and he layde hys handes on euery one of them, and healed them.
Luke 4:41 And deuyls also came oute of many of them cryinge and saiyng: thou arte Christ the sonne of God. And he rebuked them, and suffered them not to speake: for they knewe that he was Christe.
Luke 4:42 Assone as it was daye, he departed & went awaye into a desert place, & the people sought hym and came to hym, and kept hym that he shoulde not departe from them.
Luke 4:43 And he sayed vnto them: I muste to other cityes also preache the kyngdome of God: For therfore am I sent.
Luke 4:44 And he preached in the synagoges of Galyle,

CHAPTER: 5

Luke 5:1 It came to passe as the people preased vpon him to heare the worde of God, that he stode by the lake of Genezareth:
Luke 5:2 and sawe two shyppes stande by the lake syde, but the fisher men were gone out of them, and were washynge their nettes.
Luke 5:3 And he entred into one of the shyppes, which pertayned to Symon, and prayed him, that he woulde thruste out a lytle from the lande. And he sat doune and taught the people out of the shyppe.
Luke 5:4 When he had left speakynge, he sayed vnto Simon: launce out into the depe, and let slip your nettes to make a draught.
Luke 5:5 And Simon aunswered and sayed vnto hym: Mayster, we haue laboured all nyght, and haue taken nothynge. Neuerthelater at thy worde I wyll lose forth the net.
Luke 5:6 And when they had so done, they enclosed a greate multytude of fyshes. And their net brake:
Luke 5:7 but they made sygnes to their fellowes which were in the other shyp that they shoulde come and helpe them. And they came and fylled both the shyppes that they sonke againe.
Luke 5:8 When Simon Peter sawe that, he fell doune at Iesus knees saiynge: Lorde go
Luke 5:9 from me for I am a synfull man. For he was vtterlye astonyed and all that were with hym at the draughte of fyshe, which they toke:
Luke 5:10 and so was Iames and Iohn the sonnes of Zebede, which were parteners with Symon. And Iesus sayed vnto Simon: feare not, from hence forth thou shalt catche men.
Luke 5:11 And they brought the shyppes to lande, and forsoke all and folowed hym.
Luke 5:12 And it fortuned as he was in a certayne citye: beholde, there was a man full of leprosye: and when he had spyed Iesus, he fell on his face, and besought him saiynge: Lorde, if thou wylt thou canst make me cleane.
Luke 5:13 And he stretthed forth the hande and touched him saiynge: I wyl, be thou cleane. And immediatlye the leprosye departed from him.
Luke 5:14 And he warned hym that he shoulde tell no man but that he should go and shewe him selfe to the pryeste and offer for his clensyng, accordinge as Moyses commaundement was, for a witnes vnto them.
Luke 5:15 But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him, & much people came together to heare and to be healed of him, of their infirmyties.
Luke 5:16 And he kepte him selfe aparte in the wyldernesse, and gaue him selfe to prayer.
Luke 5:17 And it happened on a certayne daye, that he taught, and there sate the phariseis and the doctours of lawe, which were come out of all the tounes of Galyle, Iurye, and Hierusalem. And the power of the Lorde was to heale them.
Luke 5:18 And beholde men brought a man liynge in his bedde which was taken with a palsey: & sought meanes to brynge him in, and to laye him before him.
Luke 5:19 And when they could not finde by what way they might bring him in, because of the prease, they went vp on the toppe of the house, and let him doune thorowe the tyling, bedde & all in the middest before Iesus.
Luke 5:20 When he sawe their faith, he sayed to him: man, thy sinnes are forgeuen the.
Luke 5:21 And the scribes and pharyseis began to thinke saiynge: What felowe is this which speaketh blasphemy? who can forgeue synnes but God onlye?
Luke 5:22 When Iesus perceiued their thoughtes, he aunswered and sayd vnto them: What thinke ye in your hertes?
Luke 5:23 Whether is it easyer to say, thy synnes are forgeuen the, or to saye: ryse & walke?
Luke 5:24 But that ye may knowe that the sonne of man hath power to forgeue sinnes on earth, he said to the sycke of the paulsye, I say to the, aryse, take vp thy bed & go home to thy house.
Luke 5:25 And immediatlye he rose vp before them, and toke vp his bed wheron he laye, and departed to his owne house praysyng God.
Luke 5:26 And they were all amased, and they lauded God & were filled with fear saiyng: We haue sene straung thinges to daye.
Luke 5:27 And after that he wente forth and sawe a Publican named Leui, sittinge at the receite of custome and saide vnto him: folowe me.
Luke 5:28 And he left al, rose vp and folowed him.
Luke 5:29 And the same Leui made him a great feaste at home in his owne house. And ther was a great companye of publicans and of other that sate at meat with him.
Luke 5:30 And the scribes and pharyseis murmured againste his disciples saiynge: Why eate ye, and drinke ye with publicans and sinners?
Luke 5:31 Iesus aunswered and sayde vnto them: They that are whole nede not of the phisician: but thei that are sicke.
Luke 5:32 I am not come to cal the rightuous, but synners to repentaunce.
Luke 5:33 Then they sayed vnto him: Why do the disciples of Ihon faste often and praye, and the disciples of the phariseis also: and thyne eate and drinke?
Luke 5:34 And he sayed vnto them: Can ye make the children of the weddinge faste, as longe as the bridgrome is present with them?
Luke 5:35 The dayes will come, when the bridgrome shall be taken awaye from them: Then shall they faste in those dayes.
Luke 5:36 Then spake he vnto them in a symylytude. No man putteth a pece of a newe garmente, into an olde vesture: for if he do, then breaketh he the newe and the pece that was taken out of the newe agreeth not with the olde.
Luke 5:37 Also no man poureth newe wine into olde vessels. For if he do, the newe wyne breaketh the vessels, and runneth out it selfe, and the vessels perishe:
Luke 5:38 But newe wyne muste be poured into newe vessels, and both are preserued.
Luke 5:39 Also no man that drinketh olde wyne, strayght waye can awaye with newe, for he sayeth the olde is pleasaunter.

CHAPTER: 6

Luke 6:1 It happened on an after saboth, that he wente through the corne fyelde, and that his disciples plucked the eares of corne and eate, and rubbed them in their handes.
Luke 6:2 And certayne of the pharyseis sayde vnto them: Why do ye that whiche is not lawfull to do on the saboth dayes?
Luke 6:3 And Iesus aunswered them and sayde: Haue ye not read what Dauid did when he him selfe was an hongred, and they which were with hym:
Luke 6:4 how he wente into the house of God and toke and eate the loues of halowed breade, & gaue also to them which were with him, which was not lawfull to eate, but for the priestes onlye.
Luke 6:5 And he sayed vnto them: The sonne of man is Lorde of the saboth daye.
Luke 6:6 And it fortuned in another saboth also, that he entred into the synagoge and taught. And there was a man whose righthande was dried vp.
Luke 6:7 And the scrybes and pharyseis watched him, to see whether he would heale on the saboth daye, that they myght fynde an accusacion against him.
Luke 6:8 But he knewe their thoughtes, and sayde to the man which had the withered hande: Rise vp and stande forth in the middes. And he arose and stepped forth.
Luke 6:9 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: I wyll axe you a question: Whither is it lawfull on the saboth dayes to do good or to do euyl? to saue lyfe, or for to destroye it?
Luke 6:10 And he behelde them al in compasse, and sayde vnto the manye: Stretche forth thy hande. And he dyd so: & his hande was restored, and made as whole as the other.
Luke 6:11 And thei were fylled full of madnes, and communed one with another, what they might do to Iesus.
Luke 6:12 And it furtuned in those dayes that he went out into a mountaine for to praye, and contynued all night in prayer to God.
Luke 6:13 And assone as it was daye, he called his disciples, and of them he chose .xij. whiche also he called Apostles:
Luke 6:14 Symon whom he named Peter, & Andrewe his brother, Iames and Ihon, Philippe and Bartelmewe,
Luke 6:15 Mathewe and Thomas, Iames the sonne of Alpheus, and Simon called Zelotes,
Luke 6:16 and Iudas Iames sonne, and Iudas Iscarioth which same was the traytour.
Luke 6:17 And he came doune with them & stode in the playne fyelde with the companye of hys discyples, and a great multytude of people out of all partyes of Iurye and Ierusalem & from the sea coste of Tyre and Sydon, which came to heare hym, and to be healed of their disceases,
Luke 6:18 and they also that were vexed with foule spyrytes, and they were healed.
Luke 6:19 And all the people preased to touche hym, for there wente vertue out of hym, and healed them all.
Luke 6:20 And he lyfte vp his eye vpon the disciples, and sayde: Blessed be ye pore: for yours is the kyngdome of God.
Luke 6:21 Blessed are ye that honger nowe: for ye shalbe satisfyed. Blessed are ye that wepe nowe for ye shall laughe.
Luke 6:22 Blessed are ye when men hate you, and thruste you out of their companye, and rayle, & abhorre youre name as an euill thinge, for the sonne of mans sake.
Luke 6:23 Reioyse then, and be glad: for behold your reward is great in heauen. After this maner their father entreated the prophetes.
Luke 6:24 But wo be to you that are riche: for ye haue therin your consolacion.
Luke 6:25 Wo be to you that are full: for ye shal honger. Wo be to you that nowe laugh: for ye shall wayle and wepe.
Luke 6:26 Wo be to you when all men prayse you: for so dyd their fathers to the false prophetes.
Luke 6:27 But I say vnto you which heare: loue your enemyes. Do good to them which hate you.
Luke 6:28 Blesse them that coursse you. And praye for them which wrongfully trouble you.
Luke 6:29 And vnto hym that smiteth the on the one cheke, offer also the other. And him that taketh awaye thy gonne, forbyd not to take thy cote also.
Luke 6:30 Giue euerye man that axeth of the. And of hym that taketh awaye thy goodes, axe them not again.
Luke 6:31 And as ye woulde that men should do to you: so do ye to them likewyse.
Luke 6:32 Yf ye loue them which loue you, what thanke are ye worthy of? For the verye synners loue their louers.
Luke 6:33 And if ye do for them which do for you, what thanke are ye worthye of? For the verye synners do euen the same.
Luke 6:34 If ye lende to them of whom ye hope to receiue, what thanke shall ye haue: for the very synners lende to synners to receiue much againe.
Luke 6:35 Wherfore, loue ye your enemyes, do good and lende, lokinge for nothynge againe, and your rewarde shall be greate, and ye shalbe the children of the hyest for he is kinde vnto the vnkinde and to the euyll.
Luke 6:36 Be ye therfore mercifull, as your father is mercyfull.
Luke 6:37 Iudge not and ye shall not be iudged. Condemne not, and ye shall not be condemned. Forgeue you, ye shalbe forgeuen.
Luke 6:38 Geue, and it shalbe geuen vnto you: good measure, pressed doune, shaken together and runninge ouer, shal men geue vnto your bosomes. For with what measure ye mete with the same shall men mete to you agayne.
Luke 6:39 And he putteth forth a symylytude vnto them: Can the blinde leade the blinde? Do they not both then fall into the dyche?
Luke 6:40 The discyple is not aboue his maister. Euery man shalbe perfecte if he be as his mayster is.
Luke 6:41 Why seist thou a moote in thy brothers eye, and consyderest not the beame that is in thyne owne eye?
Luke 6:42 Either howe canst thou saye to thy brother? Brother, let me pul out the moote that is thine eye: When thou perceyuest not the beame that is in thine owne eye? Ypocryte, cast out the beame that is in thine owne eye fyrst, and then shalt thou se perfectlye to pul out the mote out of thy brothers eye.
Luke 6:43 It is not a good tre that bryngeth forth euyll frute: neither is that au euil tre that bringeth forth good frute.
Luke 6:44 For euery tre is knowen by his fruite. Neyther of thornes gather men fygges, nor of bushes gather they grapes.
Luke 6:45 A good man out of the good treasure of his hert bringeth forth that which is good. And an euil man out of the euyll treasure of his herte bringeth forth that which is euyl. For of the aboundaunce of the herte, his mouth speaketh.
Luke 6:46 Why call ye me Maister Maister, and do not as I byd you?
Luke 6:47 whosoeuer commeth to me, and heareth my saiynges, and doth the same, I wyll shewe you to whom he is lyke.
Luke 6:48 He is lyke a man which builde an house and digged depe and layde the foundacion on a rocke. When the waters arose, the floud bet vpon that house, and coulde not moue it for it was grounded vpon a rocke.
Luke 6:49 But he that heareth and doeth not, is lyke a man that without foundacion bylt an house vpon the earth, against which the floude dyd beate and it fell by and by, and the fall of that house was greate.

CHAPTER: 7

Luke 7:1 When he had ended al his saynges in the audience of the people, he entred into Capernaum.
Luke 7:2 And a certayne Centuryons seruaunt was sycke and redye to dye, whom he made much of.
Luke 7:3 And when he heard of Iesu, he sent vnto hym the elders of the Iewes, besechinge hym that he woulde come & heale his seruaunte.
Luke 7:4 And they came to Iesus and besought hym instauntlye saiynge: He is worthye that thou shouldest do this for hym.
Luke 7:5 For he loueth oure nacion, and hath bylt vs a synagoge.
Luke 7:6 And Iesus went with them. And when he was not farre from the house the Centurion sent frendes to him saiynge vnto him: Lorde trouble not thy selfe, for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter vnder my roffe.
Luke 7:7 Wherfore I thought not my selfe worthy to come vnto the: but saye the worde and my seruaunte shalbe whole.
Luke 7:8 For I lykewise am a man vnder power, and haue vnder me souldiers, and I saye vnto one, go: and he goeth. And to an other, come: and he cometh. And to my seruaunte, do this: and he doeth it.
Luke 7:9 When Iesus harde this, he maruailed at him, & tourned him about & saide to the people that folowed hym: I say vnto you, I haue not founde so greate fayth, no, not in Israel.
Luke 7:10 And they that were sent, turned backe home againe, and founde the seruaunte that was sycke, whole.
Luke 7:11 And it fortnned after that, that he wente into a cytye called Naim, and manye of hys disciples went with him and much people.
Luke 7:12 When he came nye to the gate of the cytye, beholde there was a dead man caryed out which was the onlye sonne of his mother and she was a wydowe, and much people of the cytye was with her.
Luke 7:13 And when the Lorde sawe her, he had compassyon on her and saide vnto her, wepe not.
Luke 7:14 And he went and touched the coffin, and they that bare hym, stode styll. And he sayde: Yonge man, I say vnto the, aryse.
Luke 7:15 And the dead sate vp, and began to speake. And he delyuered him to his mother.
Luke 7:16 And there came a feare on them all. And they glorifyed God saiynge: a greate Prophete is rysen among vs, and God hath visyted his people.
Luke 7:17 And this rumore of hym wente forth throughout all Iurye, and thoroweout all the regions which lye rounde about.
Luke 7:18 And the discyples of Ihon shewed hym of all these thinges.
Luke 7:19 And Ihon called vnto him two of his discyples, and sente them to Iesus saiynge: Arte thou he that shall come? or shall we loke for another?
Luke 7:20 When the men were come vnto him they sayde: Ihon Baptiste sent vs vnto the saiynge. Art thou he that shall come, or shall we wayte for an other?
Luke 7:21 And at that same tyme he cured manye of their infyrmytyes and plages and of euyll spirites, and vnto manye that were blinde he gaue syght.
Luke 7:22 And Iesus aunswered and saide vnto them: Go your wayes and shewe Ihon what thinges ye haue seane and hearde: howe that the blynd se, the halt go, the lepers are clensed, the deafe heare, the dead aryse, to the poore is glad tydinges preached,
Luke 7:23 and happye is he that is not offended by me.
Luke 7:24 When the messengers of Ihon were departed, he began to speake vnto the people of Ihon. What went ye out into the wildernes for to se? Went ye to se a rede shaken with the winde?
Luke 7:25 But what went ye out for to se? a man clothed in softe raiment? Beholde they which are gorgeouslye apparilled, and lyue delicatly are in kinges courtes.
Luke 7:26 But what went ye forth to se? a Prophete, yea I saye vnto you, and more then a prophete.
Luke 7:27 This is he of whom it is written: Behold I sende my messenger before thy face, to prepare thy waye before the
Luke 7:28 For I saye vnto you: a greater Prophete then Ihon, amonge womens children is ther none. Neuerthelesse one that is lesse in the kingdome of God, is greater then he.
Luke 7:29 And all the people that hearde and the publicans iustifyed God, and were baptysed with the baptime of Ihon.
Luke 7:30 But the Phariseis and scribes despised the counsel of God againste them selues, and were not baptysed of him.
Luke 7:31 And the Lorde sayed: Wherunto shall I lyken the men of this generacion, and what thinge are they?
Luke 7:32 They are lyke vnto chyldrin syttyng in the marcked place, & cryenge one to an other, and saiynge: We haue pyped vnto you and ye haue not daunsed: we mourned to you, & ye haue not wept.
Luke 7:33 For Ihon Baptyste came, neyther eatinge breade nor drincking wyne, and ye saye: he hath the deuyll.
Luke 7:34 The sonne of man is come and eateth and drincked, and ye saye: beholde a man which is a glotten, and a drincker of wine, a frende of publicans and synners.
Luke 7:35 Yet is wysdome iustyfyed of all her chyldren.
Luke 7:36 And one of the pharyseis desyred hym that he wolde eate with him. And he wente into the pharyseis house and sate doune to meate.
Luke 7:37 And beholde a woman in that citye which was a synner, assone as she knewe that Iesus sate at mete in the phariseis house, she brought an alabaster boxe of ointment,
Luke 7:38 and she stode at his fete behinde him wepinge, and began to washe his fete with teares, and dyd wype them wyth the heares of her head, and kyshed his fete, and annoynted them with oyntment.
Luke 7:39 When the pharysey which bade him, sawe that he speake within him selfe saiyng. If this man were a Prophete, he woulde surely haue knowen who and what maner woman this is which toucheth him, for she is a synner.
Luke 7:40 And Iesus aunswered and sayde vnto him: Simon I haue some what to saye vnto the. And he sayed: Maister saye on.
Luke 7:41 There was a certayne lender, which had two detters, the one ought fyue hundred pence: and the other fyfty.
Luke 7:42 When they had nothinge to paye, he forgaue them both. Which of them tell me, wyll loue him most.
Luke 7:43 Simon aunswered and saide: I suppose, that he to whom he forgaue moste. And he sayde vnto hym: Thou haste truly iudged.
Luke 7:44 And he turned to the woman, and sayde vnto Symon: Seist thou this woman? I entred into thy house, and thou gauest me no water to my fete, but she hath washed my fete with teares and wyped them wyth the heyres of her head.
Luke 7:45 Thou gauest me no kisse: but she, sence the tyme I came in, hath not ceased to kisse my fete.
Luke 7:46 Myne head with oyle thou dyddest not anoynte, but she hath annointed my fete with oyntmente.
Luke 7:47 Wherfore I saye vnto the manye synnes are forgeuen her, for she loued much. To whom lesse is forgeuen, the same doth lesse loue.
Luke 7:48 And he sayde vnto her, thy synnes are forgeuen the.
Luke 7:49 And they that sate at meate with him, began to saye with in them selues: Who is this which forgeueth synnes also?
Luke 7:50 And he sayde to the woman. Thy fayth hath saued the. Go in peace.

CHAPTER: 8

Luke 8:1 And it fortuned after that, that he him selfe went thorowe out cyties and tounes preachinge and shewinge the kingdome of God, and the .xij. with hym.
Luke 8:2 And also certaine women, which were healed of euyll spretes and infyrmytyes: Marye called Magdalene, out of whom went seuen deuyls,
Luke 8:3 and Ioanna the wyfe of Chusa Herodes stewarde, and Susanna, and manye other: which ministred to them of their substaunce.
Luke 8:4 When much people were gathered together, and were come to hym out of all cytyes, he spake by a symilitude.
Luke 8:5 A sower went out to sowe his sede: and as he sowed, some fel by the waye syde: and it was troden vnder fete, and the foules of the ayre deuoured it vp.
Luke 8:6 And some fell on the stone, and assone as it was spronge vp, it withered awaye because it lacked moistnes.
Luke 8:7 And some fell amonge thornes, and the thornes spronge vp with it, and choked it.
Luke 8:8 And some fell on good grounde and spronge vp and bare fruite an hundred folde. And as he sayed these thinges he cryed: He that hath eares to heare, let hym heare.
Luke 8:9 And his discyples axed him saiynge: what maner of symylytude is this?
Luke 8:10 And he sayed vnto you is it geuen to knowe the secretes of the kingdome of God: but to other in symylytudes, that when they se, they shoulde not vnderstande.
Luke 8:11 The symylytude is this. The sede is the worde of God.
Luke 8:12 Those that are besyde the waye, are they that heare, and afterwarde commeth the deuyll and taketh awaye the worde out of their hertes leste they should beleue & be saued.
Luke 8:13 Thei on the stones, are thei which when they heare, receiue the worde with ioye. But these haue no rotes, whiche for a whyle beleue, & in tyme of temptacion go awaye.
Luke 8:14 And that whiche fell amonge thornes, are thei which heare, and go forth, and are choked with cares and with ryches, and voluptuouse liuinge, and bringe forth no fruite.
Luke 8:15 That in the good grounde, are they whyche with a good and pure herte, heare the worde and kepe it, and brynge forth fruyte wyth pacience.
Luke 8:16 No man lighteth a candell, and couereth it vnder a vessell, neither putteth it vnder a table, but setteth it on a candelstike, that thei that enter in, maye se the lyghte.
Luke 8:17 Nothinge in secrete, that shall not come abrode: Neyther any thynge hyd that shall not be knowen, and come to light.
Luke 8:18 Take hede therfore how ye heare. For who soeuer hath, to hym shall be geuen: And whosoeuer hath not, from hym shal be taken, euen that same which he supposeth that he hath.
Luke 8:19 Then came to hym his mother and his brethren and coulde not come at hym for preace.
Luke 8:20 And they tolde him sayinge: Thy mother and thy brethren stande without, and woulde se the.
Luke 8:21 He aunswered and sayde vnto them: my mother and my brethren are these which heare the worde of God and do it.
Luke 8:22 And it chaunsed on a certaine daye that he went into a shippe, and his disciples also, and he sayed vnto them: Let vs go ouer to the other syde of the lake. And they lanched forth.
Luke 8:23 And as they sayled he fell on slepe, and there arose a storme of winde in the lake, and they were fylled with water, and were in ieopardy.
Luke 8:24 And they went to him and awoke him saiyng: Maister Maister we are loste. Then he rose & rebuked the winde & the tempeste of the water, & they ceased, & it wexed calme.
Luke 8:25 And he sayed vnto them: Wher is your faythe? They feared and woundered saiynge one to another, what felowe is this: for he commaundeth both the windes & water, & they obey him?
Luke 8:26 And they sayled vnto the region of the Gaderenites, which is ouer against Galile.
Luke 8:27 And as he went out to lande, there mete him a certaine man out of the citie, which had a deuil long time, & ware no clothes, neither abode in anye house: but amonge graues.
Luke 8:28 When he sawe Iesus he cried and fel doune before him, and with a loud voice saied: What haue I to do with the Iesus the sonne of the God moste hiest? I besech the tormente me not.
Luke 8:29 Then he commaunded the foule sprete to come out of the man. For oft times he caughte him, and he was bounde with chaines, and kept with fetters, and he brake the bondes, and was caried of and the fende, into wildernes.
Luke 8:30 And Iesus axed him saiynge: what is thy name? And he saied Legion, because many deuils were entred into him.
Luke 8:31 And they besought him, that he woulde not commaunde them to go out into the depe.
Luke 8:32 And there was therby an hearde of manie swine, feadinge on an hyl: and they besought him, that he woulde suffer them to enter into them. And he suffred.
Luke 8:33 Then wente the deuyls out of the man, and entred into the swine: and the hearde toke their course, and ranne headlinge into the lake, and were choked.
Luke 8:34 When the heardmen sawe what had chaunsed, they fled and tolde it in the cytye, and in the villages.
Luke 8:35 And they came out to se what was done: and came to Iesus, and founde the man out of whom the deuyls were departed syttynge at the fete of Iesus, clothed and in his ryghte mynde, and they were afrayed.
Luke 8:36 They also which sawe it tolde them by what meanes he that was possessed of the deuyll, was healed.
Luke 8:37 And all the whole multitude of the Gaderenites, besought hym that he woulde departe from them: for they were taken with greate feare. And he gate him into the shyppe, and retourned backe againe.
Luke 8:38 Then the man out of whom the deuils were departed, besought him that he myght be with him. But Iesus sent hym awaye saiynge.
Luke 8:39 Go home againe into thine owne house, and shewe what greate thinges God hath done to the. And he wente his waye, and preached thorow out all the cytye what great thinges Iesus hath done vnto him.
Luke 8:40 And it fortuned when Iesus was come againe that the people receiued him. For they all wayted for hym.
Luke 8:41 And beholde there came a man named Iairus (and he was a ruler of the synagoge) and he fell doune at Iesus fete, and besought hym that he woulde come into his house,
Luke 8:42 for he had but a doughter only vpon a twelwe yere of age, and she lay a diynge. As he wente the people thronged hym.
Luke 8:43 And a woman hauinge an yssue of bloude twelue yeares (whiche hath spent all her substaunce amonge phisycions, neyther coulde be holpen of anye)
Luke 8:44 came behinde him, and touched the heme of his garment and immediatlye her yssue of bloude staunched.
Luke 8:45 And Iesus sayde: Who is it that touched me? When euerye man denyed, Peter and they that were with him, saide: Mayster, the people thruste the and vexe the, and sayest thou who touched me?
Luke 8:46 And Iesus saide: Some bodye touched me. For I perceyue that vertue is gone out of me.
Luke 8:47 When the woman sawe that she was not hyd, she came trimblynge, and fell at his fete, and tolde hym before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and howe she was healed immediatlye.
Luke 8:48 And he sayde vnto her: Doughter be of good comfort. Thy faith hath made the whole, go in peace.
Luke 8:49 Whyle he yet spake, there came on from the rulers of the synagoges house, which said to hym thy doughter is dead, dysease not the maister.
Luke 8:50 When Iesus hearde that. He aunswered the father saiynge: Feare not beleue onelye, and she shalbe made whole.
Luke 8:51 And when he came to the house he suffered no man to go in with him, saue Peter, Iames, and Iohn, and the father and mother of the mayden.
Luke 8:52 Euerye bodye wepe and sorowed for her. And he sayd: Wepe not: for she is not dead but slepeth.
Luke 8:53 And they laughte hym to scorne. For they knewe that she was dead.
Luke 8:54 And he thruste them all out, and caught her by the hand, and cried saiynge: Mayde aryse.
Luke 8:55 And her spiryte came againe, and she arose straight waye. And he commaundeth to geue her meate.
Luke 8:56 And the father and the mother of her were astonied. But he warned theim that they shoulde tell no man, what was done.

CHAPTER: 9

Luke 9:1 Then called he the .xij. together, and gaue them power, and authoryte ouer all Deuyls, and that they myght heale diseases.
Luke 9:2 And he sent them to preache the kyngdome of God, and to cure the sycke.
Luke 9:3 And he sayed to them: Take nothinge to sucker you by the waye neither staffe, nor scrype, neyther bread neyther money, neither haue .ij. cotes.
Luke 9:4 And whatsoeuer house ye enter into, there abyde and thence departe:
Luke 9:5 And whosoeuer wyll not receyue you, when ye go out of that cytye shake of the verye dust from your fete, for a testimonye against them.
Luke 9:6 And they went out, and went through the tounes, preachyng the gospell: and healynge euerye wher.
Luke 9:7 And Herode the Tetrarch hearde of al that was done by hym, and doubted, because that it was sayde of some, that Iohn was rysen agayne from death,
Luke 9:8 and of some that Helyas had appeared: and of other that one of the olde prophetes was rysen agayne.
Luke 9:9 And Herode sayde: Ihon haue I beheaded: who then is this of whom I hearde such thinges? And he desyred to se hym.
Luke 9:10 And the Apollels retourned, and told him what great thinges thei had done. And he toke them and wente a syde into a solitary place nye to a cytye called Bethsayda.
Luke 9:11 And the people knew of it, & folowed him. And he receiued them and spake vnto them of the kingdome of God, and healed them that had nede to be healed.
Luke 9:12 And when the daye began to weare away then came the twelue and sayde vnto hym, sende the people awaye, that they maye go into the tounes and villages rounde aboute and lodge, and get meate, for we are here in a solytarye place or wyldernes.
Luke 9:13 But he sayed vnto them: Geue ye them to eate. And they sayde: We haue nomore but fyue loues and two fyshes, excepte we should goo & by meate, for al this people.
Luke 9:14 And they were about a fyue thousande men. And he sayd to his discyples: Cause them to syt doune by fyftyes in a company.
Luke 9:15 And they dyd so, and made them all syt doune.
Luke 9:16 And he toke the fiue loues and the two fishes, and loked vp to heauen: and blessed them, and brake, and gaue to the discyples, to set before the people.
Luke 9:17 And they eate, and were all satisfyed. And there was taken vp of that remained of them, twelue baskettes full of broken meate.
Luke 9:18 And it fortuned as he was alone praiynge: his disciples were with him, and he axed them saiyng: Who saye the people that I am?
Luke 9:19 They aunswered and sayd: Iohn Baptiste. Some saye, Helyas. And some saye, one of the olde prophetes is risen agayne.
Luke 9:20 He sayde vnto them: who saye ye that I am? Peter aunswered and sayde: thou arte the Christe of God.
Luke 9:21 And he warned and commaunded them that they shoulde tell no man that thynge
Luke 9:22 saiynge: that the sonne of man muste suffer manye thinges, and be reproued of the elders, and of the hye pryestes and scrybes and be slayne, & the thirde daye ryse agayne.
Luke 9:23 And he sayed to them all, if anye man wyll come after me, let him denye hym selfe, & take vp his crosse dayly, and folowe me.
Luke 9:24 Whosoeuer wyll saue his lyfe, shall lose it. And whosoeuer shall lose his lyfe for my sake, the same shall saue it.
Luke 9:25 For what auauntageth it a man to winne the whole worlde if he lose him selfe, or runne in damage of him selfe.
Luke 9:26 For whosoeuer is ashamed of me, and of my saiynges: of hym shall the sonne of man be ashamed, when he cometh in his owne glory, & the glory of his father, and of the holye aungels.
Luke 9:27 And I tell you of a surtye. Ther be some of them that stande here, which shall not taste of death, tyll they se the kingdome of God.
Luke 9:28 And it folowed about an .viij. dayes after those saiynge: that he toke Peter, Iames, and Iohn, and went vp into a mountaine to pray.
Luke 9:29 And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenaunce was chaunged, and his garment was white and shone.
Luke 9:30 And beholde, two men talked with him, and they were Moyses & Helias,
Luke 9:31 which appeared gloriouslye, and spake of his departinge, which he shoulde ende at Ierusalem,
Luke 9:32 Peter & they that were with him were heauy with slepe. And when they awoke, they sawe his glory, and two men standinge wyth hym.
Luke 9:33 And it chaunsed as they departed from him, Peter sayd vnto him: Maister, it is good beynge here for vs. Let vs make thre tabernacles, one for the, and one for Moyses, & one for Helyas, & wist not what the sayde.
Luke 9:34 Whyle he thus spake, ther came a cloude & shadowed them, and they feared when they were come vnder the cloude.
Luke 9:35 And ther came a voice out of the cloude saiynge. This is my deare sonne, heare hym.
Luke 9:36 And assone as the voyce was paste Iesus was founde alone. And they kept it close and tolde no man in those dayes anye of those thinges which they had sene.
Luke 9:37 And it chaunched on the nexte dayes as they came doune from the hill, much peopel mete hym.
Luke 9:38 And beholde a man of the company cried out saiyng: Maister, I beseche the beholde my sonne, for he is all that I haue:
Luke 9:39 and se, a sprete taketh him, and sodenlye he cryeth, and he teareth him that he fometh agayne, and wyth much payne departeth from hym, when he hath rent hym,
Luke 9:40 and I besought thy dyscyples to cast him out, and they coulde not.
Luke 9:41 Iesus aunswered and sayde: O generacyon without fayth, and croked, howe longe shall I be wyth you? & shall suffer you? Bringe thy sonne hyther.
Luke 9:42 As he yet was a commyng, the fende rent hym, and tare hym. And Iesus rebuked the vncleane spirite and healed the chyld, and delyuered hym to hys father.
Luke 9:43 And they were all amased at the myghtye power of God. Whyle they wondred euerye one at al thinges, whiche he dyd, he sayde vnto hys discyples:
Luke 9:44 Let these sayinges sinke doune into your eares. The tyme wil come, when the sonne of man shalbe delyuered into the handes of men.
Luke 9:45 But they wiste not what the worde meante, & it was hyd from them, that they vnderstode it not. And they feared to axe him of that sayinge.
Luke 9:46 Then there arose disputacyon amonge them: who should be the greatest.
Luke 9:47 When Iesus perceyued the thoughtes of theyr hertes, he toke a chylde, and set hym harde by hym,
Luke 9:48 & sayde vnto them. Whosoeuer receyueth thys chylde in my name receyueth me. And whosoeuer receyueth me, receyueth hym that sent me. For he that is least among you all the same shalbe great.
Luke 9:49 And Iohn aunswered and sayeth: Mayster we sawe one castyng out deuils in thy name, and we forbad hym, because he foloweth not with vs.
Luke 9:50 And Iesus sayed vnto hym: forbyd ye hym not. For he that is not agaynste vs: is with vs.
Luke 9:51 And it folowed when the tyme was come, that he shoulde be receyued vp, then he set his face to go to Ierusalem,
Luke 9:52 and sent messengers before hym. And they went and entred into a citye of the Samaritans: to make readye for hym.
Luke 9:53 But they woulde not receyue hym, because hys face was as thoughe he woulde go to Ierusalem.
Luke 9:54 When his disciples Iames and Iohn sawe that, they sayde: Lorde, wilte thou that we commaunde that fyre come doune from heauen and consume them, euen as Helyas dyd?
Luke 9:55 Iesus turned aboute, and rebuked them sayinge: ye wote not what maner spirite ye are of.
Luke 9:56 The sonne of man is not come to destroye mennes lyues, but to saue them. And they wente to another toune.
Luke 9:57 And it chaunsed as he went in the waye a certayne man sayde vnto hym: I wyl folowe the, whyther soeuer thou go.
Luke 9:58 Iesus sayd vnto him: foxes haue holes, and byrddes of the ayre haue nestes, but the sonne of man hathe not wheron to laye hys heade.
Luke 9:59 And he sayed vnto another: folow me. And the same sayde: Lorde suffer me fyrste to go & burye my father,
Luke 9:60 Iesus sayde vnto him. Let the dead burye her dead: but go thou & preach the kyngedome of God.
Luke 9:61 And another sayed: I wyll folowe the Lord but let me fyrste go byd them fare wel, which are at home at my house.
Luke 9:62 Iesus sayed vnto hym. No man that putteth hys hande to the plough, and loketh backe, is apte to the kyngdome of God.

CHAPTER: 10

Luke 10:1 After these thynges, the Lord appoynted other seuentye also: and sent them, two & two before him into euery citie and place, whyther he hym selfe woulde come.
Luke 10:2 And he sayed vnto them, the haruest is great, but the laborers are fewe. Praye therfore the Lorde of the harueste, to sende forth laborers into hys haruest.
Luke 10:3 Go youre wayes: beholde, I sende you forth as lambes among wolues.
Luke 10:4 Beare no wallet neyther scryppe, nor shues, and salute no man by the way.
Luke 10:5 Into whatsoeuer house ye enter, fyrste saye: Peace be to thys house.
Luke 10:6 And yf the sonne of peace be there your peace shal reste vpon hym: yf not, it shal returne to you agayne.
Luke 10:7 And in the same house tary styll, eatynge and drinckynge suche as they haue. For the labourer is worthy of thys rewarde. Go not from house to house,
Luke 10:8 & into whatsoeuer citie ye enter, yf they receyue you, eate suche thynges as are set before you,
Luke 10:9 and heale the sycke that are there, and say vnto them: the kyngedome of God is come nye vnto you.
Luke 10:10 But into whatsoeuer citie ye shall enter, yf they receyue you not, go youre wayes out into the streates of the same and saye:
Luke 10:11 euen the very duste, whiche cleaueth on vs of your citie, we wype of agaynste you. Notwithstandynge marke this that the kyngdome of God was come nye vpon you.
Luke 10:12 Yea, and I saye to you, that it shalbe easier in that daye for Zodome then for that citie.
Luke 10:13 Wo be to the Chorazim, wo be to the Bethsaida. For yf the myracles had bene done in Tyre and Sidon, whiche haue bene done in you, they had a great whyle a gone repented, sittynge in hayre and ashes.
Luke 10:14 Neuerthelesse, it shalbe easyer for Tyre and Sidon at the iudgement, then for you.
Luke 10:15 And thou Capernaum, which arte exalted to heauen, shalt be thruste doune to hell.
Luke 10:16 He that heareth you, heareth me, and he that dispyseth you, despyseth me: & he that despyseth me, despiseth hym that sente me.
Luke 10:17 And the seuenty returned againe with ioye saiynge. Lorde euen the very deuyls are subdued to vs throughe thy name.
Luke 10:18 And he sayde vnto them: I sawe Sathan, as it had bene lyghtenynge, fall doune from heauen.
Luke 10:19 Beholde, I geue vnto you power to treade on serpentes & scorpions, & ouer all maner power of the enemye, and nothynge shall hurte you.
Luke 10:20 Neuerthelesse, in thys reioyse not that the spirites are vnder youre power: but reioyse because your names are written in heauen.
Luke 10:21 That same time reioysed Iesus in the spirite, and sayde: I confesse vnto the father, Lorde of heauen and earth, that thou haste hyd these thynges from the wyse and prudente, and hast opened them to the babes. Euen so father for so pleased it the.
Luke 10:22 All thynges are geuen me of my father. And no man knoweth who the sonne is, but the father: neyther who the father is, saue the sonne, and he to whom the sonne wyll shewe hym.
Luke 10:23 And he turned to hys discyples, and sayed secretely: Happy are the eyes, which se that ye se.
Luke 10:24 For I tell you that many prophetes and kinges haue desyred to se those thinges which ye se, and haue not sene them, and to heare those thynges whiche ye heare and haue not hearde them.
Luke 10:25 And beholde a certaine lawyer stode vp, & tempted hym, saiynge: Mayster what shall I do to enherite eternall lyfe?
Luke 10:26 He sayed vnto him: What is writen in the law? how redest thou?
Luke 10:27 And he aunswered and sayde: Loue thy Lorde God with all thy hert, and with al thy soule, and with all thy mynde, and thy neyghboure as thy selfe.
Luke 10:28 And he sayed to hym: Thou haste aunswered ryght. Thys do and thou shalte lyue.
Luke 10:29 He wyllinge to iustifye hym self, sayde vnto Iesus. Who is then my neyghboure?
Luke 10:30 Iesus aunswered, and sayde: A certayne man descended from Ierusalem into Hierico, and fell into the handes of theues, which robbed hym of hys rayment, and wounded him, and departed leuynge him halfe dead.
Luke 10:31 And by chance there came a certayne priest that same waye, and when he sawe hym, he passed by.
Luke 10:32 And lykewyse a Leuite, when he was come nye to the place, went and loked on hym, and passed by.
Luke 10:33 Then a certayne Samaritayne, as he iournyed, came nye vnto hym, and when he sawe hym, he had compassion on hym,
Luke 10:34 and went to, and bounde vp hys woundes, & poureth in oyle and wyne, and put hym on hys owne beaste, and broughte him to a common ynne, and made prouysion for him.
Luke 10:35 And on the morowe when he departed, he toke oute two pence, and gaue them to the hoste, and sayde vnto hym: Take cure of him, and whatsoeuer thou spendest more, when I come agayne, I wyll recompence the.
Luke 10:36 Whiche nowe of these thre thinkest thou, was neyghboure vnto him that fell into the theues handes?
Luke 10:37 And he sayd: he that shewed mercy on hym. Then sayd Iesus vnto hym: Go, & do thou lykewyse.
Luke 10:38 It fortuned as they went, that he entred into a certayne toune. And a certayne woman named Martha, receyued hym into her house.
Luke 10:39 And this woman had a syster called Marye whiche sate at Iesus fete, and hearde his preachynge.
Luke 10:40 And Martha was combred aboute muche seruynge, and stode and sayed: Mayster doest thou not care, that my syster hath lefte me to mynister alone? Byd her therfore, that she helpe me.
Luke 10:41 And Iesu aunswered & said vnto her: Martha, Martha, thou carest, and arte troubled aboute manye thinges,
Luke 10:42 verelye one is nedefull. Marye hath chosen her that good part whiche shall not be taken away from her.

CHAPTER: 11

Luke 11:1 And it fortuned as he was praiynge in a certayne place: when he ceased, one of hys discyples said vnto hym: Mayster, teache vs to praye, as Iohn taught his disciples.
Luke 11:2 And he sayde vnto them: When ye pray saye: O oure father whiche arte in heauen, halowed be thy name. Thy kyngedome come. They will be fulfylled euen in earthe as it is in heauen.
Luke 11:3 Geue vs oure daylye breade euermore.
Luke 11:4 And forgeue vs oure synnes: For euen we forgeue euery man that trespasseth vs: And ledde vs not into temptacyon. But deliuer vs from euyll.
Luke 11:5 And he sayde vnto them: Yf any of you shoulde haue a frende, and shoulde go to hym at midnight, and saye vnto hym: frende lende me thre loues,
Luke 11:6 for a frende of myne is come out of the waye to me, and I haue nothinge to set before him:
Luke 11:7 and he within shoulde aunswere & saye: trouble me not, the dore is now shut, and my seruauntes are with me in the chamber, I cannot ryse, and geue them to the.
Luke 11:8 I saye vnto you, thoughe he woulde not arise and geue him, because he is hys frende: yet because of hys importunitie he wold ryse, and geue him as many as he neded.
Luke 11:9 And I saye vnto you: axe and it shalbe geuen you. Seke, and ye shal finde. Knocke, and it shalbe opened vnto you.
Luke 11:10 For euery one that axeth, receyueth: and he that seketh, findeth: & to hym that knocketh shall it be opened
Luke 11:11 Yf the sonne shall axe bread of any of you that is a father, will he geue him a stone? Or yf he axe fishe, will he for a fishe geue hym a serpente?
Luke 11:12 Or yf he axe an egge, wyl he offer hym a scorpion?
Luke 11:13 Yf ye then which are euill, can geue good gyftes vnto youre chyldren, howe much more shall the father of heauen geue an holy spirite to them that desyre it of hym?
Luke 11:14 And he was castynge oute a deuyll, which was domme. And it folowed when the deuyl was gone out, the domme spake, & the people wondred.
Luke 11:15 But some of them sayed: he casteth out deuyls by the power of Belzebub the chief of the deuyls.
Luke 11:16 And other tempted hym, seking of him a signe from heauen.
Luke 11:17 But he knew their thoughtes, and sayd vnto them: Euery kingdome deuyded within it selfe, shalbe desolate: and one house shall fall vpon another:
Luke 11:18 So yf Satan be deuyded with in him selfe: how shal hys kyngdome endure? Because ye saye that I caste oute deuils by the power of Belzebub
Luke 11:19 If I by the power of Belzebub caste oute deuyls: by whom do youre chyldren caste them oute? Therefore shall they be youre iudges.
Luke 11:20 But yf I with the finger of God caste oute deuyls, no doubte the kyngedome of God is come.
Luke 11:21 When a strong man armed, watched hys house, that he possesseth is in peace.
Luke 11:22 But when a stronger then he cometh vpon hym & ouercommeth hym: he taketh from hym his harnes, wherin he trusted and deuydeth hys goodes.
Luke 11:23 He that is not with me, is agaynste me. And he that gadereth not with me, scatereth.
Luke 11:24 When the vncleane spirite is gone oute of a man, he walketh through waterles places, sekynge reste. And when he fyndeth none, he sayeth, I wyll returne agayne vnto my house whence I came out.
Luke 11:25 And when he cometh, he findeth it swepte and garnyshed.
Luke 11:26 Then goeth he and taketh to him seuen other spirites worse then hym selfe: and they enter in, and dwell there. And the ende of that man, is worsse then the begynnynge.
Luke 11:27 And it fortuned as he spake those thinges, a certayne woman of the companye lyft vp her voyce, and sayde vnto hym: Happy is the wombe that bare the, and the pappes whiche gaue the sucke.
Luke 11:28 But he sayde: Yea, happye are they that heare the worde of God, and kepe it.
Luke 11:29 When the people were gathered thycke together: he began to saye: Thys is an euyll nacyon: they seke a signe, and there shal no signe be geuen them, but the signe of Ionas the prophet.
Luke 11:30 For as Ionas was a signe to the Niniuites, so shall the sonne of man be to thys nacion.
Luke 11:31 The quene of the south shall ryse at iudgement with the men of thys generation: & condempne them: for she came from the ende of the world to heare the wysdome of Salomon. And beholde a greater then Salomon is here.
Luke 11:32 The men of Niniue shall ryse at the iudgement wt thys generacyon, and condempne them: for they repented at the preaching of Ionas. And beholde a greater then Ionas is here.
Luke 11:33 No man lyghteth a candell, & putteth in a pryuy place, neyther vnder a bushell: but on a candelsticke, that they that come in, maye se the lyght.
Luke 11:34 The lyght of thy body is the eye Therfor when thyne eye is single: then is al thy body full of lyghte. But yf thyne eye be euyll: then shall thy bodye also be ful of darknes.
Luke 11:35 Take hede therfore that the lyght whiche is in the, be not darcknes.
Luke 11:36 For yf all thy body shalbe lyght, hauyng no parte darke, then shal all be full of lyght, euen as when a candell doth lyght the with hys brightnes.
Luke 11:37 And as he spake, a certayne Pharisey besought hym to done with hym, and he wente in, & sat doune.
Luke 11:38 When the Pharisei sawe that he marueyled that he had not fyrste weshed before dyner.
Luke 11:39 And the Lorde sayde to hym: Now do ye pharyses make cleane the outsyde of the cup, and of the platter: but your inward parties are full of rauenyng and wickednes.
Luke 11:40 Ye foles, dyd not he that made that which is without: make that whiche is within also?
Luke 11:41 Neuerthelesse geue almose of that ye haue, and beholde all is cleane to you.
Luke 11:42 But wo be to you Pharyses: for the tyth the mint and rew, and al maner herbes, and passe ouer iudgement and the loue of God. These ought ye to haue lefte the other vndone.
Luke 11:43 Wo be to you Pharises, for ye loue the vppermost seates in the synagoges, and gretynges in the markettes.
Luke 11:44 Wo be to you scribes and pharyses, hypocrites, for ye are as graues which appere not, and the men that walke ouer them, are not ware of them.
Luke 11:45 Then aunswered one of the lawyers, and sayed vnto hym: Mayster, thus saiyng, thou puttest vs to rebuke also.
Luke 11:46 Then he sayde: Wo be to you also ye lawyars, for ye lade men wt burthens greuous to be borne, and ye youre selues touche not the packes with one of your fyngers.
Luke 11:47 Wo be to you: ye buylde the sepulchres of of the Prophetes, and youre fathers kylled them,
Luke 11:48 truelye ye beare witnes, that ye alowe the deedes of youre fathers: for they kylled them, and ye buylde theyr sepulchres.
Luke 11:49 Therfore sayde the wysdome of God: I wyll send them Prophetes and Apostles, and of them they shall slea and persecute,
Luke 11:50 that the bloude of all Prophetes which was shede from the beginnynge of the worlde, maye be requyred of thys generacion
Luke 11:51 from the bloude of Abell vnto the bloude of Zacharye, whiche peryshed betwene the aulter and the temple. Verelye I saye vnto you, it shalbe requyred of thys nacyon.
Luke 11:52 Wo be to you lawyers: for ye haue taken away the keye of knoweledge, ye entred not in your selues, and them that came in, ye forbade.
Luke 11:53 When he thus spake vnto them, the lawyers, and the Pharyses began to wexe busye aboute hym, and to stop hys mouthe with manye questyons,
Luke 11:54 layinge wayte for hym, and sekynge to catche some thynge of hys mouthe, whereby they myghte accuse hym.

CHAPTER: 12

Luke 12:1 As there gathered together an innumerable multitude of people (in so muche that they trode one another) he began to saye vnto hys discyples: Fyrste of all beware of the leuen of the Phariseis, which is hypocrisye.
Luke 12:2 For there is nothynge couered the shall not be vncouered: neyther hydde, that shall not be knowen.
Luke 12:3 For whatsoeuer ye haue spoken in darknes: that same shall be hearde in lyghte. And that whiche ye haue spoken in the eare, euen in secrete places, shall be preached euen on the toppe of the housses.
Luke 12:4 I saye vnto you my frendes: Be not afrayde of them that kyll the bodye, and after that haue no more that they can do.
Luke 12:5 But I wil shew you whom ye shall feare. Feare hym whiche after he hath kylled, hath power to caste into hell. Yea I saye vnto you, hym feare.
Luke 12:6 Are not fyue sparrowes bought for .ij. farthynges? And yet not one of them is forgotten of God.
Luke 12:7 Also euen the very heares of your heades are numbred. Feare not therfore: Ye are more of value then many sparowes.
Luke 12:8 I saye vnto you whosoeuer confesseth me before men, euen hym shall the sonne of man confesse also before the Angels of God.
Luke 12:9 And he that denyeth me before men, shalbe denied before the Angels of God.
Luke 12:10 And whosoeuer speaketh a worde agaynste the sonne of man it shall be forgeuen hym. But vnto hym, that blasphemeth the holy ghost, it shall not be forgeuen.
Luke 12:11 When they brynge you vnto the synagoges and vnto the rulers and offycers take no thoughte, how or what thynge ye shall aunswere or what ye shall speake.
Luke 12:12 For the holye ghost shal teache you in the same houre, what ye ought to saye.
Luke 12:13 One of the companye sayde vnto hym: Mayster byd my brother deuyde the enherytaunce with me.
Luke 12:14 And he sayde vnto hym: Man who made me a iudge or deuyder ouer you?
Luke 12:15 Wherfore, he sayde vnto them: take hede, and beware of coueteousnes. For no mannes lyfe standeth in the abundaunce of the thynges whiche he possesseth.
Luke 12:16 And he put forth a simylitude vnto them, sayinge. The grounde of a certayne ryche man brought forth frutes plenteouslye,
Luke 12:17 and he thoughte in hym selfe sayinge: what shall I do? because I haue no roume where to bestowe my frutes?
Luke 12:18 And he sayed: Thys will I do. I wyl destroy my barnes, and buylde greater, and therein wyll I gather all my frutes, and my goodes,
Luke 12:19 and I wyll saye to my soule: Soule thou hast muche goodes layde vp in store for many yeares: take thyne ease, eate, drinke, and be mery.
Luke 12:20 But God sayed vnto hym: Thou fole, thys nyghte wyll they fetche awaye thy soule agayne from the. Then whose shall these thinges be which thou haste prouyded?
Luke 12:21 So is it with hym that gathereth ryches, and is not ryche in God.
Luke 12:22 And he spake vnto hys disciples: Therfor I saye vnto you: Take no thoughte for youre lyfe, what ye shal eate, neyther for your body what ye shal put on.
Luke 12:23 The lyfe is more then meate, and the bodye is more then raymente.
Luke 12:24 Consyder the rauens, for they neyther sowe, nor repe, which neyther haue store house nor barne, and yet God fedeth them. Howe muche are ye better then the fowles.
Luke 12:25 Which of you with takynge thoughte can adde to hys stature one cubyte?
Luke 12:26 Yf ye then be not able to do that thyng whiche is least: why take ye thoughte for the remnaunt?
Luke 12:27 Consyder the lylyes howe they growe. They laboure not, they spin not, and yet I saye vnto you: that Salomon in all hys royaltte, was not clothed lyke to one of these.
Luke 12:28 If the grasse whiche is to daye in the fielde and to morowe shalbe caste into the fornace, God so cloth: howe muche more wyl he clothe you, o ye endued with lytell faythe.
Luke 12:29 And are not what ye shall eate, or what ye shall drinke, neyther climme ye vp an hye:
Luke 12:30 for all suche thynges the heathen people of the worlde seke for. Your father knoweth that ye haue nede of suche thinges.
Luke 12:31 Wherfore seke ye after the kyngdome of God, and all these thynges shall be ministred vnto you.
Luke 12:32 Feare not litel flocke, for it is your fathers pleasure, to geue you a kingdom.
Luke 12:33 Sell that ye haue, and geue almes. And make you bagges whiche were not old, and treasure that faileth not in heauen, where no these cometh, neyther mothe corrupteth.
Luke 12:34 For where youre treasure is there wyll youre hertes be also.
Luke 12:35 Let youre loynes be gerdde aboute, & your lyghtes brennynge,
Luke 12:36 and ye youre selues lyke vnto men, that wayte for theyr maister, when he wyll returne from a weddyng: that assone as he commeth and knocketh, they may open vnto hym.
Luke 12:37 Happye are those seruauntes, whom the Lorde when he commeth, shall fynde wakynge: Verely I saye vnto you, he wyll girde hym selfe aboute, and make them sytte doune to meate, & walke by, & mynyster vnto them.
Luke 12:38 And yf he come in the seconde watche, yea yf he come in the thyrd watche, and shal fynd them so: happye are those seruauntes.
Luke 12:39 Thys vnderstande, that yf the good man of the house knewe what houre that these would come, he woulde surely watche, and not suffer hys house to be broken vp.
Luke 12:40 Be ye prepared therfore: for the sonne of man will come at an houre, when ye thynke not.
Luke 12:41 Then Peter sayd vnto hym: Mayster tellest thou thys similitude vnto vs, or to al men?
Luke 12:42 And the Lorde sayd: Yf there be any faithful seruaunte and wyse, whom hys Lorde shall make ruler ouer hys housholde, to geue them theyr dutye of meate at due season:
Luke 12:43 happy is that seruaunt: whom hys mayster when he commeth, shall fynde so doinge.
Luke 12:44 Of a truth I say vnto you: that he wyl make hym ruler ouer all that he hath:
Luke 12:45 But and yf the euyll seruaunte shall saye in hys herte. My mayster wyll deferre hys commynge, & shall begynne to smyte the seruauntes, & maydens and to eate and drynke and to be droncken:
Luke 12:46 the lorde of that seruaunte wyll come in a daye when he thynketh not: and at an houre when he is not ware, and wyll deuyde hym, & wyll geue hym hys rewarde with the vnbeleuers.
Luke 12:47 The seruaunt that knewe hys maysters wyl, and prepared not hym selfe, neyther dyd accordynge to his will, shalbe beaten with many strypes.
Luke 12:48 But he that knewe not, & yet dyd commytte thynges worthye of strypes, shalbe beaten with fewe stripes. For vnto whome muche is geuen, of him shalbe muche requyred. And to whom men muche committe, the more of hym will they axe.
Luke 12:49 I am come to sende fyre on earth, & what is my desyre but that it were all ready kyndled?
Luke 12:50 Notwithstandyng I muste be baptysed with a baptisme, and howe am I payned tyll it be ended?
Luke 12:51 Suppose ye that I am come to sende peace on earth? I tell you naye, but rather debate.
Luke 12:52 For from henceforth there shalbe fyue in one house deuyded, thre againste two, and two agaynst thre.
Luke 12:53 The father shalbe deuyded agaynste the sonne, and the sonne agaynst the father. The mother agaynst her doughter, and the doughter agaynst the mother. The motherelawe agaynst her doughter lawe, and the doughterelawe agaynste her motherlawe.
Luke 12:54 Then sayde he to the people: when ye se a cloude ryse out of the west, strayght waye ye saye. We shall haue a sower, and so it is.
Luke 12:55 And when ye se the southe wynde blowe, ye saye: we shall haue heate, and it commeth to passe.
Luke 12:56 Hypocrites, ye can skyll of the fashyon of the earth, and of the skye, but what is the cause that ye can not skyll of thys tyme?
Luke 12:57 Ye and why iudge ye not of yourselues, what is ryghte?
Luke 12:58 Whyle thou goest with thyne aduersarye to the ruler, as thou arte in the waye, geue dyligence that thou mayest be delyuered from hym, leaste he brynge the to the iudge, and the iudge deliuer the to the iayler, & the iayler cast the into pryson.
Luke 12:59 I tell the, thou departest not thence, tyll thou haue made good the vttermoste myte.

CHAPTER: 13

Luke 13:1 There were presente at the same season, that shewed hym of the Galileans, whose bloud Pilate mengled with theyr owne sacrifice.
Luke 13:2 And Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto them: Suppose ye that these Galileans were greater synnes then all the other Galileans, because they suffred suche punishment?
Luke 13:3 I tell you naye: but excepte ye repente, ye shall all lykewyse peryshe.
Luke 13:4 Or those .xviij. vpon whome the towre in Siloe fell, & slewe them, thinke ye that they were sinners aboue all men that dwell in Hierusalem?
Luke 13:5 I tell you naye: But excepte ye repente, ye shal al lykewyse peryshe.
Luke 13:6 He put forth this similitude: A certayne man had a fygge tree planted in hys vyneyarde, & he came and sought frute theron, and founde none.
Luke 13:7 Then sayde he to the dresser of hys vyneyard: Beholde thys thre yeare haue I come and sought frute in thys fygge tre, and fynde none, cut it doune: why comvreth it the grounde.
Luke 13:8 And he aunswered, & sayde vnto hym: Lorde let it alone thys yeare also, tyll I digge rounde aboute it, and dounge it,
Luke 13:9 to se whether it wyl beare frute, and yf it beare not then, after that cut it doune.
Luke 13:10 And he taughte in one of theyr synagoges on the Saboth dayes.
Luke 13:11 And beholde there was a woman which had a spirite of infirmytye .xviij. yeares, and was bowed together, and coulde not lyfte vp her selfe at all.
Luke 13:12 When Iesus sawe her, he called her to hym, and sayed to her: woman thou arte delyuered from thy dysease.
Luke 13:13 And he layde hys handes on her, and immediatly she was made strayght, and gloryfyed God.
Luke 13:14 And the ruler of the synagoge aunswered with indignacion (because that Iesus had healed on the Saboth daye) & sayed vnto the people. There are .vi. dayes, in whiche men oughte to worke, in them come and be healed, & not on the Saboth daye.
Luke 13:15 Then aunswered hym the Lorde, and said: Hypocryte, doth not eache one of you on the saboth daye, lowse hys oxe or hys asse from the stall, and leade hym to the water
Luke 13:16 And ought not thys doughter of Abraham, whome Satan hath bounde lo .xviij. yeares, be lowsed from thys bonde on the Saboth daye?
Luke 13:17 And when he thus sayde, al hys aduersaryes were ashamed, and all the people reioysed on all the excellent dedes, that were done by hym.
Luke 13:18 Then sayde he: what is the kyngedome of God lyke? or whereto shall I compare it?
Luke 13:19 It is lyke a grayne of mustarde seede, whiche a man toke and sowed in hys garden: & it grew and wexed a greate tree, and the foules of the ayre made nestes in the braunches of it.
Luke 13:20 And agayne he sayed, where vnto shall I lyken the kyngedome of God?
Luke 13:21 it is lyke leuen, which a woman toke, and hyd in thre bushels of floure, tyll all was thorowe leuended.
Luke 13:22 And he went thorowe all maner of cities & tounes teachynge and iorneynge towardes Hierusalem.
Luke 13:23 Then sayde one vnto hym: Lorde, are ther fewe that shalbe saued? And he sayde vnto them:
Luke 13:24 stryue with your selues to enter in at the strayte gate: For manye I saye vnto you wyl seke to enter in, & shal not be able.
Luke 13:25 When the good man of the house is rysen vp, and hathe shut to the dore, ye shall begynne to stande without, and to knocke at the dore, saiynge: Lorde Lorde open to vs: and he shall aunswere and saye vnto you: I knowe you not whence ye are.
Luke 13:26 Then shal ye begyn to say: We haue eaten, in thy presence and dronke, and thou haste taught in oure stretes.
Luke 13:27 And he shall saye: I tell you I knowe you not whence ye are: departe frome me all ye workers of iniquitie.
Luke 13:28 There shalbe wepynge and gnashing of teth, when ye shall se Abraham and Isaac and Iacob, and all the Prophetes in the kingdome of God, and your selues thruste oute at dores.
Luke 13:29 And they shall come from the easte & from the west, and from the northe, and from the southe, and shall sit doune in the kyngdom of God.
Luke 13:30 And beholde there are laste whiche shalbe fyrste. And there are fyrste which shal be laste.
Luke 13:31 The same daye there came certayne of the Pharises and sayde to him: Get the out of the waye, and departe hence: For Herode wyl kil the.
Luke 13:32 And he sayed vnto them, Go ye and tell that foxe, beholde I caste oute deuyls, & heale the people to day and to morowe, and the third daye I make an ende.
Luke 13:33 Neuertheles, I must walke to daye and to morowe and the daye folowynge. For it can not be, that a prophet perysh any other wher, saue at Hierusalem
Luke 13:34 O Hierusalem, Hierusalem, whiche killest Prophetes, and stonest them that are sent to the: howe often woulde I haue gathered thy chyldren together, as the hen gathered her neste vnder her wynges, but ye would not.
Luke 13:35 Beholde your habitacion shall be lefte vnto you desolate. For I tell you, ye shal not se me vntyll the tyme come that ye shall say, blessed is he that commeth in the name of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 14

Luke 14:1 And it chaunsed that he went into the house of one of the chiefe Phariseis to eate breade, on a Saboth daye: and they watched hym.
Luke 14:2 And beholde there was a man before hym whiche had the dropsye.
Luke 14:3 And Iesus aunswered and spake vnto the lawyars and Pharyseis sayinge: is it lawfull to heale on the Saboth daye?
Luke 14:4 And they helde theyr peace: And he toke hym, and healed him, and let hym go:
Luke 14:5 and aunswered them saying, which of you shall haue an asse, or an oxe fallen into a pytte, and wyll not straighte waye pul him out on the Saboth daye?
Luke 14:6 And they coulde not aunswere hym agayne to that.
Luke 14:7 He put forth a similitude to the gestes, when he marked howe they preased to the hyest roumes, and sayed vnto them:
Luke 14:8 When thou arte bydden to a weddynge of anye man, sit not downe in the hyest roume, least a more honorable man then thou be bydden of hym,
Luke 14:9 & he that bade both hym and the, come and saye to the: geue thys man roume, and thou then begynne with shame to take the lowest roume.
Luke 14:10 But rather when thou arte bydden, go and sit in the lowest roume, that when he that bade the, commeth, he maye saye vnto the frende sit vp hyer. Then shalte thou haue worshyppe in the preseuce of them that sitte at meat with the.
Luke 14:11 For whosoeuer exalteth him selfe, shalbe broughte lowe. And he that humbleth him selfe, shalbe exalted.
Luke 14:12 Then sayde he also to hym that had desyered hym to dyner. When thou makest a dyner or a supper: call not thy frendes, nor thy brethren, neyther thy kynsmen nor yet ryche neyghboures: least they byd the agayne, and a recompence be made the.
Luke 14:13 But when thou makest a feaste, call the poore the maymed, the lame, and the blynde,
Luke 14:14 & thou shalte be happy, for they can not recompence the. But thou shalte be recompensed at the resurreccyon of the iust men.
Luke 14:15 When one of them that sate at meate also hearde that, he sayed vnto hym: happye is he that eateth breade in the kyngdom of God.
Luke 14:16 Then sayde he to hym. A certayne man ordeyned a greate supper, and bade manye,
Luke 14:17 & sente hys seruaunte at supper tyme to saye to them that were bydden, come, for all thynges are nowe readye.
Luke 14:18 And they all at once began to make excuse. The fyrste sayed vnto him: I haue boughte a ferme, and muste nedes go, & se it, I pray the haue me excused.
Luke 14:19 And another sayed: I haue bought fyue yocke of oxen, and I go to proue them, I praye the haue me excused.
Luke 14:20 The thyrde sayed: I haue maryed a wyfe and therfore I can not come.
Luke 14:21 And the seruaunt went and brought his mayster worde therof. Then was the good man of the house displeased, and sayed to hys seruaunt: Go oute quickly into the streates and quarters of the citie, and brynge in hyther the poore, and the maymed and the halte and the blynde.
Luke 14:22 And the seruaunt sayde: Lorde it is done as thou commaundest, and yet there is roume.
Luke 14:23 And the Lorde sayd to the seruaunt: Go oute into the hygh waies, and hedges and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.
Luke 14:24 For I saye vnto you that none of those men which were bydden, shall tast of my supper.
Luke 14:25 There went a great companye with him, and he turned and sayde vnto them:
Luke 14:26 If a man come to me, and hate not hys father and mother, and wyfe, and chyldren and brethren & systers, moreouer and hys owne lyfe, he can not be my disciple.
Luke 14:27 And whosoeuer beare not his crosse, and come after me can not be my disciple.
Luke 14:28 Which of you disposed to buylde a tower, sitteth not doune before, & counteth the costes whether he haue sufficient to performe it,
Luke 14:29 leste after he hath layde the foundacion, and is not able to performe it, all that beholde it beginne to mocke hym,
Luke 14:30 saiyng: this man beganne to buylde, and was not able to make an end.
Luke 14:31 Or what kynge goeth to make batayle agaynste another kynge, & sytteth not doune fyrste, and casteth in hys mynd, whyther he be able with ten thousande to mete hym that cometh against him with twentye thousande.
Luke 14:32 Or els whyle the other is yet a great waye of, he wyll send embassetours, and desire peace.
Luke 14:33 So likewise none of you that forsaketh not all that he hath, can be my discyple.
Luke 14:34 Salt is good, but yf salt haue loste her saltnes, what shall be seasoned therwith?
Luke 14:35 It is neyther good for the lande nor yet for the doung hyll, but men caste it out at the dores. He that hath eares to heare, let hym heare.

CHAPTER: 15

Luke 15:1 Then resorted vnto hym all the Publycans and synners for to heare hym.
Luke 15:2 And the Pharises & Scribes murmured saiyng. He receyued to hys company synners, and eateth with them.
Luke 15:3 Then put he forth thys similytude to them. saying:
Luke 15:4 What man of you hauynge an hundred shepe, yf he loose one of them, doth not leaue nynty and nyne in the wildernes, and go after that which is lost vntyl he fynde hym?
Luke 15:5 And when he hath found hym, he putteth hym on hys shoulders wyth ioye.
Luke 15:6 And assone as he cometh home, he calleth together his louers and neyghboures, saiyng vnto them: reioyse with me, for I haue found my shepe whiche was lost.
Luke 15:7 I saye vnto you, that lykewyse ioye shalbe in heauen ouer one synner, that repenteth, more then ouer nyntye and nyne iust persons whiche nede no repentaunce.
Luke 15:8 Eyther what woman hauyng .x. grotes yf she loose one, doth not lyght a candell, and swepe the house, and seke diligentlye, tyll she fynde it?
Luke 15:9 And when she hath founde it, she calleth her louers and her neyghboures, saiyng: Reioyse with me, for I haue founde the grote which I had lost.
Luke 15:10 Lykewyse I saye vnto you ioye is made in the presence of the Angels of God ouer one synner that repenteth.
Luke 15:11 And he sayde: A certayne man had two sonnes,
Luke 15:12 and the yonger of them sayde to hys father: geue me my parte of the goodes that to me belongeth. And he deuyded vnto them hys substaunce.
Luke 15:13 And not longe after, the yonger sonne gathered all that he had together, & toke hys iorneye into a farre countrye, & there he wasted hys goodes with ryetous liuing.
Luke 15:14 And when he had spent all that he had, there arose a great dearth throughout all that same lande, & he began to lacke.
Luke 15:15 And he wente and claue to a citesyn of the same countrye, whiche sent hym to hys fielde, to kepe hys swyne.
Luke 15:16 And he woulde fayne haue fylled hys bellye with the codes that swyne eate. And no man gaue hym.
Luke 15:17 Then he came to hym selfe, and sayed: Howe many hyred seruauntes at my fathers haue breade ynough, and I dye for honger,
Luke 15:18 I wyll aryse, and go to my father, and will say vnto hym: father I haue synned agaynst heauen and before the,
Luke 15:19 and am no more worthye to be called thy sonne, make me as one of thy hyred seruauntes.
Luke 15:20 And he arose and wente to his father. And when he was yet a great way of, hys father sawe hym, and had compassyon and ran and fell on hys necke, & kyssed hym.
Luke 15:21 And the sonne sayed vnto him: father, I haue synned agaynst heauen in thy syghte, & am no more worthy to be called thy sonne.
Luke 15:22 But hys father sayed to hys seruauntes: brynge forthe that beste garmentes, & put it on hym, and put a rynge on hys hande, & showes on hys fete.
Luke 15:23 And brynge hyther the fatted caulfe and kyll hym, and let vs eate and be merye:
Luke 15:24 for thys my sonne was dead, and is alyue agayne, he was lost and is nowe founde. And they beganne to be mery.
Luke 15:25 The elder brother was in the fielde, & when he came, & drewe nye to the house, he hearde minstrelcy and daunsynge,
Luke 15:26 and called one of hys seruauntes, and axed what those thinges meant.
Luke 15:27 And he sayed vnto him: thy brother is come, & thy father hath killed the fatted caulfe, because he hath receyued hym safe and sound.
Luke 15:28 And he was angrye, and woulde not go in. Then came hys father out, and intreated him
Luke 15:29 He aunswered and sayde to his father: Loo this many yeares haue I done the seruice, neyther brake at any tyme thy commaundement, & yet gauest thou me neuer so muche as a kyd to make mery with my louers:
Luke 15:30 but assone as this thy sonne was come, which hath deuoured thy goodes with harlotes, thou hast for his pleasure kylled the fatted caulfe.
Luke 15:31 And he sayde vnto hym: sonne thou wast euer with me, and all that I haue, is thyne.
Luke 15:32 It was mete that we shoulde make merye, and be glad: for this thy brother was dead, and is aliue again and was loste, and is founde.

CHAPTER: 16

Luke 16:1 And he sayed also vnto his disciples. There was a certayne ryche man which had a steward that was accused vnto him: that he wasted hys goodes.
Luke 16:2 And he called hym, and sayde vnto hym: Howe is it, that I heare thys of the? Geue a comptes of thy stewardshyppe. For thou mayest be no longer stewarde.
Luke 16:3 The stewarde sayde within hym selfe, what shall I do? for my mayster wyll take away from me the stewardshyppe. I can not dygge, and to begge, I am ashamed.
Luke 16:4 I wote what to do, that when I am put oute of stewardshyppe, they maye receyue me into theyr houses.
Luke 16:5 Then called he all hys maysters detters, & sayed vnto the first, how much owest thou vnto my mayster?
Luke 16:6 And he sayed: an hundred tonnes of oyle. And he sayed to hym: take thy bil and sit doune quicklye, and wryte fyftye.
Luke 16:7 Then sayed he to another: what owest thou? And he sayed: an hundred quarters of wheate. He said to hym: Take thy byll, and write foure scoore.
Luke 16:8 And the Lord commended the vniust steward because he had done wyslye. For the chyldren of thys worlde are in theyr kynde, wyser then the chyldren of lyght,
Luke 16:9 And I saye also vnto you: make you frendes, of the wycked mammon, that when ye shall depart, they maye receyue you into euerlastynge habitacyons.
Luke 16:10 He that is faythfull in that whiche is least, the same is faythfull in muche. And he that is vnfaythfull in the least, is vnfaythfull also in muche.
Luke 16:11 So then yf ye haue not ben faythfull in the wycked Mammon: who wyll beleue you in that which is true?
Luke 16:12 And yf ye haue not bene faythfull in another mannes busynes, who shall geue you your owne?
Luke 16:13 No seruaunte can serue two maysters, for other he shal hate the one and loue the other, or els he shall leane to the one, and despyse the other. Ye can not serue God and Mammon.
Luke 16:14 All these thynges hearde the phariseis also which were couetous, and they mocked hym.
Luke 16:15 And he sayde vnto them: Ye are they whiche iustifye your selues before men: but God knoweth your hertes. For that which is highly estemed amonge men, is abhominable in the syght of God.
Luke 16:16 The lawe and the Prophetes raygned vntyll the tyme of Iohn: and sence that tyme the kyngdom of God is preached, and euery man stryueth to go in.
Luke 16:17 Soner shall heauen & earthe peryshe, then one title of the lawe shal perish.
Luke 16:18 Whosoeuer forsaketh his wyfe and maryeth another, breaketh matrimony. And euery man which maryeth her that is deforsed from her husbande comitteth aduoutrye also.
Luke 16:19 There was a certayne ryche man, whiche was clothed in purple and fyne bysse, & fared delyciously euery daye,
Luke 16:20 And there was a certayne begger named Lazarus, whiche laye at hys gate full of sores,
Luke 16:21 desierynge to be refresshed with the cromes which fell from the riche mans bourde. Neuerthelesse the dogges came and lycked hys sores.
Luke 16:22 And it fortuned that the begger dyed, and was caryed by the Angels into Abrahams bosome. The ryche man also dyed and was buryed.
Luke 16:23 And beynge in hell in tormentes, he lyfte vp hys eyes, and sawe Abraham a farre of, & Lazarus in his bosome,
Luke 16:24 and he cryed & sayed: father Abraham haue mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he maye dyppe the typpe of his fynger in water, and cole my tonge, for I am tormented in this flamme.
Luke 16:25 But Abraham sayd vnto hym. Sonne, remembre that thou in thy lyfe tyme, receyuedest thy pleasure, and contrarywyse Lazarus payne. Nowe therfore is he conforted, and thou arte punyshed.
Luke 16:26 Beyonde all thys, betwene you and vs there is a great space set, so that they whiche would go from hence to you can not, neyther maye come from thence to vs.
Luke 16:27 Then he sayed: I praye the therfore father, sende hym to my fathers house.
Luke 16:28 For I haue fyue brethren, for to warne them lest they also come into thys place of tormente.
Luke 16:29 Abraham said vnto hym: they haue Moyses and the Prophetes: let them heare them.
Luke 16:30 And he sayd: nay father Abraham, but yf one came vnto them from the dead, they woulde repent.
Luke 16:31 He sayed vnto hym: yf they heare not Moyses, and the Prophetes, neyther wyll they beleue, though one rose from death agayne.

CHAPTER: 17

Luke 17:1 Then sayde he to the disciples, it cannot be auoyded but that offences will come. Neuerthelesse wo be to hym: through whome they come.
Luke 17:2 It were better for him that a mylstone were hanged about his necke. and that he were cast into the sea, then that he shoulde offende one of these litelons.
Luke 17:3 Take hede to youre selues. Yf thy brother trespasse agaynst the, rebuke hym,
Luke 17:4 and yf he repent, forgeue hym. And thoughe he synne agaynst the seuen tymes in a day, & seuen tymes in a day tourne agayne to the saiyng: it repenteth me, forgeue hym.
Luke 17:5 And the Apostles sayed vnto the Lorde: encrease oure fayth.
Luke 17:6 And the Lorde sayde: yf ye had fayth lyke a grayne of mustarde seede, and shoulde say vnto thys sycamine tree, plucke thy selfe vp by the rootes, and plante thy selfe in the sea: he should obeye you.
Luke 17:7 Who is it of you, yf he had a seruaunt plowyng or fedynge catell, that woulde say vnto hym when he were come from the fielde. Go quickly, and sit doune to meate,
Luke 17:8 and woulde not rather say to him: dresse, wherwith I may suppe, and gyrde vp thy selfe, and serue me, til I haue eaten and droncken, & afterwarde eate thou, and drinke thou:
Luke 17:9 Doth he thanke that seruaunte, because he dyd that whiche was commaunded to hym? I trowe not.
Luke 17:10 So lykewyse ye, when ye haue done al those thinges: which are commaunded you, saye: we are vnprofytable seruauntes. We haue done that whiche was oure duetye to do.
Luke 17:11 And it chaunsed as he wente to Ierusalem that he passed through Samaria and Galile.
Luke 17:12 And as he entred into a certayne toune: there met hym .x. that were lepers. Whiche stode a farre
Luke 17:13 & put forth theyr voyces and sayde: Iesu maister, haue mercy on vs.
Luke 17:14 When he saw them he saide vnto them: Go and shew your selues to the priestes. And it chaunsed as they went, they were clensed.
Luke 17:15 And one of them when he sawe that he was clensed, turned backe agayn and with a loude voyce praysed God
Luke 17:16 and fel doune on his face at hys fete, & gaue him thankes. And the same was a Samaritane.
Luke 17:17 And Iesus aunswered and sayed: are there not ten clensed? But where are those nyne?
Luke 17:18 There are not founde that returned agayne to geue GOD prayse, saue only thys straunger.
Luke 17:19 And he said vnto him: aryse, and go thy waye, thy faythe hath made the whole.
Luke 17:20 When he was demaunded of the Pharises when the kyngdom of God shoulde come: he aunswered them, and sayd: The kingdome of God cometh not with waytyng for.
Luke 17:21 Neyther shal men saye: Lo here, lo there. For beholde the kyngdom of God is within you.
Luke 17:22 And he sayed to hys disciples: The dayes wyll come, when ye shall desyre to se one daye of the sonne of man, & ye shall not se it.
Luke 17:23 And they shall saye to you. Se here. Se there. Go not after them, nor folowe them,
Luke 17:24 for as the lyghtenynge that appeareth out of the one part of the heauen, and shyneth vnto the other parte of heauen: So shall the sonne of man be in his daye.
Luke 17:25 But fyrste muste he suffer manye thynges, and be refused of thys nacyon.
Luke 17:26 As it happened in the tyme of Noe: So shal it be in the tyme of the sonne of man.
Luke 17:27 They ate, they dranke, they maryed wyues, and were maryed euen vnto the same daye that Noe wente into the arke, and the floude came & destroyed them all.
Luke 17:28 Lykewyse also, as it chaunsed in the dayes of Lot. They ate, they dranke they bought, they solde, they planted, they buylte.
Luke 17:29 And euen the same daye that Lot went out of Zodome, it rayned fyre and brymstone from heauen, and destroyed them.
Luke 17:30 After these ensamples, shal it be in the daye when the sonne of man shall appeare.
Luke 17:31 At that daye he that is on the house toppe, and hys stuffe in the house: let him not come doune to take it out. And lykewyse let not him that is in the fielde turne backe agayne to that he lefte behynde.
Luke 17:32 Remembre Lottes wyfe
Luke 17:33 Whosoeuer wyll go about to saue his lyfe, shal lose it. And whosoeuer shal lose hys lyfe, shall saue it.
Luke 17:34 I tel you: In that nyght there shalbe two in one bed, the one shalbe receyued, & the other shal be forsaken.
Luke 17:35 Two shalbe also a grinding together, the one shalbe receyued, and the other shalbe forsaken.
Luke 17:36 n/a
Luke 17:37 And they aunswered, & sayde to hym: where Lorde? And he sayed vnto them: wheresoeuer the body shalbe, thyther wyl the egles resorte.

CHAPTER: 18

Luke 18:1 And he put forth a similitude vnto them signifyeng that men ought alwaies to pray, & not to be werye,
Luke 18:2 saiynge. There was a Iudge in a certayne cytye, whiche feared not God, neyther regarded man.
Luke 18:3 And there was a certaine wedowe in the same citie whiche came vnto hym saiynge: auenge of myne aduersarye.
Luke 18:4 And he woulde not for a whyle. But afterwarde he sayde to hym selfe, though I feare not God, nor care for man,
Luke 18:5 yet because thys wedowe troubleth me. I wil auenge her least at the least she come and hagge on me.
Luke 18:6 And the Lord sayed: heare what the vnrightuous iudge sayeth.
Luke 18:7 And shall not God aduenge his electe, which crye daye and nyghte vnto hym, ye though he defarre them?
Luke 18:8 I tell you, he wil auenge them, and that quickly. Neuerthelesse when the sonne of man commeth, suppose ye, that he shall fynde fayth on earth?
Luke 18:9 And he put forth thys similytude vnto certayne, which thrusted in them selues that they were perfecte, and despyseth other.
Luke 18:10 Two men went vp into the temple to praye, the one a pharise and the other a publican.
Luke 18:11 The Pharyse stode and prayed thus with hym selfe: God I thanke the, that I am not as other men are, extorsioners, vniust, aduouterers, or as this publican,
Luke 18:12 I faste twyse in the weke, I geue tythe of all that I possesse.
Luke 18:13 And the Publicane stode a farre of, and woulde not lyft vp his eyes to heauen, but smote his brest, saiynge: God be mercifull to me a synner.
Luke 18:14 I tell you: this man departed home to hys house iustifyed more then the other. For euerye man that exalteth hym selfe, shalbe brought lowe. And he that humbleth hym selfe, shalbe exalted.
Luke 18:15 They broughte vnto hym also babes: that he shoulde touche them. When hys disciples saw that they rebuked them.
Luke 18:16 But Iesus called them vnto hym, and sayed: Suffer children to come vnto me, and forbyd them not. For of suche is the kyngdome of God.
Luke 18:17 Verely I say vnto you: whosoeuer receyueth not the kyngdome of God, as a chylde, he shall not enter therin.
Luke 18:18 And a certayne ruler axed him, saiyng: Good Maister, what ought I to do, to obtayne eternall lyfe?
Luke 18:19 Iesus sayde vnto hym: Why callest thou me good? No man is good, saue God onlye.
Luke 18:20 Thou knowest the commaundementes: Thou shalte not committe aduoutrye. Thou shalte not kyll. Thou shalt not steale. Thou shalte not beare false wytnesse: Honoure thy father and mother.
Luke 18:21 And he sayed: al these haue I kepte from my youth.
Luke 18:22 When Iesus hearde that, he sayed vnto hym. Yet lackeste thou one thynge. Sell all that thou haste, and distrybute it vnto the poore, and thou shalt haue treasure in heauen, and come, & folowe me.
Luke 18:23 When he hearde, that he was heauy: for he was very ryche.
Luke 18:24 When Iesus sawe hym morne, he sayed: with what difficultye shall they that haue ryches, enter into the kyngedome of God:
Luke 18:25 it is easyer for a camel to go thorowe a nedels eye then for a ryche man to enter into the kyngdom of God.
Luke 18:26 Then sayed they that hearde that: And who shall then be saued?
Luke 18:27 And he sayed: Thynges which are vnpossyble with men are possyble with God.
Luke 18:28 Then sayed Peter: Loo we haue lefte al, & folowed the.
Luke 18:29 And he sayed vnto them: Verelye I saye vnto you, there is no man that leaueth house, other father or mother, other brethren or wyfe or children, for the kyngdom of Goddes sake,
Luke 18:30 which same shall not receyue much more in thys worlde: and in the world to come, lyfe euerlastynge.
Luke 18:31 He toke vnto hym twelue, and sayed vnto them. Beholde we go vp to Hierusalem, & all shal be fulfylled that are wryten by the Prophetes of the sonne of man.
Luke 18:32 He shalbe deliuered vnto the gentils, and shalbe mocked, and shalbe dispytefully entreated, and shalbe spitted on,
Luke 18:33 and when they haue scourged him, they wyll put hym to death, and the thyrde daye he shall ryse agayn.
Luke 18:34 But they vnderstode none of these thynges. And this saiyng was hyd from them. And they perceyued not the thynges whiche were spoken.
Luke 18:35 And it came to passe, as he was come nye vnto Hierico, a certayne blynde man sat by the waye syde begginge.
Luke 18:36 And when he harde the people passe by, he axed what it meante:
Luke 18:37 And they sayed to him, that Iesus of Nazareth passed by.
Luke 18:38 And he cryed, saiynge: Iesus the sonne of Dauid, haue thou mercye on me.
Luke 18:39 And they whiche wente before, rebuked hym, that he shoulde holde his peace. But he cryed so much the more, thou sonne of Dauid haue mercy on me.
Luke 18:40 And Iesus stode still, and commaunded hym to be brought vnto hym. And when he was come neare, Iesus axed hym,
Luke 18:41 saiyng: What wilt thou that I do vnto the? And he sayde: Lorde that I maye receyue my syght.
Luke 18:42 Iesus sayde vnto hym: receyue thy syght: thy fayth hath saued the.
Luke 18:43 And immediatly he sawe, & folowed hym, praysyng God. And all the people when they sawe it, gaue laude to God.

CHAPTER: 19

Luke 19:1 And he entred in and went thorowe Hierico.
Luke 19:2 And behold, ther was a man named Zacheus, which was a ruler amonge the Publicans, and was riche also.
Luke 19:3 And he made meanes to se Iesus, what he shulde be, and coulde not for the prease, because he was of a lowe stature.
Luke 19:4 Wherfore he ran before and ascended vp into a wylde figge tree, to se him: for he should come that same way.
Luke 19:5 And when Iesu came to the place, he loked vp and sawe hym, and sayed vnto hym: Zache, attonce come doune, for to daye I must abyde at thy house.
Luke 19:6 And he came doune hastelye & receyued hym ioyfullye.
Luke 19:7 And when they sawe that, they al groundged saiyng: He is gone into tarye with a man that is a synner.
Luke 19:8 And Zache stode forthe and sayed vnto the Lord, beholde Lord, the haulfe of my goodes I geue to the pore, and yf I haue done anye man wronge, I wyl restore hym foure folde:
Luke 19:9 And Iesus sayed to him: this daye is healthe come vnto thys house, for as muche as it also is become the chyld of Abraham.
Luke 19:10 For the sonne of man is come to seke, and to saue that which was loste.
Luke 19:11 As they hearde these thynges, he added therto a similitude, because he was nye to Hierusalem, and because also they thoughte that the kyngdome of God should shortly appere.
Luke 19:12 He sayde therfore: a certayne noble man wente into a farre countre, to receyue him a kyngdome, and then to come agayne.
Luke 19:13 And he called hys ten seruauntes, & deliuered them ten pounde saiynge vnto them? by and sell tyll I come.
Luke 19:14 But hys citisens hated hym, and sente messengers after hym, saiynge: we will not haue thys man to reygne ouer vs.
Luke 19:15 And it came to passe, when he was come agayne, and had receyued hys kyngdome, he commaunded these seruauntes, to be called to him (to whom he gaue hys money) to wyt what euery man had done.
Luke 19:16 Then came the fyrste saiynge: Lorde, thy pounde hath encreased ten pounde.
Luke 19:17 And he sayde vnto hym. Well good seruaunte, because thou waste faythful in a very lytell thynge, take thou authoritye ouer ten cities.
Luke 19:18 And the other came, saying: Lorde thy pounde hath encreased fyue pound.
Luke 19:19 And to the same he sayde, and be thou also ruler ouer .v. cities.
Luke 19:20 And the .iij. came & sayde: Lorde, behold here thy pounde, whiche I haue kept in a napkyn,
Luke 19:21 for I feared the, because thou art a strayt man, thou takest vp that thou laydest not doune, and reapest that thou dyddest not sowe.
Luke 19:22 And he sayde to him: Of thyne owne mouthe iudge I the thou euil seruaunt. Knowest thou that I am a strayte man takyng vp that I layde not doune, and reapyng that I did not sowe?
Luke 19:23 Wherfore then gauest not thou my money into the banke, that at my commynge I mighte haue requyred myne owne with vauntage.
Luke 19:24 And he sayed to them that stode by: take from hym that pounde, and geue it hym that hath ten pounde.
Luke 19:25 And they sayde vnto him: Lorde, he hath ten pounde.
Luke 19:26 I saye vnto you, that vnto all them that haue, it shalbe geuen: and from hym that hath not, euen that he hath shalbe taken from hym.
Luke 19:27 Moreouer those myne enemyes which woulde not that I should raigne ouer them, brynge hyther, and slea them before me.
Luke 19:28 And when he had thus spoken, he proceded forthe ascendyng vp to Ierusalem.
Luke 19:29 And it fortuned, when he was come nye Bethphage and Bethanye, besydes mounte oliuete, he sente two of hys disciples,
Luke 19:30 saiynge: Go ye into the toune whiche is ouer againste you, In the whiche assone as ye are come, ye shall fynde a colt tyed, whereon yet neuer man sate. Lewse him, and bring him hither.
Luke 19:31 And yf anye man axe you, why that ye lewse him: thus say vnto him: the Lorde hath nede of hym.
Luke 19:32 They that were sente, wente theyr waye, & founde as he had sayed vnto them.
Luke 19:33 And as they were alewsynge the colte, the owners sayed vnto them: why lewse ye the colte?
Luke 19:34 And they sayed: for the Lorde hath nede of hym.
Luke 19:35 And they broughte hym to Iesus. And they caste theyr raymente on the colte, and set Iesus theron.
Luke 19:36 And as he wente, they sprede theyr clothes in the waye.
Luke 19:37 And when he was nowe come, where he shoulde go doune from the mount Oliuete, the whole multitude of the discyples beganne to reioyce, and to laude God with a loude voyce for all the myracles that they had sene,
Luke 19:38 saying: Blessed be the kyng that cometh in the name of the Lorde: peace in heauen, and glorye in the hyest.
Luke 19:39 And some of the Phariseis of the companye sayde vnto him: Mayster rebuke thy disciples.
Luke 19:40 He aunswered and sayed vnto them: I tell you, yf these shoulde holde theyr peace, the stones woulde crye.
Luke 19:41 And when he was come neare, he behelde the citie, and wept on it,
Luke 19:42 saiyng: Yf thou haddest knowen those thynges which belong vnto thy peace, euen at thys thy tyme. But now are they hydde from thyne eyes.
Luke 19:43 For the dayes shall come vpon the, that thyne enemyes shal cast a banke aboute the, & compasse the round and kepe the on euerye syde,
Luke 19:44 and make the euen with the grounde, with children whiche are in the. And they shall not leaue in the one stone vpon another, because thou knowest not the tyme of thy visitacyon.
Luke 19:45 And he went into the temple, and beganne to cast oute them that solde therin, and them that boughte,
Luke 19:46 saiyng vnto them, it is wryten: my house is the house of prayer, but ye haue made it a den of theues.
Luke 19:47 And he taught daily in the temple. The hye Priestes and the Scribes and the chiefe of the people wente about to destroye hym,
Luke 19:48 but coulde not fynde what to do. For all the people stacke by hym, and gaue hym audience.

CHAPTER: 20

Luke 20:1 And it fortuned in one of those dayes as he taught the people in the temple, & preached the gospel: the hye priestes & the scribes came with the elders,
Luke 20:2 and spake vnto hym saiyng: Tell vs by what authoritie thou doest these thynges? Eyther who is he that gaue the this authoritie?
Luke 20:3 He aunswered & said vnto them: I also will axe you a question: and aunswere me.
Luke 20:4 The baptysine of Iohn, was it from heauen or of men?
Luke 20:5 And they thought wtin them selues, saiyng: yf we shal say, from heauen, he wil say: why then beleued ye him not?
Luke 20:6 But and yf we shall saye of men, all the people wyll stone vs. For they be perswaded that Iohn is a Prophet.
Luke 20:7 And they aunswered that they coulde not tell whence it was.
Luke 20:8 And Iesus sayde to them: neyther tell I you by what authorite I do these thinges.
Luke 20:9 Then beganne he to put forthe to the people, thys similitude. A certayne man planted a vineyarde, and let it forthe to fermers, and went hym selfe into a straunge countre for a greate season.
Luke 20:10 And when the tyme was come, he sente a seruaunt to hys tenauntes that they shoulde geue hym of the fruytes of the vyneyarde. And the tenauntes dyd beate hym, & sent him awaye empty.
Luke 20:11 And agayne he sent yet another seruaunt. And they dyd beate him, & foule entreated hym also, & sent hym awaye emptye.
Luke 20:12 Moreouer, he sent the third to, & hym they wounded, and cast out.
Luke 20:13 Then sayde the Lorde of the vineyarde: what shall I do? I wil sende my deare sonne, hym peraduenture they wyll reuerence, when they se hym.
Luke 20:14 But when the fermers sawe hym, they thoughte in them selues sayinge: thys is the hyre, come let vs kyl him, that the inheritaunce maye be oures.
Luke 20:15 And they cast hym out of the vineyarde, & kylled him. Now what shall the Lorde of the vyneyarde do vnto them?
Luke 20:16 He wyll come and destroye those fermers, and wyl let out his vineyarde to other: When they heard that, they sayde: God forbyd.
Luke 20:17 And he behelde them, and sayde: what meaneth this then that is wryten. The stone that the buylders refused, the same is made the head corner stone?
Luke 20:18 Whosoeuer stomble at that stone shalbe broken: but on whomesoeuer it fal vpon it wyll grynde hym to powder.
Luke 20:19 And the hye priestes and the scrybes the same houre wente aboute to laye handes on him, but they feared the people. For they perceiued that he had spoken thys similitude against them.
Luke 20:20 And they watched hym, and sent forthe spyes whiche shoulde fayne them selues perfect, to take him in his wordes, and to delyuer him vnto the power and authoritie of the debitie.
Luke 20:21 And they axed him, saiynge: Mayster, we knowe that thou sayest and teachest right, neyther consyderest thou any mans degree, but teachest the waye of God truely.
Luke 20:22 Is it laufull for vs to geue Cesar tribute or no?
Luke 20:23 He perceyued theyr craftynes, and sayde vnto them. Why tempt ye me?
Luke 20:24 shewe me a peny. Whose ymage and superscription hath it? They aunswered and sayde: Cesars.
Luke 20:25 And he sayed vnto them: Geue then vnto Cesar, that which belongeth vnto Cesar: and to God that which partayneth to God.
Luke 20:26 And they coulde not reproue his saiynge before the people. But they maruayled at hys aunswere, and helde theyr peace.
Luke 20:27 Then came to him certaine of the Saduces which denye that there is anye resurreccyon. And they axed him,
Luke 20:28 saiynge: Maister, Moyses wrote vnto vs, yf anye mans brother dye hauyng a wyfe, and the same dye without yssue that then his brother shoulde take his wyfe, and rayse vp seede vnto hys brother.
Luke 20:29 There were .vij. brethren, and the fyrst toke a wyfe, & dyed without chyldren.
Luke 20:30 And the seconde toke the wyfe, and he dyed childlesse:
Luke 20:31 And the third toke her, and in likewyse the residue of the seuen. and left no chyldren behynde them, and died.
Luke 20:32 Laste of all the woman dyed also.
Luke 20:33 Nowe at the resurreccyon whose wife of them shal she be? For seuen had her to wyfe.
Luke 20:34 Iesus aunswered, & sayde vnto them. The chyldren of this world mary wyues, & are maryed.
Luke 20:35 But they which shalbe made worthy to enioye that worlde and the resurreccyon from death, neyther marye wyues, neyther are maryed,
Luke 20:36 nor yet can dye anye more. For they are equal vnto the angels, & are the sonnes of god in as muche as they are the chyldren of the resurreccion.
Luke 20:37 And that the dead shal ryse agayne euen. Moises signifyed besides the bushe, when he sayed: The Lord God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob.
Luke 20:38 For he is not the God of the dead, but of them which lyue. For al lyue in him.
Luke 20:39 Then certayne of the Pharises aunswered and sayd: Mayster thou haste wel sayde.
Luke 20:40 And after that durst they not axe him any question at all.
Luke 20:41 Then sayde he vnto them: how saye they, that Christe is Dauides sonne?
Luke 20:42 And Dauid hym selfe sayth in the boke of the Psalmes. The Lorde sayde vnto my Lorde, sitte on my ryghte hande,
Luke 20:43 tyll I make thyne enemyes thy fote stole.
Luke 20:44 Seynge Dauid called hym Lorde: howe is he then hys sonne?
Luke 20:45 Then in the audience of all the people, he sayed vnto hys disciples,
Luke 20:46 beware of the Scribes, whiche desyre to go in longe clothyng, & loue gretinges in the markettes, and the hyest seates in the synagoges, & chiefe roumes at feastes,
Luke 20:47 whiche deuoure wydowes houses, & that vnder a coloure of long praying: the same shall receyue greater damnacion.

CHAPTER: 21

Luke 21:1 As he behelde, he sawe the ryche men how they cast in theyr offerynges into the treasurye,
Luke 21:2 And he sawe a certayne poore wydowe, whiche caste in thyther two mytes.
Luke 21:3 And he sayde: of a truethe I saye vnto you: this poore widow hath put in more then they all.
Luke 21:4 For they all haue of theyr superfluite added vnto the offering of god: but, she, of her penurye hath caste in all the substaunce that she had.
Luke 21:5 As some spake of the tempell, howe it was garnished wyth goodly stones and yewels, he sayde:
Luke 21:6 The dayes will come, when of these thinges which ye se shal not be left stone vpon stone, that shall not be throwen doune.
Luke 21:7 And they axed him saiynge: Maister when shall these thinges be, and what sygne wyll ther be, when such thinges shall come to passe.
Luke 21:8 And he sayd: take hede that ye be not deceiued. For manye wyll come in my name saiynge: I am he and the tyme draweth neare. Folowe not them therfore.
Luke 21:9 But when ye heare of warre and dissencion, be not afrayed. For these thinges muste fyrste come: but the ende foloweth not by & by.
Luke 21:10 Then sayd he vnto them: Nacion shall ryse against nacion, and kingdom against kingdom,
Luke 21:11 and great earthquakes shall be in all quarters and honger, and pestilence and fearfull thinges. And great sygnes shall ther be from heauen.
Luke 21:12 But before all these, they shall laye their handes on you and persecute you, delyueringe you vp to the Synagoges & into pryson, and bringe you before kinges and rulers for my names sake.
Luke 21:13 And this shall chaunce you for a testimoniall.
Luke 21:14 Let it stycke therfore faste in your hertes, not once to studye before what ye shall aunswere:
Luke 21:15 For I wyll geue you a mouthe and wisdome, where against all youre aduersaries shall not be able to speake nor resyste.
Luke 21:16 Yea and ye shalbe betrayed of your fathers and mothers, and of your brethren, and kinsmen and louers, and some of you shal they put to death.
Luke 21:17 And hated shall ye be of all men for my names sake.
Luke 21:18 Yet there shal not one heare of your heades perishe.
Luke 21:19 With your pacience possesse your soules.
Luke 21:20 And when ye se Ierusalem beseged with an hoste, then vnderstande that the solacion of the same is nye.
Luke 21:21 Then let them which are in Iwrye fly the to mountaines. And let them which are in the middes of it depart out. And let not them that are in other countries, enter therin.
Luke 21:22 For these be the dayes of vengeaunce, to fulfil all that are written.
Luke 21:23 But wo be to them that be with chylde, and to them that geue sucke in those dayes: for ther shalbe great trouble in the lande, and wrath ouer all this people.
Luke 21:24 And they shall fall on the edge of the swearde, and shalbe lead captyue into all nacyons. And Ierusalem shalbe troden vnder fote of the gentyls vntyll the tyme of the gentyls be fulfylled.
Luke 21:25 And ther shalbe signes in the sunne, and in the mone, and in the starres: & in the earth, the people shalbe in such perplexitye, that they shall not tel which waye to turne them selues. The sea and the waters shall roore,
Luke 21:26 and mens hertes shall fayle them for feare, & for lokinge after those thinges whiche shall come on the earth. For the powers of heauen shal moue.
Luke 21:27 And then shall they se the sonne of man come in a cloude with power and great glory.
Luke 21:28 When these thynges beginne to come to passe then loke vp, and lift vp your heades, for youre redempcion draweth nye.
Luke 21:29 And he sheweth them a symilytude: behold the fygge tre, and all other trees,
Luke 21:30 when they shut forth their buddes, ye se and knowe of your owne selues that sommer is then nye at hande.
Luke 21:31 So likewyse ye (when ye se these thinges come to passe) vnderstande that the kingdome of God is nye.
Luke 21:32 Verelye I saye vnto you this generacion shall not passe tyll all be fulfylled.
Luke 21:33 Heauen and earth shall passe: but my wordes shall not passe.
Luke 21:34 Take hede to your selues, lest youre hertes be ouercome with surfetinge and dronkenes and cares of this worlde: and that that day come not on you vnwares.
Luke 21:35 For as a snare shall it come on all them that syt on the earth.
Luke 21:36 Watche therfore contynuallye and praye, that ye may obtayne grace to flye all this that shal come, and that ye may stande before the sonne of man.
Luke 21:37 In the daye tyme, he taught in the tempell and at night, he went out and had abiding in the mounte Oliuete.
Luke 21:38 And all the people came in the morninge to hym in the tempell, for to heare hym.

CHAPTER: 22

Luke 22:1 The feast of swete bread drue nye whiche is called easter,
Luke 22:2 and the hye pryestes and scribes sought how to kyl hym, but they feared the people.
Luke 22:3 Then entred Sathan into Iudas whose syr name was Iscaryot (whych was of the number of the twelue)
Luke 22:4 and he went his waye and communed with the hygh Priestes and offycers how he myght betraye him to them.
Luke 22:5 And they were glad, and promysed to geue him money.
Luke 22:6 And he consented, and sought oportunitye to betray him vnto them when the people were awaye.
Luke 22:7 Then came the daye of swete bread when necessyte the easterlambe muste be offered.
Luke 22:8 And he sent Peter and Ihon saiynge: go & prepare vs the easterlambe, that we may eate.
Luke 22:9 They said to hym: Where wilt thou that we prepare?
Luke 22:10 And he sayed vnto them: Behold when ye be entred into the citye, ther shall a man mete you bearinge a picher of water, him folowe into the same house that he entreth in,
Luke 22:11 & saye vnto the good man of the house: The mayster sayeth vnto the: wher is the geste chamber, where I shall eate myne easterlambe with my disciples?
Luke 22:12 And he shall shewe you a great parloure paued. There make redy.
Luke 22:13 And they went and founde as he had sayde vnto them, and made redy the easterlambe.
Luke 22:14 And when the houre was come, he sate doune and the twelue Apostles with him.
Luke 22:15 And sayde vnto them: I haue inwardlye desyred to eate this easterlambe with you, before that I suffer.
Luke 22:16 For I saye vnto you: henceforth I wyll not eate of it anye more, vntill it be fulfylled in the kingdome of God.
Luke 22:17 And he toke the cuppe and gaue thankes, and sayde: Take this and deuide it amonge you.
Luke 22:18 For I say vnto you: I wyll not drinke of the frute of the vyne vntyll the kyngdome of God be come.
Luke 22:19 And he toke bread, gaue thankes brake it, & gaue it to them, saiynge: This is my body which is geuen for you. This is the remembraunce of me.
Luke 22:20 Lykewyse also, when they had supped he toke the cup saiynge: This cup is the newe testamente in my bloude, whiche shall for you be shed.
Luke 22:21 Yet beholde, the hande of him that betrayeth me, is with me on on the table.
Luke 22:22 And the sonne of man goeth as it is appointed. But wo be to that man by whome he is betrayed.
Luke 22:23 And they beganne to enquire amonge them selues which of them it shoulde be, that shoulde do that.
Luke 22:24 And ther was a stryfe amonge them, which of them shoulde be taken for the greatest.
Luke 22:25 And he sayde vnto them: the kinges of the gentyls raigne ouer them, and they that beare rule ouer them, are called gracious Lordes.
Luke 22:26 But ye shall not be so. But he that is greatest amonge you, shalbe as the yongest: and he that is chiefe shal be as the minister.
Luke 22:27 For whether is greater, he that sytteth at meate: or he that serueth? Is not he that sytteth at meate? And I am amonge you, as he that ministreth.
Luke 22:28 Ye are they whiche haue bydden with me in my temptacions.
Luke 22:29 And I appointe vnto you a kyngdome, as my father hath appointed to me,
Luke 22:30 that ye maye eate and drinke at my table in my kingdome, and syt on seates, and iudge the twelue tribes of Israel.
Luke 22:31 And the Lorde sayde: Simon Simon beholde, Sathan hath desyred you, to syfte you, as it were wheate,
Luke 22:32 but I haue prayed for the, that thy faith fayle not. And when thou arte conuerted, strengthe thy brethren.
Luke 22:33 And he said vnto him: Lorde I am redye to go with the into prison, and to death.
Luke 22:34 And he saide: I tell the Peter, the cocke shal crowe this daye, tyl thou haue thrise denied that thou knowest me.
Luke 22:35 And he sayde vnto them: when I sente you without wallet and scrip and shoes? lacked ye any thinge? And they saide no.
Luke 22:36 And he sayde vnto them: but nowe he that hath a wallet let him take it vp and lykewyse his scrip. And he that hath no swerde, let him sell his cote and bye one.
Luke 22:37 For I saye vnto you: that yet that which is written, must be perfourmed in me: euen with the wicked was he numbred. For tose thinges which are written of me, haue an ende.
Luke 22:38 And they sayde: Lorde beholde here are two sweardes. And he sayde vnto them: it is ynough.
Luke 22:39 And he came out, and went as he was wont to mounte Oliuete. And the disciples folowed hym.
Luke 22:40 And when he came to the place, he sayde to them: praye, least ye fall into the temptacion.
Luke 22:41 And he gate him selfe from them, about a stones cast, & kneled doune, & prayed
Luke 22:42 saiynge: Father if thou wylt, wythdrawe this cup from me. Neuertheles, not my wyll, but thyne be fulfylled.
Luke 22:43 And ther appered an aungell vnto him from heauen, confortinge him.
Luke 22:44 And he was in agonye, and praied some what longer. And his sweate was lyke droppes of bloude trycklinge doune to the grounde.
Luke 22:45 And he rose vp from prayer, and came to his disciples, and founde them slepinge for sorowe,
Luke 22:46 and sayde vnto them: Why slepe ye? Ryse and praye, leste ye fall into temptacion.
Luke 22:47 Whyle he yet spake: beholde there came a company, and he that was called Iudas, one of the twelue, wente before them, and preased nyghe vnto Iesus to kysse him
Luke 22:48 and Iesus said vnto hym: Iudas, betrayest thou the sonne of man with a kysse?
Luke 22:49 When they whiche were aboute him sawe what woulde folowe, they sayed vnto him: Lorde, shall we smite with swearde?
Luke 22:50 And one of them smote a seruaunte of the hiest prieste of all, & smote of his righte eare.
Luke 22:51 And Iesus aunswered and saide: Suffer ye thus farre forth. And he touched his eare and healed him.
Luke 22:52 Then Iesus sayed vnto the hye pryestes and rulers of the temple, and the elders which were come to him. Be ye come out as vnto a thefe with sweardes and staues?
Luke 22:53 When I was dayly with you in temple, ye stretched not forth handes agaynste me. But this is euen youre verye houre, and the power of darcknes.
Luke 22:54 Then toke they him, and ledde him and brought him to the hye priestes house. And Peter folowed a farre of.
Luke 22:55 When they had kindled a fyre in the myddes of the palaice, and were set doune together: Peter also sate doune amonge them:
Luke 22:56 And one of the wenches, behelde hym as he sate by the fyre and set good eye syght on him and sayde: this same was also with him.
Luke 22:57 Then he denyed hym saiynge: woman I knowe him not.
Luke 22:58 And after a lytle while another sawe him and said: thou arte also of them. And Peter sayed: man I am not.
Luke 22:59 And about the space of an houre after, another affyrmed saiynge: verelye euen this felowe was with him, for he is of Galile,
Luke 22:60 and Peter sayed: man I wote not what thou sayest. And immediatlye whyle he yet spake, that cocke crewe.
Luke 22:61 And the Lorde tourned backe and loked vpon Peter. And Peter remembred the wordes of the Lorde, howe he sayed vnto him, before the cocke crowe, thou shalt denye me thryse.
Luke 22:62 And Peter wente out, and wepte betterlye.
Luke 22:63 And the men that stode about Iesus mocked hym and smote him,
Luke 22:64 and blindfolded him, and smote his face. And axed him, saiynge arede who it is that smote the?
Luke 22:65 And manye other thinges despitfully sayed they against him.
Luke 22:66 And assone as it was daye the elders of the people and the hyghe priestes an scribes came together, and ledde him into their counsell saiynge:
Luke 22:67 are thou verye Christe? tell vs. And he sayde vnto them: If I shall tell you, ye wyl not beleue.
Luke 22:68 And if also I axe you, ye wyll not aunswere me or let me go.
Luke 22:69 Hereafter shall the sonne of man syt on the ryghthande of the power of God.
Luke 22:70 Then saide they all: Arte thou then the sonne of God? He sayde to them: ye say that I am.
Luke 22:71 Then sayde they: what nede we anye further wytnes? We our selues haue hearde of his owne mouthe.

CHAPTER: 23

Luke 23:1 And the whole multytude of them arose, & ledde him vnto Pilate.
Luke 23:2 And they began to accuse hym saiynge: We haue founde thys felowe peruertinge the people & forbiddinge to paye tribute to Cesar, saiynge: that he is Christ a kinge.
Luke 23:3 And Pylate apposed him saiynge: art thou the kynge of the Iewes? He aunswered him and sayde: thou sayest it.
Luke 23:4 Then said Pilate to the hye pryestes, & to the people: I fynde no faute in this man.
Luke 23:5 And they were the more fearce saiynge. He moueth the people, teachinge thorowout all Iewrye, and began at Galyle, euen to this place.
Luke 23:6 When Pilate hearde mencion of Galyle, he axed whether the man were of Galyle.
Luke 23:7 And as sone as he was knewen that he was of Herodes iurisdiccion he sent him to Herode, which was also at Ierusalem in those dayes:
Luke 23:8 And when Herode sawe Iesus, he was excedinglye gladde. For he was desyrous to se hym of a long season, because he had heard many thinges of him, and trusted to haue sene some miracles done by hym.
Luke 23:9 Then questioned he with hym of manye thinges. But he aunswered him not one worde.
Luke 23:10 The hye priestes and scribes, stode forth and accused him straightlye.
Luke 23:11 And Herode with his men of warre despysed him and mocked him, and arayed him in white, and sent him again to Pilate.
Luke 23:12 And the same daye Pylate and Herode were made frendes together. For before they were at variaunce.
Luke 23:13 And Pilate called together the hye priestes and the rulers, and the people,
Luke 23:14 and sayed vnto them. Ye haue brought this man vnto me, as one that peruerted the people. And beholde I haue examined him before you, & haue founde no faute in this man of those thinges wherof ye accuse him:
Luke 23:15 no nor yet Herode. For I sent you to him, and lo nothinge worthy of death is done of him.
Luke 23:16 I wil therfore chasten him and let him louse.
Luke 23:17 For of necessyte he muste haue let one louse vnto them at that feaste.
Luke 23:18 And all the people cryed at once saiynge: awaye with him and delyuer to vs Barrabas
Luke 23:19 which for insurreccion made in the cytye, and morther, was cast into prison,
Luke 23:20 Pilate spake agayne to them willinge to let Iesus louse.
Luke 23:21 And they cryed saiynge: Crucifye him, crucyfye him.
Luke 23:22 He saide vnto them the thirde tyme. What euill hath he done? I fynde no cause of death in him. I will therfore chasten him, & let him louse.
Luke 23:23 And they cryed with loude voice, & required that he might be crucyfyed. And the voice of them and of the hie priestes preuailed.
Luke 23:24 And Pilate gaue sentence that it should be as they required,
Luke 23:25 and let louse vnto them him that for insurreccion and morther, was cast into prison whom they desyreth, and deliuered Iesus to do with him what they woulde.
Luke 23:26 And as they led him awaye: they caught one Simon of Syren, coming out of the fielde and on him laide they the crosse, to beare it after Iesu.
Luke 23:27 And there folowed him a great companye of the people and of women, whiche women bewailed and lamented him.
Luke 23:28 But Iesus turned backe vnto them, and sayed: Doughters of Ierusalem, wepe not for me: but wepe for your selues and for your chyldren.
Luke 23:29 For beholde the dayes wyll come, when men shall saye: Happye are the baren and the wombes that neuer bare, and the pappes that neuer gaue sucke.
Luke 23:30 Then shall they beginne to say to the mountaynes fal on vs: to the hilles, couer vs.
Luke 23:31 For if they do this to a grene tre, what shalbe done to the drye?
Luke 23:32 And there were two euyll doers led with him to be slayne.
Luke 23:33 And when they were to the place which is called Caluarye, ther thei crucyfyed him and the euill doers, one on the right hande, and the other on the lifte.
Luke 23:34 Then said Iesus: father forgeue them, for they wote not what they do. And they parted his rayment, and cast lottes.
Luke 23:35 And the people stode and behelde. And the rulers mocked him with them saiyng: he holpe other men let him helpe him selfe, if he be Christ the chosen of God.
Luke 23:36 The souldiers also mocked him and came and gaue him vineger
Luke 23:37 and sayed: if thou be that kinge of the Iewes, saue thy selfe.
Luke 23:38 And his superscription was wrytten ouer him, in greke in latine and in Hebrew: This is the kinge of the Iewes:
Luke 23:39 And one of the euyll doers which hanged, rayled on him saiynge. If thou be Christ saue thy selfe and vs.
Luke 23:40 The other aunswered and rebuked him saiyng. Neither fearest thou God, because thou art in the same damnacion?
Luke 23:41 We are ryghtuously punished, for we receyued accordinge to our dedes. But this man hath done nothinge amisse.
Luke 23:42 And he sayd vnto Iesus: Lord remembre me when thou commeste into thy kyngdome.
Luke 23:43 And Iesus sayd vnto him: Verely I saye vnto the: to daye shalt thou be with me in Paradise.
Luke 23:44 And it was about the syxte houre. And there came a darcknes ouer all the lande, vntyl the ninthe houre,
Luke 23:45 and the sonne was darckened. And the vaile of the temple dyd rent euen through the myddes.
Luke 23:46 And Iesus cryed with a great voyce, and said: Father, into thy handes I commende my spirite. And when he thus had sayd: he gaue vp the ghoste.
Luke 23:47 When the Centurion sawe what had happened, he gloryfyed God saiynge: Of a suretye this man was perfecte.
Luke 23:48 And all the people that came together to the syght beholdinge the thinges which were done: smote their brestes, and returned home.
Luke 23:49 And all his acquantaunce, and the women that folowed him from Galyle, stode a farre of beholdinge these thinges.
Luke 23:50 And beholde there was a man named Ioseph, a counselloure, and was a good man and a iuste,
Luke 23:51 and did not consente to the counsell and dede of them which was of Aramathia, a citye of the Iewes: which same also waited for the kingdome of God:
Luke 23:52 he wente vnto Pilate, and begged the bodye of Iesus,
Luke 23:53 and toke it doune, and wrapped it in a lynnen clothe, and layed it in a hewen tombe, wher in was neuer man before layed.
Luke 23:54 And that same day was the Saboth euen, and the Saboth drwe on.
Luke 23:55 The women that folowed after, which came with him from Galyle, behelde the sepulchre, and how his bodye was layed.
Luke 23:56 And they returned and prepared odours and ointmentes: but rested the Saboth daye, accordinge to the commaundemente.

CHAPTER: 24

Luke 24:1 On the morowe after the Saboth, early in the morninge, they came vnto the toumbe and brought the odoures which they had prepared and other women with them.
Luke 24:2 And they founde the stone rouled awaye from the sepulchre,
Luke 24:3 and wente in, but founde not the bodye of the Lorde Iesu.
Luke 24:4 And it happened, as they were amased thereat. Behold two men stode by them in shinninge vestures.
Luke 24:5 And as they were afrayed, and bowed doune their faces on the earth: they sayed to them: Why seke ye the lyuinge amonge the dead?
Luke 24:6 he is not here, but is rysen. Remember howe he spake vnto you, when he was yet with you in Galile,
Luke 24:7 saiynge: that the sonne of man must be delyuered into the handes of synfull men, and be crucifyed, and the thirde daye ryse againe.
Luke 24:8 And they remembred his wordes,
Luke 24:9 and returned from the sepulchre, and tolde all these thinges vnto the eleuen, and to al the remnaunte.
Luke 24:10 It was Mary Magdalene, and Ioanna, and Mary Iacobi, and other that were with them which tolde these thinges vnto the Apostles,
Luke 24:11 & their wordes semed vnto them fained thinges, neyther beleued they them.
Luke 24:12 Then arose Peter and ranne vnto the sepulchre, and stouped in & sawe the linnen clothes layde by them selfe, & departed wondringe in him selfe at that which had happened.
Luke 24:13 And beholde, two of them went that same daye to a toune which was from Ierusalem about threscore forlonges called Emaus,
Luke 24:14 and they talketh together of all these thinges that had happened.
Luke 24:15 And it chaunsed as they communed together and reasoned, that Iesus him selfe drue neare, and went with them.
Luke 24:16 But their eyes were holden that they coulde not knowe him.
Luke 24:17 And he sayed vnto them: What maner of communicacions are these that ye haue one to another as ye walke, and are sadde.
Luke 24:18 And the one of them named Cleophas, aunswered and sayed vnto him art thou only a straunger in Ierusalem, and hast not knowen the thinges which haue chaunsed therin in these dayes?
Luke 24:19 To whom he sayde: what thinges? And they sayde vnto him: of Iesus of Nazareth which was a Prophete, mighty in dede and worde before God, and all the people.
Luke 24:20 And howe the hye priestes and oure rulers delyuered him to be condempned to death: and haue crucifyed him.
Luke 24:21 But we trusted that it shoulde haue bene he, that shoulde haue delyuered Israell. And as touchinge all these thinges, to daye is euen the thirde daye, that they were done.
Luke 24:22 Yea and certayne women also of our companye made vs astonied, whiche come earlye vnto the sepulchre,
Luke 24:23 and founde not his bodye: and came saiynge, that they had sene a visyon of aungels, whiche saide that he was aliue.
Luke 24:24 And certaine of them which were with vs went their waye to the sepulchre, and founde it euen so as the women had sayde: but hym they sawe not.
Luke 24:25 And he sayed vnto them: O fooles and slowe of hert to beleue all that the Prophetes haue spoken.
Luke 24:26 Ought not Christ to haue suffred these thinges and to enter into his glorye?
Luke 24:27 And he began at Moyses, and at all the Prophetes, & interpreted vnto them in all scryptures, which were written of hym.
Luke 24:28 And they drue me vnto the toune which they wente to. And he made as though he woulde haue gone further?
Luke 24:29 But they constrayned him saiynge, abyde with vs, for it draweth towardes nyght, and the daye is farre passed. And he wente into tarye wyth them.
Luke 24:30 And it came to passe as he sate at meate with them, he toke breade, blessed it, brake and gaue to them.
Luke 24:31 And their eyes were opened and they knewe him: and he vanyshed out of their sight.
Luke 24:32 And they sayde betwene them selues: did not our hertes burne within vs whyle he talked with vs by the waye, and as he opened to vs the scryptures?
Luke 24:33 And they rose vp the same houre, and returned agayne to Ierusalem and founde the eleuen gathered together, and them that were with them,
Luke 24:34 which sayde: The Lorde is rysen in dede, and hath appeared to Simon.
Luke 24:35 And they tolde what thinges were done in the waye, and howe they knewe him in breakinge of breade.
Luke 24:36 As they thus spake. Iesus him selfe stode in the middes of them, and saide: Peace be with you.
Luke 24:37 And thei were abashed and afraied, supposynge that they had sene a spirite.
Luke 24:38 And he sayde vnto them: Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughtes aryse in your hertes?
Luke 24:39 Beholde my handes and & my fete, that it is euen my selfe. Handle me & se: for spyrytes haue not flesh and bones as ye se me haue.
Luke 24:40 And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them his handes and his fete.
Luke 24:41 And while they yet beleued not for ioye, and wondred, he said vnto them: haue ye here anye meate?
Luke 24:42 And they gaue him a pece of broiled fyshe, and of an hony combe.
Luke 24:43 And he toke it, and eate it before them.
Luke 24:44 And he sayde vnto them: These are the wordes which I spake vnto you, whyle I was yet with you: that al muste be fulfilled which was written of me in lawe of Moyses and in the prophetes and in the Psalmes.
Luke 24:45 Then opened he their wittes, that they myght vnderstande the scriptures,
Luke 24:46 and sayde vnto them: Thus is it written, and thus it behoued Christ to suffer: and to ryse agayne from death the thirde day,
Luke 24:47 and that repentaunce and remissyon of synnes shoulde be preached in his name amonge all nacions. And must begynne at Ierusalem.
Luke 24:48 And ye are witnesses of these thinges.
Luke 24:49 And beholde, I wyl sende the promes of my father vpon you. But tary ye in the citye of Ierusalem, vntyll ye be endewed with power from an hye.
Luke 24:50 And he led them out into Bethany, and lift vp his handes, & blessed them.
Luke 24:51 And it came to passe, as he blessed them, he departed from them, and was caryed vp into heauen.
Luke 24:52 And they worshipped him, and returned to Ierusalem, with great ioye,
Luke 24:53 and were contynuallye in the temple, praysynge and laudinge God. AMEN.

BOOK: John

CHAPTER: 1

John 1:1 In the begynnynge was the worde, and the word was with God, & the worde was God.
John 1:2 The same was in the begynnynge wyth God.
John 1:3 All thynges were made by it and without it was made nothynge that was made.
John 1:4 In it was lyfe, and the lyfe was the lyght of men,
John 1:5 & the lyght shyneth in the darknes, but the darknes comprehended it not.
John 1:6 Ther was a man sent from God, whose name was Iohn.
John 1:7 These same came as a wytnes to beare wytnes of the lyght, that all men through him myght beleue.
John 1:8 He was not that lyght but to beare witnes of the lyght.
John 1:9 That was a true lyght, which lyghted all men that come into the worlde.
John 1:10 He was in the worlde, & the worlde was made by him, & yet the worlde knewe him not.
John 1:11 He came amonge his (owne) & his owne receiued him not.
John 1:12 But as manye as receyued him to them he gaue power to be the sonnes of God in that they beleued on his name
John 1:13 & which were borne not of the bloude nor of the wyl of the flesh, nor yet of the wyll of man: but of God.
John 1:14 And the worde was made flesh & dwelt amonge vs, and we sawe the glorye of it, as the glory of the onlye begotten sonne of the father, which worde was ful of grace & verite.
John 1:15 Iohn bare witnes of him & cried saiyng: This was he of whom I spake, he that cometh after me was before me, because he was yer then I.
John 1:16 And of his fulnes haue all we receyued, euen (grace) for grace.
John 1:17 For the lawe was geuen by Moyses, but grace and truthe came by Iesus Christ.
John 1:18 No man hath sene God at anye tyme. The onlye begotten sonne which is in the bosome of the father, he hath declared hym.
John 1:19 And this is the recorde of Iohn: When the Iewes sent pryestes and Leuites from Ierusalem, to axe him what arte thou?
John 1:20 And he confessed and denied not, and sayd plainlye: I am not Chryste.
John 1:21 And they axed hym: what then? Art thou Helias? And he sayed: I am not. Art thou a Prophete? And he aunswered no.
John 1:22 Then sayed they vnto him: what art thou? that we may geue an aunswere to them that sent vs? What sayest thou of thy selfe?
John 1:23 He sayde: I am the voice of a cryar in the wyldernes, make strayght the waye of the Lorde, as sayde the Prophete Esaias.
John 1:24 And they which were sent, were of the pharyseis.
John 1:25 And they axed him: and sayd vnto him: why baptysest thou then if thou be not Christ, nor Helias, neyther a Prophete?
John 1:26 Iohn aunswered them saiynge: I baptyse with water, but one is come amonge you whom ye knowe not,
John 1:27 he it is that cometh after me, which was before me, whose shoe latchet I am not worthy to vnlose.
John 1:28 These thinges were done in Bethabara beyonde Iordaine wher Iohn did baptyse.
John 1:29 The nexte daye Iohn sawe Iesus commynge vnto him, and sayde: beholde the lambe of God, which taketh away the synne of the worlde.
John 1:30 This is he of whom I sayde. After me cometh a man which was before me, for he was yer then I,
John 1:31 and I knowe him not: but that he shoulde be declared to Israel, therfore am I come baptysynge with water.
John 1:32 And Iohn bare recorde saiynge: I saw the sprete descende from heauen, lyke vnto a doue, and abide vpon him,
John 1:33 and I knewe him not. But he that sent me: to baptyse in water, the same sayde vnto me: vpon whom thou shalt se the sprete descende and tarye styll on him, the same is he, whych baptyseth wyth the holye ghost.
John 1:34 And I sawe and beare recorde that this is the sonne of God.
John 1:35 The next daye after Iohn stode againe, and two of his disciples.
John 1:36 And he behelde Iesus as he walked by, & sayde: beholde the lambe of God.
John 1:37 And the .ij. disciples hearde him speake & foloweth Iesus.
John 1:38 And Iesus turned aboute and sawe them folowe, and sayde vnto them: what seke ye? They sayde vnto him: Rabbi (which is to saye by interpretacion, Maister) wher dwellest thou?
John 1:39 He sayed vnto them: come and se. They came and sawe wher he dwelte: and abode with him the daye. For it was aboute the tenth houre.
John 1:40 One of the two which hearde Iohn speake and folowed Iesus, was Andrew Simon Peters brother.
John 1:41 The same founde his brother Simon fyrst, and sayde vnto him: we haue founde Messias, which is by interpretation, anointed:
John 1:42 and brought him to Iesus. And Iesus behelde him and saide: thou art Simon the sonne of Ionas, thou shalt be called Cephas: which is by interpretacion, a stone.
John 1:43 The daye folowinge Iesus woulde go into Galyle, and founde Philip, and saide vnto him: folow me.
John 1:44 Philip was of Bethsaida the citye of Andrewe and Peter.
John 1:45 And Phylyp founde Nathanaell, and sayde vnto hym. We haue founde hym of whom Moyses in the lawe, and the prophetes did write: Iesus the sonne of Ioseph of Nazareth.
John 1:46 And Nathanael said to him: Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saide to him: come and se.
John 1:47 Iesus sawe Nathanael comminge to him and sayde of him: Beholde a right Israelyte, in whom is no gyle.
John 1:48 Nathanael, saide vnto hym: wher knewest thou me? Iesus aunswered, and sayde vnto him: Before that Philyp called the when thou wast vnder the fygge tree, I sawe the.
John 1:49 Nathanael aunswered & sayde vnto him: Rabbi, thou art the sonne of God, thou art the kynge of Israel.
John 1:50 Iesus aunswered and sayde vnto him: Because I sayde vnto the: I sawe the vnder the fygge tree, thou beleuest. Thou shalt se greater thinges then these.
John 1:51 And he sayed vnto him: Verely verely, I saye vnto you: here after shall ye se heauen open, and the aungels of God ascendinge and descendinge ouer the sonne of man,

CHAPTER: 2

John 2:1 And the thyrd day, was ther a Maryage in Cana a citie of Galile: & the mother of Iesus was ther.
John 2:2 And Iesus was called also & his disciples vnto the mariage.
John 2:3 And when the wyne fayled, the mother of Iesus sayde vnto him: they haue no wine.
John 2:4 Iesus said vnto her: woman, what haue I to do with the? Myne houre is not yet come.
John 2:5 His mother sayd vnto the mynisters: whatsoeuer he saith vnto you, do it.
John 2:6 And ther were standing there, sixe water pots of stone after the maner of the puryfiyng of the Iewes containinge two or thre fyrkins a pece.
John 2:7 And Iesus sayd vnto them: fill the waterpottes with water. And they filled them vp to the bryme.
John 2:8 And he sayd vnto them: drawe out now, & beare vnto the gouerner of the feaste. And they beare it.
John 2:9 When the ruler of the feaste had tasted the water that was turned vnto wyne, & knew not whence it was (but the mynysters whyche drue the water, knewe) He called the brydegrome,
John 2:10 and sayed vnto him: Al men at the beginning, set forth good wine and when men be dronke, then that which is worsse. But thou hast kept back the good wine vntil now.
John 2:11 This beginning of miracles did Iesus in Cana of Galile, and shewed his glory, & hys disciples beleued on him.
John 2:12 After that he descended into Capernaum, and his mother and his brethren, and his disciples: but continued not manye dayes there.
John 2:13 And the Iewes easter was euen at hande, & Iesus went vp to Ierusalem,
John 2:14 and founde syttinge in the temple those that solde oxen & shepe and doues and chaungers of money.
John 2:15 And he made a scourge of smal cordes: and draue them all out of the temple with the shepe and oxen, and poured out the chaungers money, and ouerthrue the tables,
John 2:16 and sayd vnto them that solde doues: Haue these thinges hence & make not my fathers house an house of marchaundise.
John 2:17 And his dyscyples remembred how that it was written: the zele of thyne house hath euen eaten me.
John 2:18 Then aunswered the Iewes & saied to him: what token shewest thou vnto vs, seyng that thou dost these thinges?
John 2:19 Iesus aunswered and said vnto them: destroy thys temple & in thre dayes. I wyll reare it vp again.
John 2:20 Then said the Iewes .xlvi. yeres was thys temple a buildynge, and wylt thou reare it vp in .iij. daies?
John 2:21 But he spake of the temple of hys bodie.
John 2:22 Assone therfore as he was risen from death agayne, his disciples remembred that he thus said. And they beleued the scrypture, and the wordes whyche Iesus had sayd.
John 2:23 When he was at Ierusalem at easter in the feaste many beleued on his name, when they sawe his miracles which he dyd,
John 2:24 but Iesus put not himself in their handes, because he knewe all men,
John 2:25 and neded not that any man shuld testyfy of man. For he knew what was in man.

CHAPTER: 3

John 3:1 Ther was a man of the Pharises named Nicodemus a ruler amonge the Iewes.
John 3:2 The same came to Iesus by nyghte & sayed vnto him: Rabbi, we knowe that thou art a teacher whiche art come from God. For no man coulde do such miracles as thou doest, except God were wt him.
John 3:3 Iesus aunswered & said to him: verely verely, I said vnto the: except a man be borne a new, he can not se the kingdome of God.
John 3:4 Nicodemus said vnto him: how can a man be borne when he is olde? can he enter into his mothers wombe and be borne againe?
John 3:5 Iesus aunswered: verely, verely, I saye vnto the: except that a man be boren of water and of the spyryte, he can not enter into the kyngdome of God.
John 3:6 That whyche is borne of the fleshe is fleshe: and that whiche is borne of the spyryte, is spyrite.
John 3:7 Marueyle not that I said to the, ye must be borne a newe.
John 3:8 The wynde bloweth wher it listeth: and thou hearest the sounde therof: but canst not tell whence it cometh and whyther it goeth: So is euery man that is borne of the spyryte.
John 3:9 And Nicodemus aunswered and said vnto him: how can these thinges be?
John 3:10 Iesus aunswered & said vnto him: art thou a maister in Israel, and knowest not these thinges?
John 3:11 Verely, verely, I say vnto the we speake that we know and testify that we haue sene, & ye receiue not our witnes.
John 3:12 Yf when I tel you earthly thinges ye beleue not: howe shoulde ye beleue if I shal tell you of heauenly thinges?
John 3:13 And no man ascendeth vp to heauen, but he that came doune from heauen, that is to say, the sonne of man which is in heauen.
John 3:14 And as Moyses lyfte vp the serpent in the wyldernes, euen so muste the sonne of man be lyft vp,
John 3:15 that none that beleueth in him perish, but haue eternall life.
John 3:16 For God so loueth the worlde, that he hath geuen his only sonne, that none that beleue in him, should perishe: but should haue euerlastinge lyfe.
John 3:17 For God sent not his sonne into the world, to condempne the worlde: but that the world through him, might be saued.
John 3:18 He that beleueth on him, shal not be condempned. But he that beleueth not is condempned allready, because he beleueth not in the name of the onlye sonne of God.
John 3:19 And this is the condempnacion, that light is come into the worlde, and the men loued darknes more then lyght, because their dedes were euyll.
John 3:20 For euerye man that euyll doth, hateth the light: nether commeth to the lyghte: lest his dedes shoulde be reproued.
John 3:21 But he that doeth truth commeth to the light that hys dedes myght be knowen, how that they are wrought in God.
John 3:22 After these thinges came Iesus & his dysciples into the Iewes lande, and ther he haunted wyth them & baptised.
John 3:23 And Iohn also baptysed in Enon besides Salim, because ther was much water there, & they came and were baptised.
John 3:24 For Iohn was not yet cast into pryson.
John 3:25 And ther arose a question betwene Iohns disciples and the Iewes aboute purifyinge.
John 3:26 And they came vnto Iohn, and sayed vnto hym: Rabbie, he that was with the beyond Iordan, to whom thou bareste witnes, Beholde the same baptyseth, and al men come to him.
John 3:27 Iohn aunswered, and sayed: a man can receiue nothing at al except it be geuen him from heauen.
John 3:28 Ye youre selues are witnesses how that I saide: I am not Christ, but am sent before him.
John 3:29 He that hath the bryde is the brydegrome. But the frend of the brydegrom, whiche standeth by and heareth him reioyseth greatlye of the brydegromes voyce. Thys my ioye is fulfilled.
John 3:30 He muste increace: and I muste decreace.
John 3:31 He that commeth from an hye is aboue al. He that is of the earth, is of the earth, & speaketh of the earth. He that commeth from heauen, is aboue all,
John 3:32 and what he hath sene and hearde: that he testifyeth: but no man receiueth his testimony.
John 3:33 Howbeit he that hath receiueth his testimony hath set to his seale that God is true.
John 3:34 For he whom God hath sent, speaketh the wordes of God: For God geueth not the spirite by measure.
John 3:35 The father loueth the sonne and hath geuen all thinges into his hand.
John 3:36 He that beleueth on the sonne, hath euerlasting life, and he that beleueth not the sonne shall not se life: but the wrath of God abydeth on him.

CHAPTER: 4

John 4:1 As sone as the Lord had knowledge, how the Phariseis had hearde, that Iesus made & Baptysed more disciples then Iohn
John 4:2 (though that Iesus him self baptysed not: but his disciples)
John 4:3 he lefte Iewry, & departed agayne into Galile.
John 4:4 And it was so that he must nedes go thorowe Samaria.
John 4:5 Then cam he to a citie of Samaria called Sichar, beside the possessyon that Iacob gaue to hys sonne Iosephe.
John 4:6 And there was Iacobs wel, Iesus then weried in hys iorny, sate thus on the wel. And it was about the .vi. houre:
John 4:7 and ther came a woman of Samaria to draw water. And Iesus sayed vnto hyr: geue me drinke.
John 4:8 For hys disciples were gone awaye vnto the town to bye meate.
John 4:9 Then sayde the woman of Samarya vnto hym: howe is it, that thou beynge a Iewe, axest drynke of me which am a Samaritan? for the Iewes medle not with the Samaritans.
John 4:10 Iesus aunswered & sayd vnto hyr: if thou kneweste the gyfte of God, and who it is that sayeth to the geue me drynke, thou wouldeste haue axed of hym, and he woulde haue geuen the water of lyfe.
John 4:11 The woman sayd to hym: Syr thou hast nothinge to drawe wyth, and the well is depe: from whence then hast thou that water of lyfe?
John 4:12 Art thou greater, then our father Iacob, whyche gaue vs this well, and he him selfe dranke therof, and hys chyldren, and his catell?
John 4:13 Iesus aunswered & sayde vnto hyr: whosoeuer drynketh of thys water: shall thyrste agayne.
John 4:14 But whosoeuer shall drinke of the water that I shall geue hym, shall neuer be more a thyrste: but the water that I shall geue him, shall be in him a well of water, springinge vp into euerlasting lyfe.
John 4:15 The woman sayde vnto him: Syr geue me of that water, that I thyrst not neyther come hyther to draw.
John 4:16 Iesus sayd vnto hyr. Go and call thy husbande, and come hyther.
John 4:17 The woman aunswered and sayde to him: I haue no husbande.
John 4:18 Iesus sayde to hyr, Thou hast well sayed, I haue no husbande. For thou haste had fyue husbandes and he whome thou nowe haste is not thy husbande. That saydest thou trulye.
John 4:19 The woman sayd vnto him: Syr I perceiue that thou art a prophete.
John 4:20 Oure fathers worshipped in this mountayne: and ye saye that in Hyerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.
John 4:21 Iesus sayd vnto hyr: woman beleue me, the houre cometh, when ye shal neyther in this mountayne, nor yet at Hierusalem worshyppe the father.
John 4:22 Ye worshype, ye wote not what: we knowe what we worshype. For saluation cometh of the Iewes.
John 4:23 But the houre cometh and nowe is, when the true worshyppers shal worshyp the father in spyrite and in trueth. For verelye suche the father requireth to worshyp him.
John 4:24 God is a spyryte, and they that worshyp hym, must worshyp hym in spiryte and trueth.
John 4:25 The woman sayd vnto him: I wot well Messias shal come, whiche is called Christe. When he is come, he wyll tell vs all thinges.
John 4:26 Iesus sayd vnto hyr: I that speake vnto the am he.
John 4:27 And euen at that poynte, came hys disciples, & merueyled that he talketh with the woman. Yet no man said vnto him: what meanest thou, or why talkest thou with hyr?
John 4:28 The woman then left hyr waterpotte, and went hyr way into the citie, and sayed to the men.
John 4:29 Come se a man whiche told me all thynges that euer I dyd. Is not he Christ?
John 4:30 Then they went out of the cytye, and came vnto hym.
John 4:31 And in the meane while his disciples praied hym saying: Maister, eate.
John 4:32 He said vnto them: I haue meate to eate, that ye knowe not of.
John 4:33 Then saied the discyples betwene them selues: hath anye manne brought hym meate?
John 4:34 Iesus saied to them: my meate is to do the wil of him that sent me. And to fynishe his workes.
John 4:35 Saye not ye: there are yet foure monethes, and then cometh heruest? Behold I saye vnto you, lyfte vp youre eyes, and loke on the regyons: for they are whyte al ready vnto harueste.
John 4:36 And he that reapeth receyueth rewarde, and gathereth fruite vnto lyfe eternall: that both he that soweth, and he that reapeth might reioyce together.
John 4:37 And herein is the sayinge true, that one soweth, and another reapeth.
John 4:38 I sente you to reape that wheron ye bestowed no laboure. Othere men laboured, and ye are entred into theyr laboures.
John 4:39 Manye of the Samarytanes of that citie beleued on hym for the sayinge of the woman, whyche testified, he tolde me all thynges that euer I did.
John 4:40 Then when the Samaritans were come vnto him they besought hym that he woulde tary with them. And he abode ther .ij. daies.
John 4:41 And manye more beleued because of his owne wordes,
John 4:42 & sayd vnto the woman. Now we beleue not because of thy saying. For we haue heard hym oureselues, & knowe that thys is euen in dede Christe the Sauioure of the worlde.
John 4:43 After .ij. daies he departed thence, and wente awaye into Galile.
John 4:44 And Iesus hym selfe testifyed, that a Prophet hath no honoure in hys own countrye.
John 4:45 Then assone as he was come into Galyle, the Galyleans receyued hym whych had sene al the thynges that he dyd at Hierusalem at the feaste. For they went also vnto the feaste daye.
John 4:46 And Iesus came againe into Cana of Galile: wher he turned water into wine. And there was a certayne ruler, whose sonne was sicke at Capernaum.
John 4:47 Assone as the same heard that Iesus was come out of Iury into Galile, he wente vnto hym, and besoughte hym, that he woulde descende and heale hys sonne: For he was euen ready to dye.
John 4:48 Then sayed Iesus vnto hym: except ye se sygnes and wonders ye can not beleue.
John 4:49 The ruler sayd vnto him: Syr come awaie or euer my chylde dye.
John 4:50 Iesus sayd vnto hym: Go thy waie, thy sonne liueth. And the man beleued the wordes that Iesus had spoken vnto hym, and went hys way.
John 4:51 And anone as he went on his waye, hys seruauntes mette hym and tolde hym sayinge, thy chylde lyueth.
John 4:52 Then enquered he of them the houre when he began to amende, and they saied vnto hym: yester daye the seuenth houre the feuer lefte hym.
John 4:53 And the father knewe that it was the same houre in whyche Iesus sayed vnto hym: Thy sonne lyueth. And he beleued and al his housholde.
John 4:54 This is againe the, seconde miracle, that Iesus dyd after he was come out of Iury into Galile.

CHAPTER: 5

John 5:1 After that there was a feast of the Iewes and Iesus went vp to Ierusalem.
John 5:2 And ther is at Ierusalem by the slaughterhouse, a pole called in the Ebrue toung Bethesda, hauing .v. porches,
John 5:3 in which lay a greate multitude of sycke folke, of blinde halt and withered, waitinge for the mouyng of the water.
John 5:4 For an angell went doune at a certaine ceason into the pole and troubled the water. Whosoeuer then fyrste after the steringe of the water, stepped in, was made whole of whatsoeuer disease he had.
John 5:5 And a certayne man was there whyche had ben diseased .xxxviij. yeares.
John 5:6 When Iesus sawe hym lye and knewe that he nowe longe tyme had bene diseased, he said vnto hym: Wylt thou be made whole?
John 5:7 The sicke man aunswered hym. Syr I haue no man when the water is troubled to put me into the pole. But in the meane time while I am about to come, another steppeth doune before me.
John 5:8 And Iesus sayde vnto him: ryse take vp thy bed, and walke.
John 5:9 And immediatly the man was made whole, and toke vp his bedde, and went. And the same day was the saboth daye.
John 5:10 The Iewes therfore sayd to him that was made whole it is the saboth day, it is not lawful for the to carye thy bed.
John 5:11 He answered them: he that made me whole, said vnto me: take vp thy bed, and get the hence.
John 5:12 Then axed they hym what man is that whiche saied vnto the, take vp thy bed & walke.
John 5:13 And he that was healed, wiste not who it was. For Iesus had gotten him selfe awaie, because that there was prease of people in the place.
John 5:14 And after that, Iesus found him in the temple & said vnto him: behold thou arte made whole, synne no more, lest a worsse thinge happen vnto the.
John 5:15 The man departed & told the Iewes that it was Iesus, which had made him whole.
John 5:16 And therfore the Iewes dyd persecute Iesus, and soughte the meanes to slea him, because he had done these thinges on the saboth daye.
John 5:17 And Iesus answered them: my father worketh hither to & I worke.
John 5:18 Therfore the Iewes sought the more to kill him not only because he had broken the saboth, but sayd also that God was hys father, and made hym selfe equal with God.
John 5:19 Then aunswered Iesus and sayed vnto them: verely verely, I say vnto you: the sonne can do nothinge of hym selfe, but that he seeth the father do. For whatsoeuer he doth, that doeth the sonne also.
John 5:20 For the father loueth the sonne, & sheweth hym all thinges, whatsoeuer he him selfe doeth. And he wyll shewe hym greater workes then these, because ye should maruaile.
John 5:21 For lykewyse as the father rayseth vp the dead, and quickeneth them: euen so the sonne quickeneth whom he wyll.
John 5:22 Neyther iudgeth the father anye man: but hath committed all iudgement vnto the sonne,
John 5:23 because that all men should honoure the sonne, euen as they honoured the father. He that honoureth not the sonne: the same honoureth not the father, which hath sent him.
John 5:24 Verely, verely I say vnto you he that heareth my wordes, and beleueth on him that sent me, hath euerlasting lyfe, & shal not come into damnacion: but is escaped from death vnto lyfe.
John 5:25 Verely verely, I saye vnto you: The tyme shall come, and nowe is, when the dead shall heare the voyce of the sonne of God. And they that heare shall lyue.
John 5:26 For as the father hath lyfe in him selfe, so lykewyse hath he geuen to the sonne to haue lyfe in him selfe,
John 5:27 and hath geuen him power also to iudge, in that he is the sonne of man.
John 5:28 Maruaile not at this, the houre shall come in the which all that are in the graues, shal heare his voice,
John 5:29 and shall come forth: they that haue done good, vnto the resurreccion of lyfe, and they that hath done euil, vnto the resurreccion of damnacion.
John 5:30 I can of myne owne selfe do nothinge at all. As I heare. I iudge: and my iudgement is iust, because I seke not mine owne wyll but the wyll of my father which hath sent me.
John 5:31 If I beare witnes of my selfe, my witnes is not true.
John 5:32 Ther is another that beareth witnes of me, and I am sure that the wytnes which he beareth of me, is true.
John 5:33 Ye sent vnto Iohn, and he bare witnes vnto the truth.
John 5:34 But I receiue not the recorde of man Neuerthelesse, these thinges I say that ye might be safe.
John 5:35 He was a burninge and a shyninge lyght and ye woulde for a season haue reioysed in his lyght:
John 5:36 But I haue greater witnes then the witnes of Iohn. For the workes which the father hath geuen me to fynyshe the same workes which I do, beare witnes of me that the father sent me.
John 5:37 And the father himselfe which hath sent me, beareth witnes of me. Ye haue not hearde his voice at anye tyme nor ye haue sene his shape:
John 5:38 therto his wordes haue ye not abydinge in you. For whom he hath sent, him ye beleue not.
John 5:39 Searche the sciptures, for in them ye thinke ye haue eternall lyfe: and they are they which testifye of me.
John 5:40 And yet wyll ye not come to me that ye might haue lyfe.
John 5:41 I receyue not prayse of men.
John 5:42 But I knowe you, that ye haue not the loue of God in you.
John 5:43 I am come in my fathers name, and ye receyue me not. If another shall come in his owne name, him wyll ye receyue.
John 5:44 Howe can ye beleue which receyue honoure one of another, and seke not the honoure that commeth of God onlye?
John 5:45 Do not thinke that I wyll accuse you to my father. There is one that accuseth you euen Moyses in whom ye truste.
John 5:46 For had ye beleued Moises ye would haue beleued me for, he wrote of me.
John 5:47 But seynge ye beleue not hys writting: how should ye beleue my wordes?

CHAPTER: 6

John 6:1 After these thynges Iesus went his way ouer the sea of Galyle, nye to a cytye called Tyberias.
John 6:2 And a great multitude folowed hym, because they had sene his miracles which he did on them that were diseased.
John 6:3 And Iesus went vp into a mountayne, and there he sate with his disciples.
John 6:4 And easter a feast of the Iewes was nye.
John 6:5 Then Iesus lift vp his eyes, and sawe a company come vnto him, and sayd vnto Phylip: whence shalt we bye bread that these might eate?
John 6:6 This he sayde to proue hym, for he him selfe knewe what he would do.
John 6:7 Philip aunswered him, two hondred peny worth of bread are not sufficient for them, that euerye man haue a litel.
John 6:8 Then sayde vnto hym one of his disciples, Andrew Simon Peters brother.
John 6:9 Ther is a lad here, which hath fyue barly loues and two fyshes: but what is that among so many?
John 6:10 And Iesus sayde: make the people sytte downe. There was much grasse in the place. And the men sate doune, in numbre, about fyue thousande.
John 6:11 And Iesus toke the bread and gaue thankes, and gaue to the disciples, and his disciples to them that were set doune. And likewise of the fyshes as much as they would.
John 6:12 When they had eaten ynough, he said vnto his disciples: gather vp the broken meate that remayneth: that nothinge be lost:
John 6:13 And they gathered it together and fylled twelue baskettes with the broken meate, of the fyue barly loues and two fyshes which broken meate remained vnto them that had eaten.
John 6:14 Then the men when they had sene the miracle that Iesus did, saide: this is of a truthe the prophete that shoulde come into the worlde.
John 6:15 When Iesus perceiued that they woulde come, & take him vp to make him king, he departed againe into a mountaine him selfe alone.
John 6:16 And when euen was come his disciples went vnto the sea
John 6:17 and entred into a shyppe and went ouer the sea vnto Capernaum. And anone it was darke, and Iesus was not come to them.
John 6:18 And the sea arose wt a great winde that blewe.
John 6:19 And when they had rowen about a .xxv. or a .xxx. furlonges, they sawe Iesus walke on the sea, and drawe nye vnto the shippe and they were afrayed.
John 6:20 And he sayde to them. It is I: be not afrayed.
John 6:21 Then would they haue receyued him into the shyppe, and the shyppe was by and by at the lande whither they wente.
John 6:22 The daye folowinge, the people which stode on the other syde of the sea, sawe that ther was none other shyp ther saue that one wherinto his disciples were entred and that Iesus went not in with his discyples into the shyp but that his disciples were gone awaye alone.
John 6:23 How be it ther came other shyppes from Tiberias nye vnto the place wher they eate bread when the Lorde hath blessed.
John 6:24 Then when the people sawe that Iesus was not there neyther his disciples, they also toke shyppinge and came to Capernaum sekinge for Iesus.
John 6:25 And when they had found him on the other syde of the sea, they sayde vnto hym: Rabbi when camest thou hither?
John 6:26 Iesus aunswered them and sayde verelye, verelye I say vnto you ye seke me, not because ye sawe the miracles, but because ye eate of the loues, and were fylled.
John 6:27 Laboure not for the meate which perysheth, but for the meate that endureth vnto euerlasting lyfe, which meate the sonne of man shall geue vnto you. For hym hath God the father sealed.
John 6:28 Then sayde they vnto him: what shall we do that we might worke the workes of God?
John 6:29 Iesus aunswered and saide vnto them: This is the worke of God, that ye beleue on him: whom he hath sent.
John 6:30 They said vnto him: what sygne shewest thou them that we may se and beleue the? What doest thou worke?
John 6:31 Our father did eate manna in the desert as it is written. He gaue them bread from heauen to eate.
John 6:32 Iesus sayde vnto them: verelye, verelye I say vnto you: Moyses gaue you not breade from heauen: but my father geueth you the true breade from heauen.
John 6:33 For the bread of God is he which commeth doune from heauen, and geueth lyfe vnto the worlde.
John 6:34 Then sayde they vnto hym: Lord, euermore geue vs this breade.
John 6:35 And Iesus sayde vnto them: I am that breade of lyfe. He that commeth to me, shall not honger: and he that beleueth on me shall not thurste.
John 6:36 But I saye vnto you: that ye haue sene me, and yet beleue not.
John 6:37 All that the father geueth me shall come to me, and him that cometh to me, I cast not awaye.
John 6:38 For I came doune from heauen: not to do myne owne wyll, but his wyll which hath sent me.
John 6:39 And this is the fathers wyll which hath sent me, that of all whiche hath geuen me, I shoulde loose nothinge: but shoulde rayse it vp agayne at the laste daye.
John 6:40 And this is the wyll of him that sent me: that euerye man which seeth the sonne and beleueth on him haue euerlasting lyfe. And I wyll rayse him vp at the laste daye.
John 6:41 The Iewes then murmured at him, because he sayd: I am that bread which is come doune from heauen.
John 6:42 And they sayde: Is not this Iesus the sonne of Ioseph, whose father and mother we knowe? Howe is it then that he saieth: I came doune from heauen?
John 6:43 Iesus aunswered and saide vnto them. Murmure not amonge your selues.
John 6:44 No man can come to me: except the father which hath sent me drawe him. And I wyll rayse him vp at the laste day.
John 6:45 It is written in the prophetes: that they shalbe al taught of God. Euery man therfore thath hath heard and hath learned of the father commeth vnto me.
John 6:46 Not that anye man hath sene the father, saue which is of God, the same hath sene the father.
John 6:47 Verely, verelye, I say vnto you, he that beleueth on me, hath euerlasting lyfe
John 6:48 I am that bread of lyfe.
John 6:49 Youre fathers did eate Manna in the wyldernes and are dead.
John 6:50 This is that bread which commeth from heauen that he which eateth of it, shoulde also not dye.
John 6:51 I am that lyuinge bread: which came doune from heauen. If any man eate of this bread, he shall lyue for euer. And the bread that I wyll geue is my flesh, which I will geue for the life of the worlde.
John 6:52 And the Iewes stroue amonge them selues saiynge: How can this felowe geue vs his flesh to eate?
John 6:53 Then Iesus saide to them. Verely, verely, I say vnto you: excepte ye eate the fleshe of the sonne of man and drinke his bloude, ye shall not haue lyue in you.
John 6:54 Whosoeuer eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloude, hath eternal lyfe: and I wyll rayse him vp at the laste day.
John 6:55 For my flesh is meate in dede, and my bloude is drinke in dede.
John 6:56 He that eateth my flesh, and drinketh my bloude, dwelt in me and I in him.
John 6:57 As the liuinge father hath sent me, euen so lyue I by my father, and he that eateth me shall lyue by me.
John 6:58 This is the bread which came from heauen: not as your fathers haue eaten Manna and are dead. He that eateth of this breade, shall lyue euer.
John 6:59 These thinges sayed he in the synagoge as he taught in Capernaum.
John 6:60 Many therfore of his disciples, when they had hearde this, sayd this is anhearde saiynge: who can abide the hearinge of it?
John 6:61 Iesus knewe in him selfe, that his disciples murmured at it, and sayde vnto them: Doth this offende you?
John 6:62 What and if ye shall se the sonne of man ascende vp wher he was before?
John 6:63 It is the spirite that quickeneth, the flesh proffetteth nothing. The wordes that I speake vnto you, are spirite and lyfe.
John 6:64 But there are some of you that beleue not. For Iesus knewe from the beginninge, which they were that beleued not, and wo should betraye him.
John 6:65 And he sayde: therfore said I vnto you that no man cometh vnto me, except it were geuen vnto him of my father.
John 6:66 From that tyme manye of his discyples wente backe, and walked no more with him.
John 6:67 Then sayde Iesus to the twelue: will ye also go awaye?
John 6:68 Then Symon Peter aunswered: Maister to whom shall we go? Thou hast the wordes of eternall lyfe,
John 6:69 and we beleue and knowe thou arte Christe the sonne of the lyuinge God.
John 6:70 Iesus aunswered them: Haue not I chosen you twelue, and yet one of you is the deuyll?
John 6:71 He spake it of Iudas Iscarioth the sonne of Simon: For he it was that shoulde betraye him, and was one of the twelue.

CHAPTER: 7

John 7:1 After that Iesus went about into Galile, and would not go about in Iewry, for the Iewes sought to kyll him.
John 7:2 The Iewes tabernacle feaste was at hande.
John 7:3 His brethren therfore sayde vnto hym: get the hence, & go into Iewry that thy disciples maye se thy workes that thou doest.
John 7:4 For ther is no man that doeth any thing secretly, and he him selfe seketh to be knowen openly. If thou do such thinges shew thy selfe to the worlde.
John 7:5 For as yet his brethren beleued not in him.
John 7:6 Then Iesus sayde vnto them: My tyme is not yet come, your tyme is alway redye.
John 7:7 The worlde can not hate you. But me it hateth: because I testifye of it, that the workes of it are euyll.
John 7:8 Go ye vp vnto this feaste, I wyl not go yet vnto this feaste for my tyme is not yet full come.
John 7:9 These wordes he sayde vnto them, and abode styll in Galyle.
John 7:10 But assone as his brethren were gone vp, he wente also vp vnto the feast: not openly, but as it were priuelye.
John 7:11 Then sought him the Iewes at the feaste, and sayde: where is he?
John 7:12 And much murmuringe was ther of him amonge the people. Some sayde: He is good. Other sayd nay, but he deceiued the people.
John 7:13 How beit no man spake openlye of him, for feare of the Iewes.
John 7:14 In the middes of the feaste, Iesus wente vp into the temple and taught
John 7:15 And the Iewes maruayled saiynge: How knoweth he the scriptures, seiyng that he neuer learned?
John 7:16 Iesus aunswered them, and sayde: My doctryne is not myne: but his that sent me:
John 7:17 If any man wil do his wyll he shall knowe of the doctryne, whither it be of God, or whither I speake of my selfe.
John 7:18 He that speaketh of him selfe, seketh his owne prayse. But he that seketh his prayse that sent him, the same is true and no vnrightuousnes is in him.
John 7:19 Dyd not Moises geue you a lawe, and yet none of you kepeth the lawe? Why go ye about to kill me?
John 7:20 The people aunswered and sayde: thou hast the deuyl: who goeth about to kyll the?
John 7:21 Iesus aunswereth and saide to them: I haue done one worke, and ye all maruayle.
John 7:22 Moyses therfore gaue vnto you circuncisyon: not because it is of Moises, but of the fathers. And yet ye on the Saboth daye, circumcyse a man.
John 7:23 If a man on the Saboth daye receyue circumcisyon without breakinge of the lawe of Moyses: disdayne ye at me because I haue made a man euery whit whole on the Saboth daye?
John 7:24 Iudge not after the vtter aperaunce: but iudge rightuouse iudgemente.
John 7:25 Then sayde some of them of Hierusalem: is not this he whom they go aboute to kyll?
John 7:26 Beholde he speaketh boldly, & they say nothinge to him: Do the rulers knowe in dede that this is very Christe?
John 7:27 Howe be it we knowe this man whence he is: but when Christ cometh, no man shall knowe whence he is.
John 7:28 Then cried Iesus in the temple as he taught saiyng: ye knowe me, and whence I am ye knowe. And yet I am not come of my selfe, but he that sent me is true, whom ye knowe not.
John 7:29 I knowe hym: for I am of hym, and he hath sent me.
John 7:30 Then they sought to take hym: but no man layde handes on hym, because his tyme was not yet come.
John 7:31 Many of the people beleued on him and sayd: when Christe cometh wyl he do mo miracles then this man hath done?
John 7:32 The pharyseis hearde that the people murmured such thinges about him. Wherfore the phariseis and hye priestes sente ministers forth to take him.
John 7:33 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: Yet am I a lytle while with you, and then go I vnto hym that sent me.
John 7:34 Ye shall seke, and shal not fynde me: and where I am, thither can ye not come.
John 7:35 Then sayd the Iewes amonge them selues: whither wyll he go, that we shall not fynde him? Wyll he go amonge the gentyls which are scattered all abrode and teache the gentyls:
John 7:36 What maner of saiynge is this that he saide: ye shall seke me, and shall not fynde me: and wher I am thither can ye not come?
John 7:37 In the last day, that great daye of the feaste Iesus stode and cried saiynge: If a man thirste, let him come vnto me and drinke.
John 7:38 He that beleueth on me, as sayeth the scripture, out of hys bellye shall flowe riuers of water of lyfe.
John 7:39 This spake he of the spirite which they that beleueth on him, shoulde receyue. For the holye ghost was not yet because that Iesus was not yet gloryfyed.
John 7:40 Manye of the people, when they hearde that saiynge sayed: of a truthe this is a Prophete,
John 7:41 other sayeth: this is Christe, some saide: shal Christ come out of Galile?
John 7:42 Saieth not the scriptuture that Christ shal come of the sede of Dauid, & out of the toune of Bethleem wher Dauid was?
John 7:43 So was there dissencydu among the people aboute hym?
John 7:44 And some of them woulde haue taken him: but no man layed handes on hym.
John 7:45 Then came the ministers to the hye priestes and Phariseis. And they sayd vnto them: why haue ye not brought hym?
John 7:46 The seruauntes aunswered: neuer man spake as thys man doth.
John 7:47 Then aunswered them the Phariseis: are ye also deceyued?
John 7:48 Doth anye of the rulers or the Phariseis beleue on hym?
John 7:49 But the commune people whiche know not the lawe, are cursed.
John 7:50 Nicodemus sayed vnto them. He that came to Iesus by night, and was one of them.
John 7:51 Doeth our lawe iudge anye man, before it heare him and knowe what he hath done?
John 7:52 They aunswered and sayed vnto hym: art thou also of Galile? Searche and loke, for oute of Galile aryseth no Prophete.
John 7:53 And euery man wente vnto hys owne house.

CHAPTER: 8

John 8:1 And Iesus wente vnto mounte Oliuete,
John 8:2 and earlye in the mornynge came agayne into the temple, and all the people came vnto him, and sate doune & taught them.
John 8:3 And the Scribes and Phariseis brought vnto hym a woman taken in aduoutrye, and set her in the middest,
John 8:4 and sayed vnto hym: Mayster, thys woman was taken in aduoutrye, euen as the dede was a doynge.
John 8:5 Moyses in the lawe commaunded vs that suche shoulde be stoned. What sayest thou therfore?
John 8:6 And this they sayed to tempte hym, that they myghte haue, whereof to accuse hym. Iesus stouped doune, and with hys fynger wrote on the ground.
John 8:7 And whyle they continued axynge hym, he lyfte hym selfe vp, and sayd vnto them: let hym that is amonge you without synne caste the fyrst stone at her.
John 8:8 And agayne he stouped doune, and wrote on the grounde.
John 8:9 And assone as they hearde that, they went out one by one, the eldest fyrst. And Iesu was left alone, and the woman standynge in the myddes.
John 8:10 When Iesus had lyft vp hym self agayn and sawe no man but the woman, he sayd to her. Woman where are those thyne accusers? Hath no man condemned the?
John 8:11 She sayed no man Lorde. And Iesus sayde: Neyther do I condempne the. Go, and synne no more.
John 8:12 Then spake Iesus agayne vnto them, saiynge. I am the lyghte of the worlde. He that foloweth me, shall not walke in darkenes: but shall haue the lyghte of lyfe.
John 8:13 The Phariseis sayde vnto hym: thou bearest recorde of thy selfe thy recorde is not true.
John 8:14 Iesus aunswered and sayed vnto them: though I beare recorde of my selfe, yet my recorde is true: for I know whence I came, and whether I go. But ye can not tel, whence I came, and whither I go.
John 8:15 Ye iudge after the flesh. I iudge no man.
John 8:16 Thoughe I iudge, yet is my iudgement true. For I am not alone: but I and the father that sent me.
John 8:17 It is also written in your lawe, that the testimony of two men is true.
John 8:18 I am one that beare witnes of my selfe, and the father that sent me beareth witnes of me.
John 8:19 Then sayde they vnto hym: where is thy father? Iesus aunswered: ye neyther knowe me nor yet my father. Yf ye had knowen me, ye shoulde haue knowen my father also.
John 8:20 These wordes spake Iesus in the treasury, as he taught in the temple, and no man layde handes on hym, for hys tyme was not yet come.
John 8:21 Then sayde Iesus agayne vnto them. I go my waye, and ye shall seke me, & shall dye in youre synnes. Whether I go, thither can ye not come.
John 8:22 Then sayde the Iewes: will he kyll hym selfe, because he sayth: whether I go thyther can ye not come?
John 8:23 And he sayde to them: ye are from beneth. I am from aboue. Ye are of thys worlde. I am not of thys worlde.
John 8:24 I sayd therfore vnto you, that ye shall dye in your synnes. For except ye beleue that I am he, ye shall dye in youre synnes.
John 8:25 Then sayed they vnto hym, who arte thou? And Iesus sayde vnto them: Euen the very same thynge that I saye vnto you,
John 8:26 I haue manye thynges to saye, and to iudge of you: but he that sent me is true. And I speake in the worlde, those thinges which I haue hearde of hym.
John 8:27 Howe be it, they vnderstode not that he spake of hys father.
John 8:28 Then sayde Iesus vnto them: when ye haue lyfte vp an hye the sonne of man, then shall ye knowe, that I am he, and that I do nothynge of my self: but as my father hath taught me, euen so I speake:
John 8:29 and he that sente me, is with me. The father hath not left me alone, for I do alwayes those thynges, that please him.
John 8:30 As he spake these wordes, many beleued on hym. Then sayde Iesus to those Iewes whiche beleued on hym.
John 8:31 Yf ye continue in my wordes: then are ye my very discyples,
John 8:32 and shal know the truth, and the truthe shall make you free.
John 8:33 They aunswered hym. We be Abrahams seede, and were neuer bonde to any man: why sayest thou then: ye shalbe made, fre?
John 8:34 Iesus aunswered them: verelye, verelye I say vnto you, that whosoeuer committeth synne
John 8:35 is the seruaunte of synne. And the seruaunte abydeth not in the house for euer.
John 8:36 But the sonne abydeth euer. Yf the sonne therfore shal make you fre, then are ye free in dede.
John 8:37 I knowe that ye are Abrahams sede, but ye seke meanes to kyl me, because my sayinges haue no place in you.
John 8:38 I speake that I haue sene with my father: and ye do that which ye haue sene with youre father.
John 8:39 They aunswered, & sayde vnto hym. Abraham is oure father. Iesus sayde vnto them: yf ye were Abrahams chyldren, ye woulde do the dedes of Abraham.
John 8:40 But nowe ye go about to kyll me, a man that haue tolde you the truthe whiche I haue hearde of God, thys dyd not Abraham,
John 8:41 ye do the dedes of your father. Then sayde they to him: we were not borne of fornicion. We haue one father, whiche is God.
John 8:42 Iesus sayde vnto them: yf God were youre father, then woulde ye loue me. For I proceaded forth, and come from God. Neyther came I of my selfe, but he sente me.
John 8:43 Why do ye not knowe my speache? Euen because ye cannot abyde the hearynge of my wordes.
John 8:44 Ye are of youre father the deuyl, and the lustes of your father ye wyll do. He was a murtherer from the begynnyng, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truthe in hym. When he speaketh a lye, then speaketh he of hys owne. For he is a lyar, and the father therof.
John 8:45 And because I tell you the truthe, therfore ye beleue me not.
John 8:46 Which of you can rebuke me of synne? Yf I saye the truth, why do not ye beleue me?
John 8:47 He that is of God, heareth Goddes wordes. Ye therfor heare them not, because ye, are not of God.
John 8:48 Then answered the Iewes, and sayd vnto hym: Saye we not well that thou arte a Samaritane, and hast the deuyll?
John 8:49 Iesus aunswered: I haue not the deuyll: but I honoure my father, & ye haue dishonoured me.
John 8:50 I seke not myne owne prayse: but there is one that seketh, and iudgeth.
John 8:51 Verely verely I saye vnto you, yf a man kepe my saiynges, he shall neuer she death.
John 8:52 Then sayed the Iewes to hym. Nowe knowe we that thou haste the deuyll. Abraham is dead, and also the Prophetes, and yet thou sayest, yf a man kepe my saiynges he shall neuer tast of death.
John 8:53 Art thou greater then oure father Abraham which is dead? And the Prophetes are dead: Whome makest thou thy selfe?
John 8:54 Iesus answered. Yf I honoure my selfe, myne honoure is nothynge worthe. It is my father, that honoureth me, which you saye is youre God,
John 8:55 and ye haue not knowen hym: but I knowe hym, And yf I shoulde saye: I knowe hym not, I shoulde be a lyer lyke vnto you. But I knowe hym, and kepe hys saiynge.
John 8:56 Your father Abraham was glad to se my daye and he sawe it, and reioyced.
John 8:57 Then sayed the Iewes vnto hym: thou arte not yet .l. yeares olde, and hast thou sene Abraham?
John 8:58 Iesus said vnto them: Verelye verely I saye vnto you: yer Abraham was I am.
John 8:59 Then toke they vp stones to caste at hym. But Iesus hyd him self and wente oute of the temple.

CHAPTER: 9

John 9:1 And as Iesus passed by, he saw a man which was blynde from hys byrthe.
John 9:2 And his disciples axed hym: Mayster, who dyd synne: thys man or his father and mother: that he was borne blynd?
John 9:3 Iesus aunswered: Neyther hath thys man synned nor yet hys father and mother: but that the workes of God shoulde be shewed on him.
John 9:4 I must work the workes of hym that sente me, whyle it is daye. The nyghte cometh, when no man can worke.
John 9:5 As longe as I am in the worlde, I am the lyght of the worlde.
John 9:6 Assone as he had thus spoken; he spatte on the grounde, and made claye of the spetle, and rubbed the claye on the eyes of the blynd,
John 9:7 and sayed vnto hym: Go, washe the in the pole of Syloe, whiche by interpretacyon, signifyeth sente. He went hys waye, and washed & came agayne, sayng:
John 9:8 The neyghboures and they that had sene him before, how that he was a beggar, sayed: is not thys he that satte & begged.
John 9:9 Some sayed: this is he. Other saied: he is like hym. But he hym selfe sayd: I am euen he.
John 9:10 They sayed vnto hym: Howe are thyne eyes opened then?
John 9:11 He aunswered and sayde. The man that is called Iesus, made claye, & anoynted myne eyes, and sayed vnto me: Go to the pole Siloe, and washe. And I wente and washed & receyued my syghte.
John 9:12 They sayde vnto him: where is he? He sayde: I can not tell.
John 9:13 Then brought they to the Pharises, hym that a litle before was blynde:
John 9:14 for it was the Saboth day, when Iesus made the claye and opened hys eyes.
John 9:15 Then agayne the Pharises also axed him, how he had receyued his sight. He sayed vnto them: He put claye vpon my eyes, and I washed and do se.
John 9:16 Then sayd some of the Phariseis: thys man is not of God, because he kepeth not the Saboth daye. Other sayed: howe can a man that is a synner, do such miracles? And there was stryfe among them.
John 9:17 Then spake they vnto the blynde agayne. What saiest thou of hym, because he hath opened thyne eyes? And he sayed: He is a Prophete.
John 9:18 But the Iewes dyd not beleue on the felowe, howe that he was blynde and receyued hys sighte, vntyll they had called the father & mother of hym that had receyued his sighte.
John 9:19 And they axed them, saiynge: Is thys youre sonne, whom ye say was borne blynde? How doth he now se then?
John 9:20 His father and mother aunswered them, and sayed: We wote well that thys is oure sonne, & that he was borne blind,
John 9:21 but by what meanes he now seeth, that can we not tell, or who hath opened hys eyes, can we not tell. He is olde ynoughe, axe him, let hym answere for hym self.
John 9:22 Such wordes spake his father and mother, because they feared the Iewes. For the Iewes had conspyred al ready, that yf any man dyd confesse that he was Christe, he shoulde be excommunicate oute of the synagoge,
John 9:23 therfore sayd hys father & mother: he is olde ynough, axe hym.
John 9:24 Then agayne called they the man that was the blynde, & sayd vnto him: Geue God the prayse we knowe that this man is a synner.
John 9:25 He aunswered and sayde: Whither he be a synner or no. I can not tell, one thyng I am sure of: that I was blynde, and now I se.
John 9:26 Then sayd they to hym agayne: What dyd he to the? Howe opened he thyne eyes?
John 9:27 He aunswered them: I tolde you per whyle, and ye dyd not heare. Wherfore woulde ye heare it agayne? wyl ye also be hys discyples?
John 9:28 Then rated they him, & sayde: thou arte hys disciple: we be Moyses discyples.
John 9:29 We are sure that God spake wyth Moyses, thys felowe we knowe not from whence he is.
John 9:30 The man aunswered, and sayd vnto them: Thys is a merueylous thynge, that ye wote not whence he is, seyng he hath opened myne eyes.
John 9:31 For we be sure that God heareth not synners. But yf any man be a worshypper of God, and do hys wyl, hym heareth he.
John 9:32 Sence the worlde began: was it not hearde that any man opened the eies of one that was borne blynde.
John 9:33 If thys man were not of God, he coulde haue done nothynge.
John 9:34 They answered, and sayde vnto hym: thou arte all together borne in synne, and doest thou teach vs? And they cast hym oute.
John 9:35 Iesus hearde, that they had excommunicat hym, he sayde vnto hym: doest thou beleue on the sonne of God?
John 9:36 He aunswered, and sayde: Who is it Lord that I myght beleue on him?
John 9:37 And Iesus sayde vnto hym: Thou haste sene hym, and he it is that talked with the.
John 9:38 And he sayde: Lorde I beleue & worshypped hym.
John 9:39 Iesus sayed: I am come vnto iudgement into this worlde, that they which se not myght se, and they which se, myght be made blynd.
John 9:40 And some of the Pharises whiche were with him, hearde these wordes, and sayde vnto hym: are we then blynde?
John 9:41 Iesus sayde vnto them: yf ye were blynde, ye shoulde haue no synne. But nowe ye saye: we se, therfor your synne remayneth.

CHAPTER: 10

John 10:1 Verelye verelye I saye vnto you: he that entreth not in by the dore, into the shepe folde: but climmeth vp some other waye, the same is a thefe and a robber.
John 10:2 He that goeth in by the dore, is the shepeherde of the shepe,
John 10:3 to him the porter openeth, and the shepe heare hys voyce, and he calleth hys owne shepe by name, and leadeth them oute.
John 10:4 And when he hath sente forth hys owne shepe, he goeth before them, and the shepe folowe hym, for they knowe hys voyce.
John 10:5 A straunger they wyll not folowe, but wyll flye from hym, for they know not the voyce of straungers.
John 10:6 Thys similitude spake Iesus vnto them: But they vnderstode not what thynges they were whiche he spake vnto them.
John 10:7 Then Iesus sayed vnto them agayne Verelye I saye vnto you: I am the dore of the shepe.
John 10:8 Al, euen as manye as came before me, are theues and robbers: but the shepe dyd not heare them.
John 10:9 I am the dore: by me yf any man enter in, he shalbe safe, and shall go in & oute, and fynde pasture.
John 10:10 The thefe cometh not, but for to steale, kyll, and destroye. I am come, that they might haue lyfe, and haue it more aboundauntlye.
John 10:11 I am the good shepeherde. The good shepe herde geueth hys lyfe for the shepe.
John 10:12 An hyred, seruaunte, which is not the shepeherde, neyther the shepe are hys own, seeth the wolfe commynge, and leaueth the shepe, and fleeth, and the wolfe catcheth them, & scatiereth the shepe.
John 10:13 The hyred seruaunte fleeth, because he is an hyred seruaunte, and careth not for the shepe.
John 10:14 I am that good shepeherde, and knowe myne and am knowen of myne.
John 10:15 As my father knoweth me, euen so knowe I my father. And I geue my lyfe for the shepe:
John 10:16 and other shepe I haue whiche are not of thys folde. Them also muste I brynge that they maye heare my voyce, and that there maye be one flocke, and one shepeherde.
John 10:17 Therfore doth my father loue me, because I put my lyfe from me, that I myght take it agayne.
John 10:18 Noman taketh it from me, but I put it awaye of my selfe. I haue power to put it from me, and haue power to take it agayne. Thys commaundemente haue I receyued of my father.
John 10:19 And there was a dissencyon agayne among the Iewes for these saiynges,
John 10:20 & many of them sayd: he hath the deuil, and is madde: why heare ye hym?
John 10:21 Other sayd: these are not the wordes of hym that hath the deuyll. Can the deuyll open the eyes of the blynde?
John 10:22 And it was at Hierusalem the feaste of the dedicacion of the temple, and it was wynter,
John 10:23 & Iesus walked in Solomons porche.
John 10:24 Then came the Iewes rounde about hym, & sayed vnto hym: Howe longe dost thou make vs doubte? Yf thou be Christe, tell vs playnely.
John 10:25 Iesus aunswered them: I tolde you, and ye beleue not. The workes that I do in my fathers name, then beare witnes of me.
John 10:26 But ye beleue not because ye are not of my shepe. As I said vnto you:
John 10:27 my shepe heare my voice, & I know them, and they folowe me,
John 10:28 and I geue vnto them eternall lyfe, and they shall neuer perish neyther shall any man plucke them out of my hande.
John 10:29 My father whiche gaue them me, is greater then all, and no man is able to take them out of my fathers hande.
John 10:30 And I and my father are one.
John 10:31 Then the Iewes agayne toke vp stones to stone hym with all.
John 10:32 Iesus aunswered them: manye good workes haue I shewed you from my father: for whiche of them wyll ye stone me?
John 10:33 The Iewes aunswered him, saiynge: For thy good workes sake we stone the not, but for thy blasphemye, and because that thou beynge a man, makest thy selfe God.
John 10:34 Iesus aunswered them: is it not wrytten in youre lawe. I saye: ye are Goddes?
John 10:35 Yf he called them Goddes vnto whom the worde of God was spoken (& the scripture can not be broken)
John 10:36 saye ye then to hym, whom the father hath sanctifyed, & sent into the worlde, thou blasphemest, because I sayed. I am the sonne of God?
John 10:37 yf I do not the workes of my father, beleue me not.
John 10:38 But yf I do: then thoughe ye beleue not me, yet beleue the workes, that ye maye knowe and beleue, that the father is in me, and I in hym.
John 10:39 Agayne they went about to take hym: but he escaped out of theyr handes,
John 10:40 and went awaye agayne beyonde Iordan, into the place where Iohn before had baptysed, and there abode.
John 10:41 And manye resorted vnto hym, & sayed: Iohn dyd no myracle, but all thynges that Iohn spake of thys man, are true.
John 10:42 And manye beleued on hym there.

CHAPTER: 11

John 11:1 A certayne man was sicke, named Lazarus of Bethania, the toune of Marye and her syster Martha.
John 11:2 It was that Marye whiche annoynted Iesus with oyntment and wyped hys fete with her heyre, whose brother Lazarus was sicke,
John 11:3 and hys systers sente vnto hym, saiynge: Lorde, beholde, he whome thou louest, is sicke.
John 11:4 When Iesus hearde, that he sayed: this infirmitie is not vnto death, but for the laude of God that the sonne of God myght be praysed by the reason of it.
John 11:5 Iesus loued Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
John 11:6 Then after he had hearde that he was sicke, yet abode he two dayes styll in the same place, where he was.
John 11:7 Then after that sayde he to hys disciples: Let vs go into Iewry agayne.
John 11:8 His discyples sayde vnto hym: Mayster, the Iewes latelye sought meanes to stone the, and wylt thou go thyther agayne?
John 11:9 Iesus aunswered: are there not .xij. houres in the daye of a man walke in the daye, he stombleth not, because he seeth the lyght of thys world.
John 11:10 But yf a man walke in the nyght, he stombleth, because there is no lyght in him.
John 11:11 This sayed he, and after that, he sayed vnto them: oure frende Lazarus slepeth but I go to wake him out of slepe.
John 11:12 Then sayed hys discyples: Lorde yf he slepe, he shall do well ynough.
John 11:13 Howe be it Iesus spake of hys death: but they thought that he had spoken of the naturall slepe.
John 11:14 Then sayd Iesus vnto them plainly: Lazarus is dead,
John 11:15 and I am glad for youre sakes, that I was not there, because ye may beleue. Neuerthelesse let vs go vnto him.
John 11:16 Then sayde Thomas whiche is called Dydymus, vnto the discyples: Let vs also go, that we maye dye with hym.
John 11:17 Then wente Iesus, and founde that he had lyen in hys graue foure dayes already.
John 11:18 Bethanye was nye vnto Hierusalem aboute .xv. furlonges of,
John 11:19 and manye of the Iewes were come to Martha and Marye to comforte them ouer theyr brother.
John 11:20 Martha assone as she hearde that Iesus was commynge, went, and met hym: but Mary sat styll in the house.
John 11:21 Then sayde Martha vnto Iesus: Lorde, yf thou haddest bene here, my brother had not ben dead:
John 11:22 but neuerthelesse, I know that whatsoeuer thou axest of God, God wyl geue it the.
John 11:23 Iesus sayde vnto her: thy brother shall ryse agayne.
John 11:24 Martha sayed vnto him: I knowe that he shall ryse agayne in the resurreccyon at the laste daye.
John 11:25 Iesus sayed vnto her: I am the resurreccion and the lyfe. He that beleueth on me, ye though he were dead, yet shall he lyue.
John 11:26 And whosoeuer lyueth, and beleueth on me, shall neuer dye. Beleuest thou thys?
John 11:27 She sayd vnto hym: ye Lorde I beleue that thou arte Christe the sonne of God, which should come into the worlde.
John 11:28 And assone as she had so sayd, she went her waye, and called Marye her syster secretelye, saiynge: The mayster is come, and calleth for the.
John 11:29 And she assone as she hearde that, arose quickly, and came vnto hym.
John 11:30 Iesus was not yet come into the toune, but was in the place where Martha met hym.
John 11:31 The Iewes then which were with her in the house and comforted her, when they sawe Mary, that she arose vp hastely, and went out, and folowed her, saiynge: She goeth vnto the graue, to wepe there.
John 11:32 Then when Mary was come, where Iesus was, and sawe hym, she fell doune at hys fete, saiynge vnto hym: Lorde yf thou haddest bene here, my brother had not ben dead.
John 11:33 When Iesus sawe her wepe, and the Iewes also wepe which came with her, he groned in the spirite, and was troubled in hym self,
John 11:34 & sayd: Where haue ye layed hym? They sayde vnto hym: Lorde, come and se.
John 11:35 And Iesus wepte.
John 11:36 Then sayde the Iewes: Beholde, howe he loued him.
John 11:37 And some of them sayde: coulde not he which opened the eyes of the blynde, haue made also that thys man shoulde not haue dyed?
John 11:38 Iesus agayne groned in hym selfe, and came to the graue: it was a caue and a stone layde on it.
John 11:39 And Iesus sayde: take ye away the stone. Martha the syster of hym that was dead, said vnto him: Lorde by thys tyme he stinketh: for he hath bene dead four dayes.
John 11:40 Iesus sayed vnto her: Sayd I not vnto the, that yf thou dyddest beleue, thou shouldest se the glory of God.
John 11:41 Then they toke awaye the stone from that place where the dead was layde. And Iesus lyft vp hys eyes, and sayde: Father I thanke the because that thou haste hearde me.
John 11:42 I wote that thou hearest me alwayes: but because of the people that stande by, I sayed it, that they may beleue that thou hast sent me.
John 11:43 And when he thus had spoken: he cryed wt a loude voyce: Lazarus come forth.
John 11:44 And he that was dead, came forth, bounde hand and fote with graue boundes, and his face was bounde with a napkin. Iesus sayed vnto them, lowse him, and let hym go.
John 11:45 Then many of the Iewes which came to Marye, and had sene the thynges whiche Iesus dyd, beleued on hym.
John 11:46 But some of them went theyr wayes to the Pharises, and tolde them what Iesus had done.
John 11:47 Then gathered the hye Priestes and Pharyses a counsel and sayd: What do we? This man doth many myracles:
John 11:48 yf we let hym scape thus, all men wyll beleue on hym, & the Romaynes shall come and take away our countrey and the people.
John 11:49 And one of them named Cayphas which was the hye prieste that same yeare sayde vnto them: ye perceyue nothynge at all, nor yet consyder that
John 11:50 it is expedyent for vs, that one man dye for the people, & not that all the people peryshe.
John 11:51 Thys spake he not of hym selfe, but beynge hye Prieste that same yeare he prophesyed that Iesus shoulde dye for the people,
John 11:52 and not for the people only, but that he shoulde gather together in one the children of God which were scattered abrode.
John 11:53 From that daye forth they helde a counsell together, for to put hym to death.
John 11:54 Iesus therfore walked no more openlye amonge the Iewes, but went hys waye thence vnto a countrye nyghe to the wyldernes, into a cytye called Ephraim, & ther haunted wt his disciples.
John 11:55 And the Iewes Easter was nye at hande, and manye wente oute of the countrye vp to Hierusalem before the Easter, to purifie them selues.
John 11:56 Then soughte they for Iesus, and spake amonge them selues, as they stode in that temple: What thynke ye, seynge he commeth not to the feast
John 11:57 The hye priestes and Pharyseis had geuen a commaundement, that yf any man knewe, where he were, he shoulde shew it, that they myght take hym.

CHAPTER: 12

John 12:1 Then Iesus .vi. dayes before Easter, came to Bethanye where Lazarus was which was dead, and whom Iesus raysed from death.
John 12:2 There they made hym a supper, & Martha serued: but Lazarus was one of them that sate at the table with hym.
John 12:3 Then toke Mary a pounde of oyntment called Nardus, perfecte and precyous, and annoynted Iesus fete, and wepte hys fete with her heare, and the house was fylled wyth the sauoure of the oyntmente.
John 12:4 Then sayed one of hys disciples named Iudas Iscarioth Simons sonne. whiche afterwarde betrayed him:
John 12:5 why was not thys oyntment solde for thre .C. pens and geuen to the poore?
John 12:6 Thys sayed he, not that he cared for the poore, but because he was a thiefe, and kepte the bagge, and bare that whiche was geuen.
John 12:7 Then sayed Iesus Let her alone, agaynste the daye of my buriynge the kept it.
John 12:8 The poore alwayes shall ye haue with you, but me shall ye not alwayes haue.
John 12:9 Muche people of the Iewes had knoweledge that he was there, & they came not for Iesus sake onely, but that they myghte se Lazarus also whom he raysed from death:
John 12:10 The hye priestes therfore helde a counsel, that they myght put Lazarus to death also,
John 12:11 because that for hys sake many of the Iewes went away, and beleued on Iesus.
John 12:12 On the morowe muche people that were come to the feast, when they hearde that Iesus shoulde come to Hierusalem,
John 12:13 toke braunches of palme trees, and went and met hym, and cryed: Hosanna, blessed is he that in the name of the Lorde cometh kynge of Israell.
John 12:14 And Iesus gotte a yong asse, and sate theron, accordynge to that which was wrytten,
John 12:15 feare not doughter of Syon, beholde thy kynge cometh, sittynge on an asses colte.
John 12:16 These thinges vnderstode not hys discyples at the fyrst: but when Iesus was glorifyed, then remembred they that suche thynges were written of him, and that suche thynges they had done vnto hym.
John 12:17 The people that was with hym, when he called Lazarus out of hys graue, and raysed hym from death, bare recorde.
John 12:18 Therfore met hym the people, because they hearde that he had done suche a myracle.
John 12:19 The Phariseis therfore sayed amonge them selues: perceyue ye howe we preuayle nothing? beholde the worlde goeth awaye after hym.
John 12:20 There were certayne Grekes among them, that came to praye at the feaste:
John 12:21 the same came to Phylyppe which was of Bethsayda a citie in Galile, and desiered hym, saiynge: Syr we woulde fayne se Iesus.
John 12:22 Phylip came and told Andrewe. And agayne Andrewe and Philip tolde Iesus.
John 12:23 And Iesus aunswered them sayinge: The houre is come that the sonne of man must be glorifyed.
John 12:24 Verelye verelye I saye to you, excepte the wheate corne fall into the grounde and dye, it bydeth alone. If it dye, it bringeth forth much frute.
John 12:25 He that loueth hys lyfe, shall destroy it: and he that hateth hys lyfe in this world, shal kepe it vnto lyfe eternall.
John 12:26 If any man minister vnto me, let hym folowe me, and where I am, there shal also my minister be. And yf any man minister vnto me, hym wyll my father honoure.
John 12:27 Nowe is my soule troubled, and what shal I saye? Father delyuer me from thys houre: but therfore came I vnto thys houre.
John 12:28 Father, glorifye thy name. Then came there a voyce from heauen: I haue glorifyed it, and wil glorifye it agayne.
John 12:29 Then sayde the people that stode by, and hearde: it thoundreth, Other sayd an angell spake to him.
John 12:30 Iesus aunswered and sayed: thys voyce came, not because of me, but for your sakes.
John 12:31 Now is the iudgement of thys world: now shall the prince of thys worlde be caste oute.
John 12:32 And I, yf I were lyft vp from the earth, will drawe all men vnto me.
John 12:33 This sayde Iesus, signifyenge what death he shoulde dye.
John 12:34 The people aunswered hym: We haue hearde oute of the lawe, that Christe bydeth euer: and howe sayest thou then that the sonne of man muste be lyfte vp? who is that sonne of man?
John 12:35 Then Iesus sayed vnto them: yet a lyttell whyle is the lyght with you. Walke, whyle ye haue lyght, lest the darcknes come on you. He that walketh in the darcke, woteth not whether he goeth.
John 12:36 Whyle ye haue lyghte, beleue on the lyght, that ye maye be the chyldren of light. These thynges spake Iesus, and departed, and hyd hym selfe from them.
John 12:37 And though he had done so many myracles before them, yet beleued not they on hym,
John 12:38 that the saiynge of Esayas the Prophete myght be fulfylled, that he spake. Lorde, who shall beleue our saiyng? And to whome is the arme of the Lorde opened?
John 12:39 Therfore coulde they not beleue, because that Esayas sayth agayne:
John 12:40 he hath blynded theyr eyes and hardened theyr hertes, that they shoulde not se with theyr eyes, and vnderstand with theyr hertes, and shoulde be conuerted, and I shoulde heale them.
John 12:41 Such thynges said Esayas when he sawe hys glorye, and spake of hym.
John 12:42 Neuerthelesse among the chief rulers many beleued on hym. But because of that Pharyses they woulde not be a knowen of it, least they shoulde be excommunicate,
John 12:43 for they loued the prayse, that is geuen of men, more then the prayse that commeth of God.
John 12:44 And Iesus cryed and sayde: he that beleueth on me, beleueth not on me, but on hym that sente me.
John 12:45 And he that seeth me, seeth hym that sent me.
John 12:46 I am come a lyght into the worlde, that whosoeuer beleueth on me, shoulde not byde in darknes.
John 12:47 And yf anye man heare my wordes, & beleue not, I iudge him not. For I came not to iudge the worlde, but to saue the worlde.
John 12:48 He that refuseth me, and receiueth not my wordes, hath one that iudgeth hym. The wordes that I haue spoken, they shall iudge hym in the laste day.
John 12:49 For I haue not spoken of my selfe: but the father which sent me, he gaue me a commaundement what I shoulde say, & what I should speake.
John 12:50 And I knowe that thys commaundement is lyfe euerlasting. Whatsoeuer I speake therfore, euen as the father bade me, so I speake.

CHAPTER: 13

John 13:1 Before the feast of Easter when Iesus knew that hys houre was come, that he shulde depart oute of thys worlde vnto the father. When he loued his which were in the worlde, vnto the ende he loued them.
John 13:2 And when supper was ended, after that the deuyl had put in the herte of Iudas Iscarioth Simons sonne, to betraye hym.
John 13:3 Iesus knowyng that the father had geuen all thynges into hys handes, and that he was come from God, and went to God,
John 13:4 he rose from supper, and layde asyde hys vpper garmentes, & toke a towell, and gyrde hym selfe.
John 13:5 After that poured he water into a bason, & began to wash hys discyples fete, and to wype them wyth a towell, wherewith he was gyrde.
John 13:6 Then came he to Symon Peter. And Peter sayde vnto hym: Lorde shalt thou washe my fete?
John 13:7 Iesus aunswered, and sayed vnto him: what I do, thou wotest not nowe, but thou shalt knowe hereafter.
John 13:8 Peter sayed vnto him: thou shalt not washe my fete whyle the worlde standeth. Iesus aunswered hym: yf I washe the not, thou shalte haue no parte with me.
John 13:9 Simon Peter sayed vnto him: Lord not my fete onelye: but also my handes and my heade.
John 13:10 Iesus sayed vnto hym: he that is washed, neadeth not saue to washe hys fete, and is cleane euery whyt. And ye are cleane: but not al.
John 13:11 For he knewe hys betrayer. Therfore sayed he: ye are not all cleane.
John 13:12 After he had washed theyr fete, and receyued hys clothes, and was set doune agayne, he sayed vnto them. Wote ye what I haue done to you?
John 13:13 Ye call me mayster and Lorde, & ye saye well, for so am I.
John 13:14 Yf I then your lord and mayster haue washed your fete, ye also ought to wash one anothers fete.
John 13:15 For I haue geuen you an ensample, that ye shoulde do as I haue done to you.
John 13:16 Verelye verelye I say vnto you: the seruaunte is not greater then hys mayster, neyther the messenger greater then he that sent hym.
John 13:17 Yf ye vnderstande these thynges, happye are ye yf ye do then.
John 13:18 I speake not of you all. I knowe whome I haue chosen. But that the scripture myght be fulfylled, he that eateth bread with me hath lyft vp hys hele agaynst me.
John 13:19 Nowe tell I you before it come, that when it come to passe, ye myght beleue that I am he.
John 13:20 Verelye verelye I saye vnto you. He that receyueth whomesoeuer I sende, receyueth me. And he that receyueth me, receyueth him that sent me.
John 13:21 When Iesus had thus sayed, he was troubled in the spirite, and testifyed, saiynge: verelye verelye I saye vnto you, that one of you shall betraye me.
John 13:22 And then the disciples loked one on another, doubtinge of whom he spake.
John 13:23 There was one of hys disciples which leaned on Iesus bosome whome Iesus loued.
John 13:24 To him beckened Simon Peter that he shuld axe who it was, of whom he spake.
John 13:25 He then as he leaned on Iesus breste sayed vnto hym: Lorde who is it?
John 13:26 Iesus aunswered, he it is to whom I geue a sop, when I haue depte it. And he wet a soppe, and gaue it to Iudas Iscaryoth Simons sonne.
John 13:27 And after the sop Satan entred into hym. Then sayde Iesus vnto hym: that thou doest, do quickly.
John 13:28 That wist no man at the table, for what intent he spake vnto hym.
John 13:29 Some of them thought, because Iudas had the bagge, that Iesus had sayed vnto hym, bye those thinges that we haue nede of agaynst the feast: or that he shoulde geue some thyng to the poore.
John 13:30 Assone then as he had receyued the sop, he went immediatlye out. And it was nyght.
John 13:31 When he was gone oute, Iesus sayde: nowe is the sonne of man glorifyed. And God is glorified by hym.
John 13:32 Yf God be glorifyed by hym, God shall also glorifye hym in hym selfe, and shall strayghte waye glorifye hym.
John 13:33 Deare chyldren, yet a lytell whyle am I with you, ye shall seke me, and as I sayde vnto the Iewes: whyther I go, thyther can ye not come. Also to you saye I now:
John 13:34 A newe commaundement geue I vnto you, that ye loue together, as I haue loued you, that euen so ye loue one another.
John 13:35 By thys shall all men knowe that ye are my discyples, yf ye shall haue loue one to another.
John 13:36 Simon Peter sayed vnto hym. Lorde whyther goest thou? Iesus aunswered hym: Whether I go thou canste not folowe me now, but thou shalt folow me afterwarde.
John 13:37 Peter sayde vnto him: lorde, why can not I folowe the now? I wyll geue my lyfe for thy sake.
John 13:38 Iesus aunswered hym: wilte thou geue thy lyfe for my sake? Verelye verelye I saye vnto the, the cocke shall not crowe, tyll thou haue denyed me thryse.

CHAPTER: 14

John 14:1 And he sayd vnto hys disciples: Let not youre hertes be troubled. Beleue in God & beleue in me.
John 14:2 In my fathers house are manye mansyons. Yf it were not so, I wolde haue told you. I go to prepare a place for you.
John 14:3 And yf I go to prepare a place for you, I wyl come agayne, and receyue you euen vnto my self, that wher I am, there may ye be also.
John 14:4 And whyther I go, ye knowe, and the waye ye knowe.
John 14:5 Thomas sayde vnto him: Lorde we know not whether thou goest Also how is it possyble for vs to knowe the waye?
John 14:6 Iesus sayd vnto hym: I am the waye, the truthe and the lyfe. And no man commeth to the father, but by me.
John 14:7 Yf ye had knowen me, ye had knowen my father also. And nowe ye knowe hym, & haue sene hym.
John 14:8 Philip sayde vnto hym: Lorde shewe vs the father, and it suffyseth vs.
John 14:9 Iesus sayd vnto hym. Haue I bene so longe tyme with you, and yet haste thou not knowen me? Philip, he that hath sene me, hath sene the father. And how sayest thou then: shew vs the father?
John 14:10 Beleuest thou not that I am in the father & the father in me? The wordes that I speake vnto you. I speake not of my selfe: but the father that dwelleth in me, is he that doeth the workes.
John 14:11 Beleue ye not that I am in the father, and the father in me? At the least beleue me for the very workes sake.
John 14:12 Verely, verely I saye vnto you, he that beleueth on me, the workes that I do, the same shal he do, and greater workes then these shal he do, because I go vnto my father.
John 14:13 And whatsoeuer ye axe in my name that will I do that the father myght be glorifyed by the sonne.
John 14:14 Yf ye shall axe any thyng in my name, I wyl do it.
John 14:15 Yf ye loue me, kepe my commaundementes
John 14:16 & I will praye the father, and he shal geue you another conforter, that he may byde with you euer
John 14:17 which is the spirite of truth whom the worlde can not receyue, because the world seeth hym not, neyther knoweth hym. But ye knowe hym. For he dwelleth with you, & shal be in you.
John 14:18 I wyll not leaue you comfortlesse, but wyll come vnto you.
John 14:19 Yet a lytel whyle and the worlde seeth me no more: but ye shal se me. For I lyue, and ye shall lyue.
John 14:20 That daye shall ye knowe that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you
John 14:21 He that hathe my commaundementes and kepeth them, the same is he that loueth me. And he that loueth me, shal be loued of my father: And I will loue hym, and will shewe myne owne selfe to him.
John 14:22 Iudas sayd vnto hym (not Iudas Iscarioth) Lord what is the cause that thou wilte shewe thy selfe vnto vs, & not vnto the worlde?
John 14:23 Iesus aunswered and sayd vnto hym, yf a man loue me, and will kepe my saiynges, my father also will loue hym & we will come vnto hym, and will dwell to hym.
John 14:24 He that loueth me not, kepeth not my saiynges. And the wordes whiche ye heare, are not myne, but the fathers which sent me.
John 14:25 Thys haue I spoken vnto you, beynge yet present with you.
John 14:26 But that comforter whiche is the holy ghost (whome my father wil send in my name) he shal teache you all thinges, & brynge all thynges to youre remembraunce whatsoeuer I haue tolde you.
John 14:27 Peace I leaue with you, my peace I geue vnto you. Not as the worlde geueth, geue I vnto you. Let not your hertes be greued, neyther feare ye.
John 14:28 Ye haue hearde how I sayde vnto you. I go and come agayne vnto you. Yf ye loued me, ye would verely reioyce, because I sayde: I go vnto the father. For the father is greater then I.
John 14:29 And nowe haue I shewed you before it come, that when it is come to passe, ye myght beleue.
John 14:30 Here after will I not talke manye wordes vnto you. For the ruler of thys world cometh and hath noughte in me.
John 14:31 But that the worlde maye knowe that I loue the father: therfore as the father gaue me commaundement euen so do I. Ryse, let vs go hence.

CHAPTER: 15

John 15:1 I am the true vyne, and my father is on husband man.
John 15:2 Euery braunche that beareth not frute in me, he wyll take awaye. And euerye braunche that beareth frute, wil he pourge, that it maye bryng more frute.
John 15:3 Now are ye cleane thorowe the wordes which I haue spoken vnto you.
John 15:4 Byde in me, and let me byde in you. As the braunche can not beare frute of it selfe, except it byde in the vyne no more can ye except ye abyde in me.
John 15:5 I am the vyne, and ye are the braunches. He that abydeth in me, and I in him, the same bryngeth forth muche frute. For without me can ye do nothynge.
John 15:6 Yf a man byde not in me, he is cast forth as a braunche, and is wythered: and men gather it, and cast it into the fyre, and it burneth.
John 15:7 Yf ye hyd in me and my wordes also hyd in you: axe what ye wyll, and it shalbe done to you.
John 15:8 Here is my father glorifyed that ye beare muche fruyte, and be made my disciples.
John 15:9 As the father hath loued me, euen so haue I loued you. Continue in my loue.
John 15:10 Yf ye shal kepe my commaundementes, ye shall byde in my loue, euen as I haue kepte my fathers commaundementes, and abyde in hys loue.
John 15:11 These thynges haue I spoken vnto you, that my ioye myght remayne in you, and that youre ioye myght be full.
John 15:12 This is my commaundement, that ye loue together as I haue loued you.
John 15:13 Greater loue then thys hath no man, then that a man bestowe hys lyfe for hys frendes.
John 15:14 Ye are my frendes, yf ye do whatsoeuer I commaunde you.
John 15:15 Henceforth call I you not seruauntes: for the seruaunt knoweth not what hys lorde doth. But you haue I called frendes, for all thynges that I haue heard of my father, I haue opened vnto you.
John 15:16 Ye haue not chosen me, but I haue chosen you and ordeyned you, that ye go & bringe forth frute, and that your frute remayne, and that whatsoeuer ye shall axe of the father in my name, he shoulde geue it to you.
John 15:17 Thys commaunde I you, that ye loue together.
John 15:18 Yf the worlde hate you, ye knowe that it hated me before it hated you.
John 15:19 Yf ye were of the worlde, the worlde woulde loue his owne. Howe be it because ye are not of the worlde, but I haue chosen you out of the worlde, therfore hateth you the worlde.
John 15:20 Remember the saiyng that I sayde vnto you: the seruaunt is not greater then the lorde, yf they haue persecuted me, so wyll they persecute you: yf they haue kept my saiynges, so wyll they kepe yours.
John 15:21 But all these thinges wyll they do vnto you, for my names sake, because they haue not knowen him that sent me.
John 15:22 Yf I had not come, and spoken vnto them, they should not haue had synne: but now haue they nothynge to cloke theyr synne with all.
John 15:23 He that hateth me, hateth my father.
John 15:24 If I had not done workes among them which none other man dyd, they had not had synne. But now haue they sene, & yet haue hated both me & my father:
John 15:25 euen that the saiyng might be fulfilled that is writen in their lawe: they hated me without a cause.
John 15:26 But when the comforter is come, whome I will sende vnto you from the father, which is the spirite of truth, which proceadeth of the father, he shall testify of me.
John 15:27 And ye shall beare witnes, also because ye haue bene with me from the begynnynge.

CHAPTER: 16

John 16:1 These thynges haue I sayed vnto you, because ye shoulde not be offended.
John 16:2 They shall excommunicate you: ye the tyme shall come, that whosoeuer kylleth you, wil thinke that he doeth god seruice.
John 16:3 And suche thinges shall they do vnto you, because they haue not knowen the father, neyther yet me.
John 16:4 But these thynges haue I tolde you, that when that houre is come ye myghte remember them that I tolde you so. These thynges sayde I not vnto you at the begynnynge, because I was present with you.
John 16:5 But nowe I go my waye to hym that sent me, and none of you axeth me, whyther goest thou?
John 16:6 But because I haue sayde suche thinges vnto you, youre hertes are full of sorowe.
John 16:7 Neuerthelesse I tell you the trueth, it is expediente for you that I go awaye. For yf I go not awaye, that comforter wil not come vnto you. But yf I departe, I wil sende hym vnto you.
John 16:8 And when he is come, he wil rebuke the world of synne, and of ryghteousnesse, and of iudgement
John 16:9 Of synne, because they beleue not on me:
John 16:10 of ryghteousnesse, because I go to my father, and then ye shall not se me,
John 16:11 and of iudgement, because the chiefe ruler of this worlde is iudged already.
John 16:12 I haue yet many thinges to say vnto you, but ye cannot beare them awaye now.
John 16:13 Howe be it when he is come (I meane the spirite of truth) he wyll lead you into all truth. He shall not speake of hym self, but whatsoeuer he shal heare, that shall he speake, and he wyll shewe you thynges to come.
John 16:14 He shall glorifye me, for he shall receyue of myne, and shall shewe vnto you.
John 16:15 Al thynges that the father hath, are myne. Therfore sayd I vnto you, that he shal take of myne, and shewe vnto you.
John 16:16 After a whyle ye shall not se me: & agayne after a whyle ye shall se me: for I go to the father.
John 16:17 Then sayed some of hys disciples amonge them selues: what is this that he sayeth vnto vs: after a whyle ye shall not se me, & agayne after a whyle ye shall se me, and that I go to the father.
John 16:18 They sayd therfore: what is it that he sayeth, after a whyle? we can not tell what he sayth.
John 16:19 Iesus perceyued that they woulde axe him and sayde vnto them. This is it that ye enquyre of amonge your selues that I sayde after a whyle ye shall not se me, and agayne after a whyle ye shall se me.
John 16:20 Verely verely I say vnto you: ye shall wepe and lament, & the world shall reioyce. Ye shall sorowe, but your sorow shalbe turned into ioye.
John 16:21 A woman when she trauayleth, hathe sorowe, because her houre is come: but assone as she is deliuered of the child she remembreth no more the anguish, for ioye that a man is borne into the worlde.
John 16:22 And ye now are in sorow: but I wyll se you agayne, and youre hertes shall reioyce, and youre ioye shall no man take from you.
John 16:23 And in that day shal ye axe me no question. Verely verely I say vnto you: whatsoeuer ye shall axe the father in my name, he wyll geue it you.
John 16:24 Hytherto haue ye axed nothyng in my name. Axe and ye shall receyue it, that your ioye maye be full.
John 16:25 These thynges haue I spoken vnto you in prouerbes. The tyme will come when I shall no more speake to you in prouerbes: but I shall shewe you plainly from my father.
John 16:26 At that daye shall ye axe in my name. And I say not vnto you that I wyll speake vnto my father for you.
John 16:27 For the father hym selfe loueth you, because ye haue loued me, and haue beleued, that I came out from God.
John 16:28 I wente oute from the father, and came into the world, and I leaue the world agayne, and go to the father.
John 16:29 Hys disciples sayde vnto him: lo now speakest thou plainly, and thou vsest no prouerbe.
John 16:30 Nowe knowe we that thou vnderstandest all thynges, and nedest not that any man should axe the any question. Therfore beleue we that thou camest from God.
John 16:31 Iesus aunswered them: Now ye do beleue.
John 16:32 Beholde, the houre draweth nye, and is all readye come that ye shalbe scatered euerye man hys wayes, and shall leaue me alone. And yet am I not alone. For the father is with me.
John 16:33 These wordes haue I spoken vnto you, that in me you myght haue peace. For in the worlde shall you haue tribulacyon: but be of good cheare. I haue ouercome the worlde.

CHAPTER: 17

John 17:1 These wordes spake Iesus, & lyfte vp hys eyes to heauen, and said: father the houre is come: glorify thy sonne, that thy sonne maye glorifye the:
John 17:2 as thou haste geuen hym power ouer all flesh, that he should geue eternall lyfe to as manye as thou hast geuen hym.
John 17:3 This is lyfe eternall that they myghte knowe, the that onely very God, and whome thou haste sente Iesus Christ.
John 17:4 I haue glorifyed the on the earthe. I haue finyshed the worke whiche thou gauest me to do.
John 17:5 And nowe glorifye me thou father with thyne owne selfe with the glorye which I had with the, yer the worlde was
John 17:6 I haue declared thy name vnto the men which thou gauest me out of the worlde. Thyne they were and thou gauest them me, and they haue kepte thy saiynges.
John 17:7 Now they knowe that all thynges whatsoeuer thou hast geuen me, are of the.
John 17:8 For I haue geuen vnto them the wordes whiche thou gauest me, and they haue receyued them and knowe surely that I came out from the, and do beleue that thou dyddest sende me.
John 17:9 I praye for them, and praye not for the worlde but for them whome thou haste geuen me, for they are thyne.
John 17:10 And all myne are thyne, and thyne are myne, and I am glorifyed in them.
John 17:11 And now am I no more in the world, but they are in the worlde, and I come to the. Holy father kepe in thyne owne name, them whom thou hast geuen me, that they maye be one, as we are.
John 17:12 Whyle I was with them in the worlde, I kept them in thy name. Those that thou gauest me, haue I kept, and none of them is lost, but that loste chylde, that the scripture myght be fulfylled.
John 17:13 Nowe come I to the, and these wordes speake I in the worlde, that they myghte haue my ioye full in them.
John 17:14 I haue geuen them thy wordes, and the worlde hath hated them, because they are not of the worlde, euen as I am not of the worlde.
John 17:15 I desyre not that thou shouldest take them out of the world: but that thou kepe them from euyl.
John 17:16 They are not of the worlde, as I am not of the world.
John 17:17 Sanctifye them with the truthe, thy saiyng is truthe,
John 17:18 As thou diddest sede me into the world, euen so haue I sent them into the worlde,
John 17:19 & for theyr sakes sanctifye I my selfe, that they also myght be sanctifyed through the truth:
John 17:20 I praye not for them alone: but for them also which shall beleue on me through theyr preachyng
John 17:21 that they all maye be one, as thou father art in me, and I in the that they maye be also one in vs, that the worlde maye beleue that thou haste sent me.
John 17:22 And that glorye that thou gauest me, haue I geuen them, that they may be one, as we are one,
John 17:23 I in them, and thou in me, that they maye be made perfect in one, & that the worlde maye knowe that thou haste sent me, & hast loued them as thou haste loued me.
John 17:24 Father, I will that they which thou haste geuen me, be with me where I am, that they maye se my glory which thou hast geuen me. For thou louedest me before the makynge of the worlde.
John 17:25 O righteous father, the very world hath not knowen the: but I haue knowen the, and these haue knowen that thou haste sente me.
John 17:26 And I haue declared vnto them thy name, & will declare it that the loue where with thou haste loued me, be in them, and that I be in them.

CHAPTER: 18

John 18:1 When Iesus had spoken these wordes, he wente forth with his disciples ouer the broke Cedron, where was a garden into the whiche he entred with his discyples.
John 18:2 Iudas also which betrayed hym, knewe the place: for Iesus oftetymes resorted thither with hys disciples.
John 18:3 Iudas then after he had receyued a bande of men, and ministers of the hye priestes and Phariseis, came thyther wt lanternes and fyrebrandes, and weapens.
John 18:4 Then Iesus knowing all thynges that should come on hym, wente forth, and sayed vnto them: whom seke ye?
John 18:5 They aunswered hym: Iesus of Nazareth. Iesus sayed vnto them: I am he. Iudas also which betrayed hym, stode wt them.
John 18:6 But assone as he had sayd vnto them: I am he, they went backwardes, and fell to the grounde.
John 18:7 And he asked them agayne: whome seke ye? They aunswered: Iesus of Nazareth.
John 18:8 Iesus aunswered: I sayde vnto you: I am he. Yf ye seke me, let these go theyr waye.
John 18:9 That the saiynge myght be fulfylled which he spake: of them which thou gauest me, haue I not loste one.
John 18:10 Simon Peter hadde a swerde, & drue it, and smote the hye Pryestes seruaunte, and cut of hys ryght eare. The seruauntes name was Malchus.
John 18:11 Then sayed Iesus vnto Peter: put vp thy swerde into the sheath: shall I not drinke of the cup whiche my father hathe geuen me?
John 18:12 Then the company and the captaine and the ministers of the Iewes, toke Iesus & bounde hym,
John 18:13 and led hym awaye to Anna fyrste: For he was fatherinlawe vnto Cayphas, whiche was the hye prieste that same yeare.
John 18:14 Cayphas was he that gaue counsell to the Iewes, that it was expedient, that one man shoulde dye for the people.
John 18:15 And Simon Peter folowed Iesus, & another disciple: that disciple was knowne of the hye prieste, and went in with Iesus into the palayce of the hye prieste.
John 18:16 But Peter stode at the dore without. Then went oute that other disciple whiche was knowne vnto the hye prieste, and spake to the damsell that kepte the dore, & brought in Peter.
John 18:17 Then sayed the damsel that kepte the dore, vnto Peter: Arte not thou one of thys mans disciples? He sayed: I am not.
John 18:18 The seruauntes and the ministers stode there and had made a fyre of coles, for it was colde, and they warmed them selues. Peter also stode amonge them, and warmed hym selfe.
John 18:19 The hye Prieste axed Iesus of hys disciples and of hys doctryne.
John 18:20 Iesus aunswered him: I spake openly in the world. I euer taught in the synagoge, and in the temple whyther all the Iewes resorted, and in secrete haue I sayde nothynge.
John 18:21 Why axest thou me? Axe them whiche hearde me, what I sayde vnto them. Beholde, they can tell what I sayde.
John 18:22 When he had thus spoken, one of the ministers which stode by, smote Iesus on the face, saiyng: aunswerest thou the hye prieste so?
John 18:23 Iesus aunswered hym: Yf I haue euyll spoken, beare wytnes of the euyll, yf I haue well spoken, why smytest thou me?
John 18:24 And Annas sent him bounde vnto Cayphas the hye priest.
John 18:25 Symon Peter stode and warmed him self and they sayed vnto hym: arte not thou also one of hys discyples? He denyed it, and sayde: I am not.
John 18:26 One of the hye priestes seruauntes (hys cosin whose eare Peter smote of) sayde vnto him: dyd not I se the in the garden with him?
John 18:27 Peter denyed agayne, and immediatlye the cocke crewe.
John 18:28 Then led they Iesus from Cayphas into the hall of iudgement. It was in the morning and they themselues went not into the iudgement hall leaste they shoulde be defyled, but that they might eate the paschall lambe.
John 18:29 Pylate then wente oute vnto them, and sayde: what accusacion bringe ye agaynste this man?
John 18:30 They aunswered, and sayed vnto him. If he were not an euyli doer, we woulde not haue delyuered him vnto the.
John 18:31 Then sayed Pilate vnto them: take ye him, and iudge hym after your owne lawe. Then the Iewes sayed vnto hym: It is not laufull for vs to put any man to deat
John 18:32 That the wordes of Iesus might be fulfylled, whiche he spake, signifiynge what death he shoulde dye.
John 18:33 Then Pilate entred into the iudgemente hall agayne, and called Iesus, and sayd vnto hym: arte thou the kynge of the Iewes?
John 18:34 Iesus aunswered: saiyest thou that of thy self, or dyd other tell it the of me?
John 18:35 Pylate aunswered Am I a Iewe? Thyne owne nacyon and hye priestes haue delyuered the vnto me, What hast thou done?
John 18:36 Iesus aunswered my kingdome is not of thys worlde. If my kingdome were of thys worlde, then woulde my mynisters surely fyght, that I shoulde not be delyuered to the Iewes, but now is my kyngdom not from hence.
John 18:37 Pilate sayed to him: Arte thou a kynge then? Iesus aunswered: Thou sayest that I am a kynge. For thys cause was I borne, and for thys cause came I into the worlde, that I shoulde beare wytnes vnto the trueth. And al that are of the trueth heare my voyce.
John 18:38 Pylate sayde vnto hym: what thynge is trueth? And when he had sayd that, he wente oute agayne to the Iewes, and sayd vnto them: I fynd in him no cause at al.
John 18:39 Ye haue a custome that I shoulde deliuer you one lose at Easter. Wyll ye that I lose vnto you the kyng of the Iewes.
John 18:40 Then cryed they all agayne, sayinge: Not hym, but Barrabas, that Barrabas was a robber.

CHAPTER: 19

John 19:1 Then Pylate toke Iesus & scourged him.
John 19:2 And the souldyers wound a croune of thornes, and put it on hys heade. And they dyd on hym a purple garment
John 19:3 & sayde: hayle kyng of the Iewes: and they smote him on the face.
John 19:4 Pylate went forth agayne, & sayd vnto them: behold I bryng hym forth to you, that ye maye knowe, that I fynde no faute in hym.
John 19:5 Then came Iesus forthe wearynge a croune of thornes and a purple robe. And Pylate sayde vnto them: Beholde the man.
John 19:6 When the hye Priestes and ministers saw him, they cryed, saiyng: Crucifye him, crucifye him. Pylate sayde vnto them: Take ye hym, and crucifye hym; for I finde no cause in him.
John 19:7 The Iewes aunswered hym: we haue a lawe, and by our lawe he oughte to dye: because he made hym selfe the sonne of God.
John 19:8 When Pilate hearde that saiyng: he was the more afrayd,
John 19:9 and went agayne into the iudgement hall, and sayde vnto Iesus: whence are thou? But Iesus gaue hym none aunswere.
John 19:10 Then sayde Pylate vnto him: Speakest thou not vnto me? knowest thou not that I haue power to crucify the, and haue power to louse the?
John 19:11 Iesus aunswered: Than couldest haue no power at all agaynst me, except it were geuen the from aboue. Therfore he that delyuered me vnto the, is more in synne.
John 19:12 And from thence forth sought Pylate meanes to louse him: but the Iewes cryed, saiynge: yf thou let hym go, thou arte not Cesars frende. For whosoeuer maketh hym selfe a kynge, is agaynst Cesar.
John 19:13 When Pylate heard that saiyng: he brought Iesus forth, and sate doune to geue sentence in a place called the pauement: but in the Hebrue tong Gabbatha.
John 19:14 It was the Saboth euen which falleth in the easter feast, and about the sixt houre. And he sayed vnto the Iewes. Beholde your kynge.
John 19:15 They cryed, awaye wyth hym, awaye with hym, crucifye hym. Pylate sayd to them: Shall I crucifye your kynge? The hye Priestes aunswered: we haue no king but Cesar.
John 19:16 Then delyuered he him vnto them to be crucifyed. And they toke Iesus, & led hym awaye,
John 19:17 & he bare his crosse, & went forth into a place called the place of dead mens sculles, which is named in Hebrewe Golgatha,
John 19:18 Where they crucifyed hym, and two other with hym, on eyther syde one, and Iesus in the myddest.
John 19:19 And Pylate wrote hys tytle and put it on the crosse. The wrytyng was Iesus of Nazareth, kynge of the Iewes.
John 19:20 Thys tytle red manye of the Iewes. For the place where Iesus was crucifyed, was nye to the cytye. And it was wrytten in Hebrue, Greke and Latyn.
John 19:21 Then sayde the hye priestes of the Iewes to Pylate. Wryte not kynge of the Iewes: but that he sayde. I am kyng of the Iewes.
John 19:22 Pilate aunswered: what I haue wrytten that haue I wrytten.
John 19:23 Then the souldyers, when they had crucyfyed. Iesus toke hys garmentes, and made foure partes, to euery souldyour a parte, and also hys cote. The cote was withoute seame, wroughte vpon thorow out.
John 19:24 And they sayde one to another. Let vs not deuyde it, but caste lottes, who shall haue it: That the scripture myght be fulfylled which sayeth. They parted my raymentes among them, and on my cote dyd they caste lottes. And the souldiours dyd such thynges in dede.
John 19:25 There stode by the crosse of Iesus his mother, and hys mothers sister. Marye the wyfe of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalen.
John 19:26 When Iesus sawe his mother, and the discyple standyng whome he loued, he sayed vnto his mother: woman beholde thy sonne.
John 19:27 Then sayed he to the discyple: beholde thy mother. And from that houre the discyple toke her for hys owne.
John 19:28 After that when Iesus perceyued that all thynges were perfourmed, that the scrypture myght be fulfylled, he sayed: I thyrst.
John 19:29 There stode a vessell full of vyneger by. And they fylled a sponge with vyneger, and wounde it aboute with ysope, and put it to hys mouthe.
John 19:30 Assone as Iesus had receyued of the vyneger he sayed: It is finyshed: and bowed hys head, and gaue vp the ghoste.
John 19:31 The Iewes then because it was the saboth euen, that the bodyes shoulde not remayne vpon the crosse on the saboth day (for that Saboth daye was an hye daye) besought Pylate that theyr legges myghte be broken, and that they myghte be taken doune.
John 19:32 Then came the souldyers, and brake the legges of the fyrst & of the other, which was crucified with Iesus.
John 19:33 But when they came to Iesus, and sawe that he was dead already, they brake not hys legges:
John 19:34 but one of the souldyers with a speare thruste hym into the syde and forth with came there out bloude and water.
John 19:35 And he that sawe it, bare recorde, and hys recorde is true. And he knoweth that he sayth true, that ye myghte beleue also.
John 19:36 These thynges were done, that the scripture shoulde be fulfylled: Ye shall not breake a bone of hym.
John 19:37 And agayne another scripture sayeth: They shall loke on hym whome they pearled.
John 19:38 After that Ioseph of Arimathia (whiche was a disciple of Iesus, but secretely for feare of the Iewes) besought Pylate that he myght take doune the bodye of Iesus. And Pylate gaue him licence.
John 19:39 And there came also Nicodemus whiche at the begynnyng came to Iesus by nyght, and broughte of myrre & aloes myngled together aboute an hundred pounde wayght.
John 19:40 Then toke they the body of Iesu, & wound it in lynnen clothes with the odoures, as the maner of the Iewes is to burye.
John 19:41 And in the place where Iesus was crucifyed, was a garden, and in the garden a new sepulchre, wherein was neuer man layde.
John 19:42 There layde they Iesus because of the Iewes saboth euen, for the sepulchre was nye at hande.

CHAPTER: 20

John 20:1 The morowe after the Saboth daye came Mary Magdalene early when it was yet darcke, vnto the sepulchre, and saw the stone taken awaye from that toumbe.
John 20:2 Then she ranne, and came to Simon Peter, and to the other discyple whom Iesus loued, and sayde vnto them. They haue taken away the Lorde out of the toumbe, and we cannot tell where they haue layde hym.
John 20:3 Peter went forth & that other disciple & came vnto the sepulchre.
John 20:4 They ranne both together, & that other disciple dyd out runne Peter, & came fyrste to the sepulchre.
John 20:5 And he stouped doune, and saw the lynnen clothes liyng, yet went he not in.
John 20:6 Then came Symon Peter folowyng him and wente into the sepulchre, and sawe the lynnen clothes lye,
John 20:7 and the napkyn that was aboute hys head, not liynge with the lynnen clothe, but wrapped together in a place by it selfe.
John 20:8 Then wente in also that other discyple which came fyrste to the sepulchre, and he saw & beleued.
John 20:9 For as yet they knew not the scriptures that he should ryse agayne from death.
John 20:10 And the discyples went awaye agayne vnto theyr owne home.
John 20:11 Mary stode without at the sepulchre wepynge. And as she wepte. she bowed her self, and loked into the sepulchre,
John 20:12 and sawe two angels in whyte sittynge, the one at the heade, & the other at the fete, where they had layde the bodye of Iesus.
John 20:13 And they sayd vnto her: Woman, why wyppest thou? She sayed vnto them: For they haue taken awaye my Lorde, and I wote not where they haue layed hym.
John 20:14 When she had thus sayde, she tourned her self backe, and sawe Iesus standynge, and knewe not, that it was Iesus.
John 20:15 Iesus sayde to her: woman why wepest thou? Whome sekest thou? She supposynge that he had bene the gardener, sayed vnto him: Syr yf thou haue borne him hence, tell me where thou hast layed hym, that I maye fet him.
John 20:16 Iesus sayde vnto her: Mary. She turned her selfe, and sayd vnto him: Rabbony, whiche is to saye: Mayster.
John 20:17 Iesus sayd vnto her touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my father. But go to my brethren, & saye vnto them: I ascende vnto my father and youre father: to my God and your God.
John 20:18 Mary Magdalene came and tolde the dyscyples that she had sene the Lord, and that he had spoken suche thinges vnto her.
John 20:19 The same day at night, which was the morowe after the saboth day, when the dores wer shut, wher the disciples were assembled together for fear of the Iewes, came Iesus and stode in the myddes, and saide to them: peace be wyth you.
John 20:20 And when he had so sayed, he shewed vnto them his handes, and hys syde. Then were the dyscyples glade when they sawe the Lorde.
John 20:21 Then sayde Iesus to them agayne: peace be with you. As my father sente me euen so sende I you.
John 20:22 And when he had sayd that he brethed on them and sayde. Receyue the holy ghost.
John 20:23 Whosoeuers synnes ye remyt they are remitted vnto them. And whosoeuers synnes ye retayne, they are retayned.
John 20:24 But Thomas one of the twelue, called Didymus, was not wyth them when Iesus came,
John 20:25 The other disciples saide vnto him: we haue sene the Lorde. And he said vnto them: excepte I se in hys handes the prent of the nailes, and put my fynger into the holes of the nayles, and thruste my handes into hys syde, I wyl not beleue.
John 20:26 And after .viij. dayes agayne, hys dyscyples were wythin, and Thomas wyth them. Then came Iesus when the dores were shut, and stode in the middes and sayd: peace be wyth you.
John 20:27 After that sayde he to Thomas: brynge thy fynger hyther, and se my handes, and brynge thy hande and thrust it into my syde: and be not faithlesse, but beleuinge.
John 20:28 Thomas aunswered and said vnto hym: My Lord and my God:
John 20:29 Iesus sayd vnto hym: Thomas because thou hast sene me, therfore thou beleuest. Happye are they that haue not sene, and yet haue beleued.
John 20:30 And manie other sygnes dyd Iesus in the presence of hys dyscyples, whyche are not written in this boke.
John 20:31 These are written that ye myght beleue, that Iesus is Christe the sonne of God, and that in beleuinge ye might haue lyfe thorow hys name.

CHAPTER: 21

John 21:1 After that Iesus shewed hym selfe agayne at the sea of Tyberias. And on thys wise shewed he hym selfe.
John 21:2 Ther were together Symon Peter and Thomas, whyche is called Didimus, and Nathaniell of Cana a cytie of Galile, and the sonnes of Zebedei, and two other of the disciples.
John 21:3 Simon Peter sayd vnto them: I go a fyshinge. They sayd vnto hym: we also wyll go wyth the. They went theyr way and entred into a shyppe strayght waie, and that nighte caught they nothyng.
John 21:4 But when the mornyng was nowe come, Iesus stode on the shore: neuerthelesse the dyscyples knewe not that it was Iesus.
John 21:5 Iesus sayd vnto them: syre, haue ye anye meate? They aunswered him: no.
John 21:6 And he sayd vnto them: caste out the net on the ryght syde of the shyppe, and ye shall fynde. They caste out, and anone they were not able to draw it for the multytude of fyshes.
John 21:7 Then sayde the disciple whom Iesus loued vnto Peter: It is the Lord. When Simon Peter hearde that it was the Lorde, he gyrde hys mantel to him (for he was naked) and sprange into the sea:
John 21:8 The other discyples came by shippe for they were not farre from land, but as it were two hundred cubites, and they drewe the net wyth fyshes:
John 21:9 Assone as they were come to land, they sawe hote coles and fyshe, layde thereon and breade.
John 21:10 Iesus said vnto them: bringe of the fishe which ye haue now caught.
John 21:11 Simon Peter stepped forth, and drewe the net to lande full of great fyshes an hundred and .liij. And for all there were so many, yet was not the net broken.
John 21:12 Iesus sayde vnto them: come and dyne. And none of the discyples durst axe him, what art thou? for they knewe that it was the Lord.
John 21:13 Iesus then came and toke bread, and gaue them, and fyshe lykewyse.
John 21:14 And thys is nowe the thyrde tyme that Iesus appeared to hys discyples after that he was rysen agayne from deathe.
John 21:15 When they had dyned. Iesus sayd to Simon Peter: Simon Ioanna, louest thou me more then these? He sayd vnto him: ye Lorde thou knowest that I loue the. He saide vnto him: fede me lambes.
John 21:16 He saied to him again the seconde tyme? Simon Ioanna, louest thou me? He saied vnto him: yea Lorde thou knowest that I loue the. He saied vnto him: fede me shepe:
John 21:17 He saied vnto him the thyrde tyme: Simon Ioanna, louest thou me? And Peter sorowed, because he saied to him the thirde time, louest thou me, and said vnto him: Lord, thou knowest all thinge: thou knowest that I loue the. Iesus sayd vnto him: fede me shepe.
John 21:18 Verelie verelye, I saie vnto the, when thou waste yonge, thou girdest thy selfe, and walkedst whither thou wouldest: but when thou arte olde, thou shalt stretche forth thy handes, and another shall gyrd the, and lead the whither thou wouldest not:
John 21:19 That spake he, signyfyeng by what death he should glorifie God. And when he had saied thus, he sayed to hym: folowe me.
John 21:20 Peter tourned aboute, and sawe that disciple whom Iesus loued folowinge which also leaned on his breste at supper and saied: Lord which is he that shal betraye the?
John 21:21 When Peter saw him, he sayde to Iesus: Lord what shall he here do?
John 21:22 Iesus sayde vnto him: Yf I wyll haue him to tarye tyll I come, what is that to the? folow thou me.
John 21:23 Then went this saiynge abrode amonge the brethren, that that disciple shoulde not dye. Yet Iesus sayde not to hym, he shall not dye, but if I wyl that he tary tyll I come, what is that to the?
John 21:24 The same dyscyple is he which testifyeth of these thinges, and wrote these thinges. And we know that his testimonie is true.
John 21:25 Ther are also many other thinges whych Iesus dyd, the whiche if they shoulde be written euery one I suppose the worlde could not contayne the bokes that shuld be written.

BOOK: Acts

CHAPTER: 1

Acts 1:1 In the former treatyse (deare frende Theophilus) I haue written of all that Iesus beganne to do and teache,
Acts 1:2 vntyll the day in whyche he was taken vp after that he, through the holy ghost, had geuen commaundementes vnto the Apostles whiche he had chosen:
Acts 1:3 to whom also he shewed him selfe aliue after his passion by many tokens, apperynge vnto them fourty dayes, & speakinge of the kyngdome of God,
Acts 1:4 & gathered them together, and commaunded them, that they shoulde not departe from Hierusalem: but to wayt for the promys of the father, wherof ye haue hearde of me.
Acts 1:5 For Iohn baptysed with water: but ye shal be baptised with the holy ghost, and that wyth in thys feawe dayes.
Acts 1:6 When they were come together they axed of him saiynge: Lorde wylt thou at thys tyme restore againe the kyngdome to Israel?
Acts 1:7 And he sayed vnto them: It is not for you to know the tymes or the seasons which the father hath put in hys owne power
Acts 1:8 but ye shall receiue power of the holy ghost, whiche shall come on you. And ye shall be witnesses vnto me in Hierusalem, and in al Iewrye, and in Samary and euen vnto the worldes ende.
Acts 1:9 And when he had spoken these thynges whyle they beheld, he was taken vp, and a cloud receiued him vp out of their sighte,
Acts 1:10 And while they loked stedfastlye vp to heauen as he went, beholde two men stode by them in whyt apparell,
Acts 1:11 whyche also sayde: ye men of Galile, why stande ye gasynge vp into heauen? This same Iesus which is taken from you into heauen, shal so come, euen as ye haue sene hym go into heauen.
Acts 1:12 Then returned they vnto Hierusalem from mounte Oliuete, whiche is nie to Hierusalem counteynynge a saboth dayes iorney.
Acts 1:13 And when they were come in, they went vp into a parler where abode bothe Peter, and Iames, Iohn and Andrew, Philip & Thomas, Bartlemew and Matthewe, Iames the sonne of Alpheus and Simon zelotes, and Iudas Iames sonne.
Acts 1:14 These all continued wyth one accorde in prayer and supplicacion with the women and Mary the mother of Iesu, and with hys brethren.
Acts 1:15 And in those dayes Peter stode vp in the myddes of the dyscyples and sayde (the numbre of names that were together, were about an hundred and twenty)
Acts 1:16 Ye men and brethren this scripture muste haue nedes ben fulfilled, which the holy ghost through the mouth of Dauid spake before of Iudas, whiche was gyde to them that toke Iesus.
Acts 1:17 For he was noumbred wyth vs and had obtayned felowshype in this ministracion.
Acts 1:18 And the same hath now possessed a plot of grounde with the rewarde of iniquitie, and when he was hanged, brast a sondre in the myddes. and all his bowels gushed out.
Acts 1:19 And it is knowen vnto all the inhabiters of Ierusalem, in so much that, that felde is called in theyr mother tonge Acheldama, that is to say, the bloude fielde.
Acts 1:20 It is written in the boke of Psalmes: His habitacion be voide, and no man be dwelling ther in: and his Byshoprycke let another take.
Acts 1:21 Wherfore of these men whiche haue companyed with vs all the tyme that the Lorde Iesus went in and oute among vs,
Acts 1:22 beginning at the baptisme of Iohn, vnto that same daye that he was taken vp from vs, muste one be ordeyned to beare wytnes with vs of hys resurreccion.
Acts 1:23 And they apoynted two, Ioseph called Barsabas (whose syr name was Iustus) and Mathias.
Acts 1:24 And they praysed saiynge: thou Lorde whyche knowest the hertes af all men, shewe whether of these two thou hast chosen,
Acts 1:25 that the one may take the roume of this mynystracion and Apostleshippe, from that which Iudas by transgression fel, that he myght go to his owne place.
Acts 1:26 And they gaue forth theyr lottes, and the lot fell on Mathias, and he was counted with the eleuen Apostles.

CHAPTER: 2

Acts 2:1 When the fyfty daye was come, they were all with one accorde together in one place.
Acts 2:2 And sodainly there came a sounde from heauen, as it had bene the comynge of a myghty wynd, and it filled al the housse where they sate.
Acts 2:3 And there appeared vnto them clouen tounges, lyke as they had bene fyre, and it sate vpon eche of them,
Acts 2:4 and they were all filled with the holye ghoste, and began to speake wyth other tounges, euen as the spyryte gaue them vtteraunce.
Acts 2:5 And there were dwelling at Hierusalem Iewes, deuout men, whyche were of all nations vnder heauen.
Acts 2:6 When thys was noysed aboute, the multitude came together & were astonied, because that euery man hearde them speake hys owne toung.
Acts 2:7 They wondred all & merueyled sayinge among them selues: Behold are not al these which speake of Galile?
Acts 2:8 And how heare we euery man his own tounge wherin we were borne?
Acts 2:9 Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, and the inhabiters of Mesopotamia, of Iewry, and of Cappadocia, and of Ponthus and Asia,
Acts 2:10 Phrysia, Pamphilia, and of Egypte, and of the parties of Libia, which is besyde Syren, and straungers of Rome, Iewes, and conuertes,
Acts 2:11 Grekes, and Arabians: we haue heard them speake: wyth our owne tounges the great workes of God.
Acts 2:12 They were all amased, and woundered saiynge one to another: what meaneth thys?
Acts 2:13 Other mocked them sayinge: they are full of newe wyne.
Acts 2:14 But Peter stepped forth wyth the eleuen, and lyfte vp his voyce, and sayed vnto them: Ye men of Iewrye, and all ye that inhabite Hierusalem: be thys knowen vnto you, and wyth youre eares heare my wordes.
Acts 2:15 These art not drounke, as ye suppose, for it is yet but the thyrde houre of the day.
Acts 2:16 But thys is that which was spoken by the Prophet Iohel:
Acts 2:17 It shal be in the laste daies saith God, of my spirite: I wil pour out vpon all flesh. And your sonnes and daughters shal prophesie, & your youngmen shal se visions, and your oldmen shall dreame dreames.
Acts 2:18 And on my seruauntes and on my handmaydens, I wyll pour out of my spirite in those dayes, and they shall prophesye.
Acts 2:19 And I wyll shewe wounders in heauen aboue, and tokens in the earth beneth, bloude & fyre, and the vapoure of smoke.
Acts 2:20 The sonne shalbe turned into darckenes, and the mone into bloude, before that greate and notable day of the Lorde come.
Acts 2:21 And it shall be, that whosoeuer shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saued.
Acts 2:22 Ye men of Israel heare these wordes: Iesus of Nazareth, a man approued of God amonge you wyth miracles, woundres, and signes whiche God dyd by hym in the middes of you, as ye your selues knowe:
Acts 2:23 hym haue ye taken by the handes of vnryghtuous persons after he was delyuered by the determinate counsell and for knowledge of God, and haue crucifyed and slayne:
Acts 2:24 whom God hath raysed vp and lowsed the sorowes of deathe, because it was vnpossible that he shoulde be holden of it.
Acts 2:25 For Dauid speaketh of hym afore hand. I sawe the Lorde alwayes before me: For he is on my ryghte hande, that I shoulde not be moued.
Acts 2:26 Therefore dyd my herte reioice, and my tounge was glad. Moreouer also my fleshe shall reste in hope,
Acts 2:27 because thou wylt not leaue my soule in hel, neyther wylte suffer thine holy, to se corruption.
Acts 2:28 Thou hast shewed me the wayes of lyfe, and shalte make me full of ioye, wt thy countenaunce.
Acts 2:29 Men and brethren, let me frely speake vnto you of the patriarche Dauid: For he is both dead and buryed, and hys sepulchre remaineth wyth vs vnto this daye.
Acts 2:30 Therfore seiyng he was a Prophet, and knew that God had sworne wyth an othe to hym, that the fruyte of hys loynes shoulde sit on hys seat (in that Christ shoulde ryse agayne in the flesh)
Acts 2:31 he sawe before: and spake of the resurreccion of Christ, that hys soule shoulde not be lefte in hell: neyther hys fleshe should se corruption.
Acts 2:32 Thys Iesus hath God raised vp wher of we all are witnesses.
Acts 2:33 Sence nowe that he by the ryght hand of God is exalted, and hath receiued of the father the promyse of the holy ghost, he hath shed forth, that whyche ye now se and heare.
Acts 2:34 For Dauid is not ascended into heauen: but he sayd: The Lord said to my Lord, syt on my ryght hande
Acts 2:35 vntyll I make thy fooes thy fote stole.
Acts 2:36 So therefore let all the house of Israell knowe for a surety, that God hath made the same Iesus whom ye haue crucifyed, bothe Lord and Christe.
Acts 2:37 When they hearde this, they were prycked in their hertes, and sayd vnto Peter and vnto the other Apostles. Ye men and brethren, what shall we do?
Acts 2:38 Peter sayde vnto them: repent and be baptysed euerye one of you in the name of Iesus Christe for the remission of sinnes, and ye shall receiue the gifte of the holye ghost.
Acts 2:39 For the promyse was made vnto you and to your chyldren, & to all that are a farre, euen as manye as the Lorde oure God shall call.
Acts 2:40 And wyth manye other wordes bare he wytnes and exhorted them saiynge: Saue your selues from thys vntowarde generacion.
Acts 2:41 Then they that gladlye receiued his preachinge, were baptysed, and the same daye there were added vnto them about thre thousande soules.
Acts 2:42 And they continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowshyppe, and in breakyng of bread, and in praier.
Acts 2:43 And feare came ouer euery soule. And many woundres & signes were shewed by the Apostles.
Acts 2:44 And all that beleued kept them selues together, and had all thinges commen,
Acts 2:45 and solde their possessions and goodes, and departed them to all men as euery man had nede.
Acts 2:46 And they contynued dayly wyth one accorde in the temple and brake bread in euerye house, and dyd eate their meate together, with gladnes and singlenes of her
Acts 2:47 praisynge God, and had fauour wyth all the people: And the Lorde added to the congregacion dayly suche as should be saued.

CHAPTER: 3

Acts 3:1 Peter and Iohn wente vp together into the temple at the nynth houre of prayer.
Acts 3:2 And ther was a certayne man halte from hys mothers wombe, whome they broughte and layed at the gate of the temple called beutifull, to axe almes of them that entred into the temple.
Acts 3:3 Whyche same when he sawe Peter and Iohn, that they woulde into the temple, desiered to receiue an almes.
Acts 3:4 And Peter fastened hys eyes on hym wyth Iohn and sayed: loke on vs.
Acts 3:5 And he gaue heede vnto them, trustynge to receyue somethinge of them.
Acts 3:6 Then sayed Peter: Syluer and gold haue I none, suche as I haue geue I the. In the name of Iesu Christ of Nazareth, ryse vp & walke.
Acts 3:7 And he toke hym by the right hande, and lyft him vp. And immedyatlye hys fete and ancle bones receyued strength.
Acts 3:8 And he sprange, stode and also walked, and entred wyth them into the temple, walkynge and leaping and laudinge God.
Acts 3:9 And all the people sawe hym walke and laude God.
Acts 3:10 And they knewe hym that it was he whyche sate and begged at the beutyfull gate of the temple. And they wondred & were sore astonied at that, which had happened vnto hym.
Acts 3:11 And as the halte whych was healed held Peter and Iohn, all the people ran amased vnto them in Solomons porche.
Acts 3:12 When Peter saw that, he aunswered vnto the people: ye men of Israel why maruaile ye at this or why loke ye so stedfastly on vs as though by our owne power or holines, we had made this man go.
Acts 3:13 The God of Abraham Isaac and Iacob, the God of our fathers hath glorified hys sonne Iesu, whom ye delyuered and denyed in the presence of Pylate, when he had iudged hym to be lowsed.
Acts 3:14 But ye denyed the holye and iuste: and desyred a mortherer to be geuen you
Acts 3:15 and kylled the Lorde of lyfe, whom god hath raysed from death, of the whiche we are wytnesses.
Acts 3:16 And hys name through the fayth of his name, hath made this man sound: whom ye se and knowe. And the fayth whych is by hym, hath geuen to hym thys health in the presence of you all.
Acts 3:17 And nowe brethren I wote well that through ignoraunce ye dyd it, as did also your heades.
Acts 3:18 But those thinges whyche God before had shewed, by the mouth of all hys prophetes, howe that Christe shoulde suffer, he hath thus wyse fulfilled.
Acts 3:19 Repent ye therfore and turne, that youre synnes maye be done awaye. When the tyme of refreshing commeth, which we shall haue of the presence of the Lorde,
Acts 3:20 and when God shal sende hym, which before was preached vnto you, that is to wytte, Iesus Christe,
Acts 3:21 whiche he must receiue heauen, vntyl the tyme that al thinges (which God hath spoken by the mouthe of all hys holye Prophetes sence the worlde beganne) be restored agayne.
Acts 3:22 For Moyses sayd vnto the fathers: A Prophete shall the Lorde youre God raise vp vnto you, euen of youre brethren lyke vnto me: hym shall ye heare in all thynges, whatsoeuer he shall saye vnto you.
Acts 3:23 For the tyme wyll come, that euerye soule, whyche shal not heare that same prophete, shal be destroyed from amonge the people.
Acts 3:24 Also all the Prophetes from Samuel and thence forth, as manye as haue spoken, haue in lykewyse tolde of these dayes.
Acts 3:25 Ye are the chyldren of the prophetes and of the couenaunt, which God hath made vnto our fathers saiynge to Abraham: Euen in thy sede shall all the kynredes of the earthe be blessed.
Acts 3:26 Fyrste vnto you hath God raysed vp his sonne Iesus, and hym he hath sent to blesse you, that euery one of you shuld turne from your wickednes.

CHAPTER: 4

Acts 4:1 As they spake vnto the people: the Priestes and the Rular of the Temple, and the Saduces came vpon them,
Acts 4:2 taking it greuouslye that they taughte the people and preached in Iesus the resurreccion frome deathe.
Acts 4:3 And layed handes on them, and putte them in holde vntyll the nexte daie, for it was nowe euen tyde.
Acts 4:4 Howe be it, manye of them which hearde the wordes, beleued: and the numbre of the men was about fyue thousande.
Acts 4:5 And it chaunced on the morowe that theyr rulars, and elders, and scribes,
Acts 4:6 as Annas the chiefe Prieste, and Cayphas, and Iohn, and Alexander, and as many as were of the hye priestes gathered together at Ierusalem,
Acts 4:7 and set them before them, & axed: by what power or in what name haue ye done this syrs?
Acts 4:8 Then Peter full of the holy ghost sayed vnto them: ye rulars of the people, and elders of Israel,
Acts 4:9 if we thys day are examined of the good dede done to the sicke man by what meanes he is made whole:
Acts 4:10 be it knowen vnto you all and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Iesus Christe of Nazareth, whom ye crucifyed, and whom God raysed agayne from deathe, euen by hym doth thys man stande here presente before you whole.
Acts 4:11 This is the stone cast asyde of you builders, which is set in the chiefe place of the corner.
Acts 4:12 Neither is ther saluacion in any other. Nor yet also is there any other name geuen to men wherin we muste be saued.
Acts 4:13 When they sawe the boldnes of Peter & Iohn and vnderstode that, they were vnlerned men and lay people, they meruailed, and they knew then that they were with Iesu:
Acts 4:14 and beholdinge also the man whiche was healed standynge wyth them, they coulde not saye agaynst it.
Acts 4:15 But they commaunded them to go a syde out of the counsell, and counceled amonge them selues
Acts 4:16 saiynge: what shall we do to these men? For a manifeste signe is done by them, and is openlye knowen to all them that dwell in Hierusalem, and we can not denie it.
Acts 4:17 But that it be noised no further among the people, let vs threaten and charge them that they speake henceforth to no man in this name.
Acts 4:18 And they called them and commaunded them that in no wyse they should speake or teache in the name of Iesu.
Acts 4:19 But Peter and Iohn aunswered to them and sayd: whether it be ryght in the syght of God to obey you more then God, iudge ye.
Acts 4:20 For we can not. But speake that whiche we haue sene and heard.
Acts 4:21 So threatened they them and let them go, and founde nothinge howe to punyshe them, because of the people. For all men lauded God for the myracle which was done,
Acts 4:22 for the man was aboue fourty yeare olde, on whom thys myracle of healynge was shewed.
Acts 4:23 Assone as they were let go, they came to their fellowes, and shewed all that the hye priestes and elders had sayed to them.
Acts 4:24 And when they hearde that, they lifte vp their voices to God with one accorde, and saied: Lorde, thou art God, whiche haste made heauen and earth, the sea and al that in them is,
Acts 4:25 whiche by the mouth of thy seruaunt Dauid hast said: Why dyd the heathen rage, and the people imagyn vaine thinges.
Acts 4:26 The kinges of the earth stode vp and the rulers came together, againste Lorde and agaynste his Chryste.
Acts 4:27 For of a trueth againste thy holy childe Iesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herode and also Poncius Pilate, with the Gentyls & the people of Israel, gathered them selues together,
Acts 4:28 for to do whatsoeuer thy hande and thy councell determined before to be done.
Acts 4:29 And nowe Lorde, beholde their threateninges, and graunte vnto thy seruauntes with all confidence to speake thy worde.
Acts 4:30 So that thou stretche forth thy hande, that healing and signes and wounders be done by the name of thy holye chylde Iesus.
Acts 4:31 And assone as they had prayed, the place moued where they were assembled together, and they were all filled with the holy ghoste, and they spake the worde of God boldlye.
Acts 4:32 And the multitude of them that beleued were of one herte, and of one soule. Also none of them said that anye of the thinges whyche he possessed, was his owne: but had all thinges commune.
Acts 4:33 And with greate power gaue the Apostles wytnes of the resurreccion of the Lorde Iesus. And greate grace was geuen wt them all.
Acts 4:34 Neyther was there anye amonge them that lacked. For as manie as were possessours of landes and houses, sold them and broughte the price of the thinges, that were solde,
Acts 4:35 and layed it doune at the Apostles fete. And distribution was made vnto euery man accordinge as he had nede.
Acts 4:36 And Ioses who was also called of the Apostles Barnabas (that is to say the sonne of consolation) beynge a Leuite, and of the country of Cipers,
Acts 4:37 had lande, and solde it, and laied the pryce doune at the Apostles fete.

CHAPTER: 5

Acts 5:1 A certain man named Ananyas with Saphira his wyfe solde a possession,
Acts 5:2 and kept awaye parte of the price (hys wyfe also beyng of counsel,) and brought a certain parte, and layd it doune at the Apostles fete.
Acts 5:3 Then said Peter. Ananias, how is it, that Sathan hath fylled thyne hert, that thou shouldest lye vnto the holy ghost, and kepe awaye part of the pryce of the lyuelod:
Acts 5:4 Pertained it not vnto the onelie, and after it was solde, was not the price in thine owne power? Howe is that, thou hast conceiued this thinge in thyne herte? Thou hast not lied vnto men, but vnto God.
Acts 5:5 When Ananias hearde these wordes, he fell doune and gaue vp the ghost. And great feare came on all them that hearde these thinges.
Acts 5:6 And the younge men rose vp, and put him a parte and caryed hym out, and buried him.
Acts 5:7 And it fortuned as it were aboute the space of thre houres after that hys wyfe came in, ignoraunt of that whiche was done.
Acts 5:8 And Peter sayed vnto her: Tell me, gaue ye the lande for so much? And she said: ye for so much.
Acts 5:9 Then saied Peter vnto her: why haue ye agreed together to tempte the spiryte of the Lorde? Beholde, the fete of them whiche haue buried thy husbande, are at the dore, and shal cary the out.
Acts 5:10 Then she fell doune straighte waye at his fete, and yelded vp the ghoste. And the yonge men came in and founde her dead, and caryed her out & buried her by her housbande.
Acts 5:11 And great feare came on al the congregation, and on as manie as hearde it.
Acts 5:12 By the handes of the Apostles were manie signes and wounders shewed amonge the people. And they were all together wyth one accorde in Solomons porch.
Acts 5:13 And of other durst no man ioyne him selfe to them: neuerthelater the people magnifyed them.
Acts 5:14 The numbre of them that beleued in the Lorde, both of men and women, grewe more and more:
Acts 5:15 in so much that they broughte the sycke into the stretes, & layed them on beddes and palettes, that at the leaste waye, the shaddowe of Peter when he came by, myght shadowe some of them.
Acts 5:16 There came also a multitude out of the cyties round about vnto Hierusalem, bringinge sicke folke, and them whiche were vexed wyth vncleane spirites. And they were healed euery one.
Acts 5:17 Then the chiefe Prieste arose vp & al they that were with hym (which is the seete of the Saduces) and were full of indignacion,
Acts 5:18 and laied handes on the Apostles, and put them in the commune prison.
Acts 5:19 But the Aungell of the Lorde by nyght opened the prison dores, and broughte them forth, & sayed:
Acts 5:20 go, steppe forthe, and speake in the temple to the people all the wordes of this lyfe.
Acts 5:21 When they heard that, they entred into the temple early in the mornynge and taught. The chiefe Prieste came & they that were with him, and called a counsell together, and all the elders of the children of Israell, & sent to the prison to fetche them.
Acts 5:22 When the mynisters came and founde them not in the prison, they returned and tolde
Acts 5:23 saiynge: the pryson founde we shut as sure as was possible, and the kepers standynge wyth out before the dores. But when we had opened, we founde no man with in.
Acts 5:24 When the chiefe Priest of al and the ruler of the temple and the hye Priestes heard these thinges, they doubted of them whervnto thys woulde growe.
Acts 5:25 Then came one and shewed them: beholde the men that ye put in prison, stande in the temple, and teache the people.
Acts 5:26 Then went the ruler of the temple with ministers, and brought them without violence. For they feared the people: least they should haue bene stoned.
Acts 5:27 And when they had brought them, they set them before the counsell. And the chiefe prieste axed them
Acts 5:28 saiynge: dyd not we straytely commaunde you, that ye shoulde not teach in this name. And behold ye haue fylled Hierusalem with your doctrine, and ye intended to brynge this mannes bloude vpon vs.
Acts 5:29 Peter and the other Apostles aunswered & saied. We ought more to obey God, then men.
Acts 5:30 The God of our father raysed vp Iesus whom ye slewe and hanged on tree.
Acts 5:31 Hym hath God lyfte vp with his ryght hand to be a ruler and a sauiour, for to geue repentaunce to Israell and forgeuenes of synnes?
Acts 5:32 And we are hys recordes concerninge these thinges, & also the holy ghost, whom God hath geuen to them that obey him.
Acts 5:33 When they heard that they claue a sunder, & sought meanes to slea them.
Acts 5:34 Then stode ther vp one in the counsel, a pharisey named Gamaliel, a doctoure af law, had in aucthorite amonge all the people, and commaunded to put the Apostles a syde a litel space,
Acts 5:35 and saide vnto them: Men of Israel take hede to youre selues what ye entende to do as touching these men.
Acts 5:36 Before these dayes rose vp one Theudas bostynge him selfe: to whom resorted a numbre of men, aboute a foure hundred which was slaine, and they all which beleued him: were scatred abroade, & brought to nought.
Acts 5:37 After this man, arose ther vp one Iudas of Galile in the tyme when tribute began, and drewe awaie muche people after him. He also perished, and all euen as manye as harkened to hym: are scattered abroade.
Acts 5:38 And nowe I saye vnto you: refrayne youre selues from these men, let them alone. For if the counsel of this worke be of men, it wil come to nought.
Acts 5:39 But and if it be of God ye can not destroye it, leaste haply ye be found to striue against god.
Acts 5:40 And to him they agreed, and called the Apostles, and beate them, and commaunded that they shoulde not speake in the name of Iesu, and let them go.
Acts 5:41 And they departed from the counsel, reioysinge that they were counted worthy, to suffer rebuke for his name.
Acts 5:42 And dayly in the temple and in euerye house they ceased not, teachinge and preachinge Iesus Christe.

CHAPTER: 6

Acts 6:1 In those dayes as the numbre of the disciples grewe, ther arose a a grudge amonge the Grekes agaynste the Hebrues, because their widdowes were despysed in the dayly ministracion.
Acts 6:2 Then the twelue called the multitude of the dysciples together and saide: it is not mete that we shoulde leaue the worde of God and serue at the tables.
Acts 6:3 Wherfore brethren, loke ye out amonge you seuen men of honeste reporte, and full of the holye ghoste and wysdome, whyche we maye apoint to this nedfull busines.
Acts 6:4 But we wyl geue our selues continually to prayer, and to the ministracion of the word.
Acts 6:5 And the saiynge pleased the whole multitude. And they chose Stephan a man full of faieth and of the holye ghost, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nichanor, and Timon, and Permenas, and Nicholas a conuerte of Antioche.
Acts 6:6 Whiche they set before the Apostles, and they praied and laide their handes on them.
Acts 6:7 And the worde of God encreased, and the numbre of the disciples multiplyed in Hierusalem greatly, and a great companye of the priestes were obedient to the faith.
Acts 6:8 And Stephane ful of fayth and power, dyd greate wounders and miracles amonge the people.
Acts 6:9 Then arose certaine of the Synagoge, whyche are called Lybertines and Syrenites, and of Alexandria, and of Cilicia, and Asia, and disputed with Stephan.
Acts 6:10 And they could not resist the wysdome, and the spyryte wt whyche he spake.
Acts 6:11 Then sent they in men, whiche said: we haue heard him speake blasphemous wordes against Moyses and against God.
Acts 6:12 And they moued the people and the elders and the scribes: and came vpon him and caught hym,
Acts 6:13 and brought him to the counsell and brought forth false witnesses whiche sayde. This man ceaseth not to speake blaspemous wordes against thys holy place, and the lawe,
Acts 6:14 for we hearde him saie: this Iesus of Nazareth shall destroye this place, and shal chaung the ordinaunces, which Moises gaue vs.
Acts 6:15 And al that sate in the counsel loked stedfastlye on hym, and saw hys face as it had bene the face of an aungel.

CHAPTER: 7

Acts 7:1 Then sayde the chiefe priest: is it euen so?
Acts 7:2 And he sayde: ye men, brethren, and fathers, harken to. The God of glorye appeared vnto our father Abraham whyle he was yet in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran,
Acts 7:3 & saied to him: come oute of thy countrey & from thy kynred, and come into the lande, whiche I shall shewe the.
Acts 7:4 Then came he out of the lande of Chaldey, and dwelt in Charran. And after that assone as his father was dead he brought him into thys lande, in whiche ye now dwell,
Acts 7:5 and he gaue him none inheritaunce in it, no not the bredeth of a fote: but promised that he would geue it to hym to possesse, and to his seed after him, when as yet he had no chylde.
Acts 7:6 God verely spake on this wyse that his sede should be a dweller in a straung land, & that they should kepe them in bondage & entreate them euyll .iiij.C. yeares.
Acts 7:7 But the nacion to whome they shalbe in bondage, will I iudge, sayed God. And after that shall they come forth and serue me in this place.
Acts 7:8 And he gaue hym the couenaunt of circumcision. And he begat Isaac, and circumcised him the .viij. daye and Isaac begatte Iacob, and Iacob the twelue Patriarches.
Acts 7:9 And the patriarches hauinge indignacion sold Ioseph into Egypt. And God was wyth him,
Acts 7:10 and deliuered him out of all his aduersities and gaue him fauoure and wysdome in the sight of Pharao kynge of Egypt, whiche made him gouerner ouer Egypte, and ouer al his houshold.
Acts 7:11 Then came there a derth ouer all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction, that our fathers founde no sustenaunce.
Acts 7:12 But when Iacob hearde that there was crone in Egypt: he sent our fathers first.
Acts 7:13 And at the seconde tyme, Ioseph was knowen of hys brethren, and Iosephes kinred was made knowen vnto Pharao.
Acts 7:14 Then sente Ioseph and caused hys father to be brought and all his kyn, thre score and .xv. soules.
Acts 7:15 And Iacob descended into Egypte, and dyed both he and our fathers,
Acts 7:16 and were translated into Sichem, and were put in the sepulcher, that Abraham bought for money of the sonnes of Emor, at Sichem.
Acts 7:17 When the tyme of the promys drue nye, (which God had sworne to Abraham) the people grew and multiplied in Egypte,
Acts 7:18 tyll another kyng arose, whiche knew not of Ioseph.
Acts 7:19 The same dealt subtely wyth oure kynred, & euyll intreated oure fathers, and made them to caste out theyr yonge chyldren, that they should not remayne aliue.
Acts 7:20 The same time was Moises borne, and was a proper chylde in the sight of God, whiche was nourished vp in hys fathers house thre monethes.
Acts 7:21 When he was cast out Pharaos doughter toke him vp, & nourished hym vp for her owne sonne.
Acts 7:22 And Moises was learned in al maner wysdome of the Egyptians, and was mighty in dedes and in wordes.
Acts 7:23 And when he was full forty yeare old, it came into his herte to vysyte his brethren the chyldren of Israell.
Acts 7:24 And when he sawe one of them suffer wronge, he defended hym and auenged his quarel that had the harme done to hym, and smote the Egyptian.
Acts 7:25 For he supposed his brethren woulde haue vnderstande how that God by his handes should saue them. But they vnderstode not.
Acts 7:26 And the nexte daye he shewed hym selfe vnto them as they stroue, and woulde haue set them at one againe saiyng: Syrs, ye are brethren, why hurte ye one another?
Acts 7:27 But he that dyd his neighboure wronge, thrust him awaie sayinge: who made the a ruler and a iudge amonge vs?
Acts 7:28 What, wilt thou kyll me, as thou dydest the Egyptian yester daye?
Acts 7:29 Then fled Moyses at that saiyng, and was a straunger in the lande of Madyan, where he begatte two sonnes.
Acts 7:30 And when .xl. yeares were expired, ther appeared to him in the wyldernes of mount Sina, an aungel of the Lord in a flamme of fyre in a bushe.
Acts 7:31 When Moyses saw it he woundred at the sight. And as he drue near to behold, the voice of the Lord came vnto hym.
Acts 7:32 I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham the God of Isaac, and the God of Iacob? Moises trembled and durst not behold.
Acts 7:33 Then sayde the Lorde to him: Put of thy shewes from thy fete, for the place where thou standeste, is holye grounde.
Acts 7:34 I haue perfectly sene the affliction of the people, which is in Egipt and I haue heard their groninge, & am come doune to deliuer them. And nowe come, and I wyl sende the into Egypte.
Acts 7:35 This Moyses whom they forsoke saiyng: who made the a ruler and a iudge, the same God sente both a ruler and a deliuerer, by the handes of the angell, whiche appeared to him in the bushe.
Acts 7:36 And the same brought them out shewing woundres and signes in Egypte, & in the red sea, and in the wildernes .xl. yeares.
Acts 7:37 This is that Moises which said vnto the children of Israell: A Prophet shall the Lorde your God rayse vp vnto you of youre brethren, lyke vnto me, him shal ye heare.
Acts 7:38 This is he that was in the congregation, in the wyldernes wyth the aungell, whyche spake to hym in the mounte Syna, and wyth oure fathers. This man receiued the worde of lyfe to geue vnto vs,
Acts 7:39 to whom our fathers woulde not obey, but cast it from them, and in their hertes turned backe againe into Egipt,
Acts 7:40 saiynge vnto Aaron: Make vs Gods to go before vs. For this Moises that broughte vs out of the lande of Egipte, we wote not what is become of him.
Acts 7:41 And they made a calfe in those dayes, and offred sacrifices, vnto the ymage, and reioysed in the workes of their owne handes.
Acts 7:42 Then God turned him selfe, and gaue them vp that they shoulde worship the starres of the skye, as it is written in the boke of the Prophetes. O ye of the house of Israell, gaue ye to me sacrifyces and meate offeringes by the space of .xl. yeare in the wildernes?
Acts 7:43 And ye toke vnto you the tabernacle of Moloch, & the star of your God Remphan, figures which ye made to worshippe them. And I wil translate you beyonde Babylon.
Acts 7:44 Our fathers had the tabernacle of witnes in the wildernes, as he had apoynted them speaking vnto Moyses, that he shoulde make it accordynge to the fashyon that he had sene,
Acts 7:45 Whiche tabernacle our fathers receiued, and brought it in with Iosue into the possession of the Gentils, whiche God draue out before the face of our fathers vnto the tyme of Dauid.
Acts 7:46 Which found fauour before God, and desired that he myght fynde a tabernacle for the God of Iacob.
Acts 7:47 But Solomon buylt hym an house.
Acts 7:48 Howe be it he that is hyest of all, dwelleth not in temples made with handes, as sayth the prophet:
Acts 7:49 Heauen is my seate, and earth is my fotestole, what house wil ye builde for me sayed the Lorde? or what place is that I should reste in?
Acts 7:50 hath not my hande made all these thinges.
Acts 7:51 Ye styfe necked, and of vncyrcumcysed hertes and eares, ye haue al wayes resisted the holye ghoste as your fathers dyd, so do ye.
Acts 7:52 Whyche of the prophetes haue not your fathers persecuted? And they haue slayne them, which shewed before of the comminge of the iuste whom ye haue nowe betrayed and mordred.
Acts 7:53 And ye also haue receiued a lawe by the ordinaunce of aungels, and haue not kepte it.
Acts 7:54 When they heard these thinges, their hertes claue a sunder, and they gnashed on him with theyr tethe.
Acts 7:55 But he beynge full of the holye ghoste: loked vp stedfastly wyth his eyes into heauen, and sawe the glorye of God, & Iesus standynge on the ryghte hand of God,
Acts 7:56 & sayde: beholde, I se the heauens open, and the sonne of man standynge on the ryght hande of God.
Acts 7:57 Then they gaue a shut wyth a loude voice, and stopped their eares, and ranne vpon hym al at once,
Acts 7:58 and cast him out of the cytie, & stoned him. And the witnesses layde doune theyr clothes at a yonge mannes fote named Saul.
Acts 7:59 And they stoned Stephan calling on & saiyng: Lord Iesu receiue my spyryte.
Acts 7:60 And he kneled doune and cryed with a loude voice: Lord laye not thys sinne to their charge. And when he had thus spoken: he fel a slepe.

CHAPTER: 8

Acts 8:1 Saul had pleasure in hys death. And at the tyme ther was a great persecution agaynste the congregation, whiche was at Ierusalem, & they were all scattered abroade thorowout the regions of Iury & Samaria, excepte the Apostles.
Acts 8:2 Then deuout men dressed Stephan, & made great lamentation ouer hym.
Acts 8:3 But Saul made hauoke of the congregacion entring into euery house, and drewe oute bothe man and woman, and thruste them into prysone.
Acts 8:4 They that were scatered abroade, wente euery where preaching the word.
Acts 8:5 Then came Philyp into a cytye of Samarya, and preached Christe vnto them.
Acts 8:6 And the people gaue hede vnto those thinges, whiche Philippe spake, wyth one accord, in that they heard and sawe the miracles which he dyd.
Acts 8:7 For vncleane spyrites criynge with loude voyce, came out of manye that were possessed of them. And manye taken wyth palsyes, and manye that halted, were healed.
Acts 8:8 And ther was greate ioye in the citye.
Acts 8:9 And ther was a certaine man called Simon, which before tyme in the same citye, vsed wytchcraft and bewitched the people of Samarye, sayinge that he was a man that coulde do greate thinges.
Acts 8:10 Whom they regarded, from the lest to the greatest, saiyng: this felow is the great power of God.
Acts 8:11 And hym they set much by: because that of long tyme he had mocked them with sorcery.
Acts 8:12 But assone as they beleued Philippes preachinge of the kyngedome of God and of the name of Iesu Christe, they were baptysed both men and women.
Acts 8:13 Then Symon hym selfe beleued also, and was baptysed, and continued wyth Philip, and woundred beholdinge the miracles & signes whiche were shewed.
Acts 8:14 When the Apostles whiche were at Ierusalem hearde saye, that Samaria had receiued the word of God, they sente vnto them Peter and Iohn.
Acts 8:15 Whyche when they were come prayed for them that they myght receiue the holy ghost.
Acts 8:16 For as yet he was come on none of them, but they were baptysed onlye in the name of Christ Iesu.
Acts 8:17 Then laied they theyr handes on them & they receiued the holy ghost.
Acts 8:18 When Simon saw that thorow laiyng on of the Apostles handes on them, the holy ghoste was geuen, he offred them money
Acts 8:19 saiyng: Geue me also this power, that on whomsoeuer I put the handes, he may receiue the holy ghost.
Acts 8:20 Then sayd Peter vnto him: thy money perishe with the, because thou wenest that the gift of God maye be obteyned wt money.
Acts 8:21 Thou hast neither parte nor fellowshippe in thys busynes. For the hert is not ryght in the sight of God.
Acts 8:22 Repent therfore of this thy wyckednes, and praye God, that the thought of thyne herte maye be forgeuen the.
Acts 8:23 For I perceiue, that thou art full of bitter gal, & wrapped in iniquitie.
Acts 8:24 Then aunswered Simon, and said: praye ye to the Lord for me, that none of these thinges, which ye haue spoken fal on me.
Acts 8:25 And they when they had testified and preached the worde of the Lorde returned towarde Ierusalem, & preached the Gospel in manie cities of the Samaritans.
Acts 8:26 Then the aungel of the Lorde spake vnto Philippe, saiynge: aryse and go Southward vnto the way, that goeth doune from Ierusalem vnto Gaza, which is in the desert.
Acts 8:27 And he arose and wente on. And beholde a man of Ethiopia, whiche was a chamberlayne, and of greate auctorite with Candace quene of the Ethiopians, and had the rule of all her treasure, came to Hierusalem for to praye.
Acts 8:28 And as he returned home againe sittinge in hys charet, he reade Esay the prophete.
Acts 8:29 Then the spyrite sayed to Phylippe: God neare, and ioyne thy selfe to yonder charete.
Acts 8:30 And Philippe ranne to him, and hearde hym reade the Prophete Esaias and saied: Vnderstandeste thou what thou readeste?
Acts 8:31 And he saied: how can I excepte I had a gyde? And he desiered Philyp, that he woulde come vp and syt wyth hym.
Acts 8:32 The tenoure of the scripture whiche he reade, was thys. He was led as a shepe to be slaine, and lyke a Lambe dombe before his sherar, so opened he not his mouth:
Acts 8:33 Because of hys humblenes, he was not estemed: who shall declare hys generacyon? for his lyke is taken from the earth.
Acts 8:34 The chamberlayne aunswered Phylippe, and sayed: I pray the of whom speaketh the Prophete this? of him selfe, or of some other man?
Acts 8:35 And Philippe opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and preached vnto him Iesus.
Acts 8:36 And as they wente on their waye, they came vnto a certaine water, and the chamberlaine sayed: Se here is water, what shall let me to be baptysed?
Acts 8:37 Philyp saide vnto him: If thou beleue with all thyne herte, thou maieste. He aunswered and saied, I beleue that Iesus Christe is the sonne of God.
Acts 8:38 And he commaunded the charete to stande styll. And they went doune both into the water: both Philippe and also the chamberlayne, and he baptysed him.
Acts 8:39 And assone as they were come out of the water, the spyryte of the Lorde caught awaye Phylip, that the chamberlayne sawe him no more. And he went on his waie reioysinge:
Acts 8:40 but Philippe was found at Azotus. And he walked thorow out the countrie preachynge in theyr cytyes, tyll he came to Cesarea.

CHAPTER: 9

Acts 9:1 And Saul yet breathynge out threatening & slaughter against the Disciples of the Lorde, went vnto the hye priest,
Acts 9:2 and desired of him letters to Damasco to the synagoges that if he founde anye of thys way, whether they were men or women, he mighte bring them bound vnto Hierusalem.
Acts 9:3 But as he went on his iorneye, and was come nye to Damasco, sodenly there shyned round aboute him a lyght from heauen,
Acts 9:4 & he fell to the earth, and hearde a voice saiyng to him: Saul, Saul why persecutest thou me?
Acts 9:5 And he saide: what art thou Lorde? And the Lorde saide: I am Iesus whom thou persecutest it shalbe hearde for the to kycke agaynste the prycke.
Acts 9:6 And he both tremblinge and astonied sayde: Lorde what wylt thou haue me to do? And the Lorde sayde vnto hym: aryse, and go into the cytye, and it shal be tolde what thou shalt do.
Acts 9:7 Then the men whiche iornyed wyth hym stode amased, for they heard a voice, but sawe no man.
Acts 9:8 And Saul arose from the earth, and opened his eyes, but saw no man. Then led they hym by the hande, and broughte him into Damasco.
Acts 9:9 And he was thre dayes wt out sight & neyther eate nor dranke.
Acts 9:10 And ther was a certaine disciple at Damasco, named Ananias, & to hym sayd the Lorde in a vision: Ananias. And he sayd: beholde I am here Lorde.
Acts 9:11 And the Lorde sayd vnto him: aryse, and go into the streat, whiche is called strayght, and seke in the house of Iudas, after one called Saul of Tharsus. For beholde he prayeth,
Acts 9:12 & hath sene in a vision a man named Ananias comminge in to hym, and putting hys handes on him that he myght receiue hys sight.
Acts 9:13 Then Ananias aunswered: Lord, I haue heard by many of this man, how much euyll he hath done to thy sainctes at Ierusalem,
Acts 9:14 and here he hath auctorite of the hye Pryestes to bynd all that call on thy name.
Acts 9:15 The Lorde said vnto him: go thy wayes for he is a chosen vessel vnto me, to beare me name before the gentyls and kynges, and the chyldren of Israel.
Acts 9:16 For I wil shew hym howe greate thinges he muste suffer for my names sake.
Acts 9:17 Ananias went hys waye and entred into the house, and put his handes on him, & said: brother Saul the Lord that appeared vnto the in the waye as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou myghtest receiue thy sight, and be fylled with the holy ghoste.
Acts 9:18 And immediatly ther fel from hys eyes as it had bene scales, and he receiued sight and arose and was baptised,
Acts 9:19 and receiued meate, and was conforted. Then was Saul certaine dayes wyth the dyscyples whyche were at Damasco.
Acts 9:20 And straight way he preached Christ in the Synagoges, howe that he was the sonne of God.
Acts 9:21 All that heard him, were amased and sayde: is not this he that spoiled them, whiche called on this name in Hierusalem, and came hyther for the intente that he shoulde brynge them bounde vnto the hye priestes?
Acts 9:22 But Saul encreased in strengthe, and confounded the Iewes whiche dwelte at Damasco affirminge that this was verye Christe.
Acts 9:23 And after a good whyle, the Iewes toke counsell together to kyl him.
Acts 9:24 But their laying awaite was knowen of Saule. And they watched at the gates day and night, to kyl hym,
Acts 9:25 then the disciples toke hym by nyght and put hym thorow the wall, and let him doune in a basket.
Acts 9:26 And when Saule was come to Hierusalem he assaied to couple him selfe wyth the dyscyples and they were all afraied of him and beleued not that he was a dyscyple.
Acts 9:27 But Barnabas toke hym and broughte hym to the Apostles and declared to them, howe he had sene the Lorde in the waye, and had spoken wyth hym: and howe he had done boldlye at Damasco in the name of Iesu.
Acts 9:28 And he had his conuersation wyth them at Hierusalem,
Acts 9:29 and quit hymselfe boldlie in the name of the Lorde Iesus. And he spake and disputed with the Grekes: and they wente aboute to slea him.
Acts 9:30 But when the brethren knew of that, they brought him to Cesaria, and sent him forth to Tharsus.
Acts 9:31 Then had the congregations reste thorowe out all Iewry and Galile and Samarie, and were edified, and walked in the feare of the Lorde, and multiplied by the confort of the holy ghoste.
Acts 9:32 And it chaunced that as Peter walked thorow out al quarters, he came to the sainctes, whiche dwelt at Lydda,
Acts 9:33 and there he founde a certaine man named Eueas, which had kepte his bed .viij. yere sycke of the palsey.
Acts 9:34 Then saied Peter vnto hym: Eneas, Iesus Christe make the whole. Aryse, and make thy bed. And he arose immediatlie.
Acts 9:35 And all that dwelte at Lidda and Assaron, sawe hym, and turned to the Lorde.
Acts 9:36 Ther was at Ioppa a certaine woman, (which was a disciple named Tabitha, which by interpretation is called Doreas) the same was ful of good workes and almes dedes, whiche she did.
Acts 9:37 And it chaunsed in those daies that she was sicke and dyed. When they had washed her, and layed her in a chamber:
Acts 9:38 Because Lidda was nye to Ioppa, and the discyples had hearde, that Peter was there, they sent vnto hym, desieringe hym that he would not be greued to come vnto them.
Acts 9:39 Peter arose and came wyth them & when he was come, they brought him into the chamber. And all the wydowes stode round about him wepynge and shewynge the cotes & garmentes, whyche Dorcas made whyle she was wyth them.
Acts 9:40 And Peter put them al forth and kneled doune, and praied and turned him to the bodye, and saied: Tabitha, aryse. And she opened her eyes, and when she sawe Peter she sat vp.
Acts 9:41 And he gaue her the hande, and lyfte her vp, and called the Sayntes and wydowes, and sheweth her alyue.
Acts 9:42 And it was knowen thorowe out all Ioppa, and many beleued on the Lorde.
Acts 9:43 And it fortuned that he taried manye dayes in Ioppa wyth one Simon a tanner.

CHAPTER: 10

Acts 10:1 There was a certain man in Cesaria, called Cornelius, a captaine of the souldiers of Italy,
Acts 10:2 a deuout man, & one that feared God wt al his houshold whiche gaue much almes to the people, and prayed God alway.
Acts 10:3 The same man saw in a vision euydently aboute the ninth houre of the daye, an aungel of God commyng in to hym, and saiyng vnto him: Cornelius.
Acts 10:4 When he loked on hym he was afraid and said, what is it Lord? He sayed vnto hym: Thy prayers and all thy almeses are come vp into remembraunce before God.
Acts 10:5 And now send men to Ioppa and call for one, Symon named also Peter.
Acts 10:6 He lodgeth wt one Symon a tanner, whose house is by the sea syde. He shall tell the, what thou oughtest to do.
Acts 10:7 When the aungell whiche spake vnto Cornelius, was departed, he called two of his housholde seruauntes, and a deuout souldier of them that waited on him
Acts 10:8 and told them all the mater, and sent them to Ioppa.
Acts 10:9 On the morow as they wente on theyr iourneye, and drewe nye vnto the cytie, Peter wente vp into the toppe of the house to praye about the .vi. houre.
Acts 10:10 Then wexed he an houngred, and woulde haue eaten. But whyle they made ready, he fell into a traunce,
Acts 10:11 and sawe heauen opened, and a certaine vessel come doune vnto hym as it had bene a greate sheete knyte at the .iiij. corners, and was let doune to the earth,
Acts 10:12 wherin were all maner of .iiij. foted beastes of the earth, and vermen and wormes, and foules of the ayer.
Acts 10:13 And ther came a voyce to hym: ryse Peter kyll and eate.
Acts 10:14 But Peter sayed: God forbydde Lorde, for I haue neuer eaten anye thynge that is comen or vncleane.
Acts 10:15 And the voyce spake vnto hym agayne the seconde tyme: what God hath clensed, that make thou not commen.
Acts 10:16 This was done thrise, and the vessell was receyued vp againe into heauen.
Acts 10:17 While Peter mused in himself: what this vision, whiche he had sene, meant: beholde, the men whiche were sente from Cornelius had made inquiraunce for Simons house, & stode before the dore.
Acts 10:18 And called oute one and axed, whither Simon, whiche was also called Peter were lodged there.
Acts 10:19 While Peter thoughte on thys vision, the spyryte sayed vnto hym: Beholde men seke the,
Acts 10:20 aryse therfore, get the doune, and go with them, and doubt not, for I haue sent them,
Acts 10:21 Peter went doune to the men, whiche were sent vnto hym from Cornelius, and saide. Beholde, I am he whom ye seke, what is the cause, wherfore ye are come?
Acts 10:22 And they sayde vnto him: Cornelius the captaine, a iuste man, and one that feareth God, and of good reporte amonge al the people of the Iewes, was warned by an holye aungel to sende for the into hys house, and to heare wordes of the.
Acts 10:23 Then called he them in, and lodged them. And on the morowe Peter wente awaye wyth them, and certaine brethren from Ioppa accompanyed him.
Acts 10:24 And the thyrd daye entred they into Cesaria. And Cornelius wayted for them, and had called together his kinsmen, and speciall frendes.
Acts 10:25 And as it chaunsed Peter to come in, Cornelius met him, and fel doune at his fete, and worshipped him.
Acts 10:26 But Peter toke him vp saiynge: stand vp: for euen I me selfe am a man.
Acts 10:27 And as he talked wyth him he came in, and founde manye that were come together.
Acts 10:28 And he sayde vnto them: Ye knowe howe that it is an vnlawfull thynge for a man that is a Iewe, to companye or come vnto an aliaunte: but God hath shewed me that I should not cal any man commen, or vncleane:
Acts 10:29 therfore came I vnto you wyth out saiynge naye, assone as I was sente for I axe therfore, for what intente haue ye sent for me?
Acts 10:30 And Cornelius sayde: Thys daye nowe .iiij. dayes I fasted and at the nynthe houre I prayde in my house: and beholde, a man stode before me in brighte clothinge,
Acts 10:31 and sayd: Cornelius, thy prayer is hearde, and thine almes deades are had in remembraunce in the sight of God.
Acts 10:32 Send therfore to Ioppa, and call for Simon whiche is also called Peter. He is lodged in the house of one Simon a tanner by the sea syde, the which assone as he is come, shall speake vnto the.
Acts 10:33 Then sent I for the immediatly, and thou hast wel done for to come. Nowe are we all here present before God, to heare al thinges that are commaunded vnto the of God.
Acts 10:34 Then Peter opened hys mouth and saide: Of a trueth I perceyue, that God is not partyall,
Acts 10:35 but in all people he that feareth hym and worketh rightuousnes, is accepted wyth hym.
Acts 10:36 Ye knowe the preachinge that God sent vnto the chyldren of Israel, preachynge peace by Iesus Christe, whiche is Lorde ouer all thinges.
Acts 10:37 Whiche preaching was published thorow out all Iewry, and beganne in Galile, after the baptisme, whiche Iohn preached,
Acts 10:38 howe God had annoynted Iesus of Nazareth wyth the holy ghost, and wyth power. Whiche Iesus went about doynge good, and healinge all that were oppressed of the deuils for God was wyth him.
Acts 10:39 And we are witnesses of al thinges whiche he did in the lande of the Iewes and at Ierusalem: whom they slewe and honge on tree.
Acts 10:40 Hym God reysed vp the thyrd daye, and shewed hym openlye,
Acts 10:41 not to all the people, but vnto vs witnesses chosen before of God, whiche eate and dronke wyth him, after he arose from death.
Acts 10:42 And he commaunded vs to preache vnto the people & testifye that it is he that is ordeined of God a iudge of quicke and deade.
Acts 10:43 To hym geue all the Prophetes witnes, that thorowe hys name, all that beleue in hym, shall receyue remission of sinnes.
Acts 10:44 Whyle Peter yet spake these wordes the holye Ghoste fel on all them whyche hearde the preaching.
Acts 10:45 And they of the circumcision, whyche beleued, were astonied, as manye as came wyth Peter, because that on the Gentils, also was shede out the gyfte of the holy ghoste.
Acts 10:46 For they heard them speake wyth tounges & magnified God. Then aunswered Peter.
Acts 10:47 Can anye man forbydde water that these shoulde not be baptysed, whiche haue receyued the holye ghoste as well as we?
Acts 10:48 And he commaunded them to be baptysed in the name of the Lorde. Then prayed they hym to tarye a fewe dayes.

CHAPTER: 11

Acts 11:1 And the Apostles and the brethren that were thorowout Iewry, harde say that the heathen had also receyued the word of God.
Acts 11:2 And when Peter was come vp to Hierusalem, they of the circuncysyon reasoned with him
Acts 11:3 saiyng: Thou wentest into men vncircumcysed, and eatest with them.
Acts 11:4 Then Peter began and expounded the thing in order to them saiyng:
Acts 11:5 I was in the cytie of Ioppa praiynge, and in a traunce I sawe a vision, a certaine vessell descende, as it had bene a large linnen cloth, let doune from heauen by the fower corners, and it came to me.
Acts 11:6 Into the which when I had fastned myne eyes, I consydered and sawe fower foted beastes of the earth, and vermen, wormes, and foules of the aier.
Acts 11:7 And I hearde a voice saiyng vnto me, aryse Peter sley & eate.
Acts 11:8 And I saide: God forbid Lord, for nothing commen or vncleane, hath at anye tyme entred into my mouth.
Acts 11:9 But the voice aunswered me agayne from heauen, count not thou those thinges commen, whiche God hath clensed.
Acts 11:10 And this was done thre times: And all were taken vp againe into heauen.
Acts 11:11 And beholde immediatly there were thre men come vnto the house where I was, sent from Cesarea vnto me,
Acts 11:12 that I should go with them, wythout doubting. More ouer these sixe brethren accompanied me: and we entered into the mans house.
Acts 11:13 And he shewed vs how he had sene an Angel in hys house, whiche stode and sayed to him. Sende men to Ioppa, and call for Simon named also Peter,
Acts 11:14 he shal tell the wordes, wherby both thou and all thyne housse shal be saued.
Acts 11:15 And as I began to preach, the holy ghost fell on them, as he dyd on vs at the beginninge.
Acts 11:16 Then came to his remembraunce the wordes of the Lorde, howe he sayed: Iohn Baptised with water, but ye shal be baptysed wyth the holy ghost.
Acts 11:17 For as much then as God gaue them lyke giftes, as he dyd vnto vs, when we beleued on the Lord Iesus Christe: what was I that I shoulde haue withstand God?
Acts 11:18 When they heard thys, they helde their peace & gloryfyed God, sayinge: then hath God also to the gentyls graunted repentaunce vnto lyfe.
Acts 11:19 They whiche were scattered abroade thorowe the affliction that arose aboute Stephan, walked thorowe oute tyll they came to Phenices and Cypers, and Antioche, preachinge the worde to no man, but vnto the Iewes onely.
Acts 11:20 Some of them were men of Cypers & Syrene, whyche when they were come into Antioche spake to the Grekes, and preached the Lorde Iesus.
Acts 11:21 And the hande of the Lorde was with them, and a greate numbre beleued and turned to the Lorde.
Acts 11:22 Tydinges of these thynges came to the eares of the congregation, which was at Hierusalem. And they sent forth Barnabas that he should go vnto Antioche.
Acts 11:23 Which when he was come, and had sene the grace of God, was gladd, and exhorted them all that wyth purpose of hert they woulde continually cleaue vnto the Lorde.
Acts 11:24 For he was a good man, and ful of the holy ghoste and of faith: and much people was added vnto the Lord.
Acts 11:25 Then departed Barnabas to Tharsus for to seke Saul.
Acts 11:26 And when he had founde hym, he brought him vnto Antioche. And it chaunced that a whole yere they had theyr conuersation with the congregation there, and taught much people: in so much that the disciples of Antioche were the fyrst that were called christians.
Acts 11:27 In those dayes came Prophetes from Hierusalem vnto Antioche.
Acts 11:28 And there stode vp one of them, named Agabus, and signified by the spyrite that there shoulde be greate derth thorowe out all the world, whiche came to passe in the Emperour Claudius daies.
Acts 11:29 Then the disciples euery man accordinge to his abilite, purposed to send succoure vnto the brethren, which dwelt in Iewry.
Acts 11:30 Whiche thynge they also dyd, and sente it to the elders, by the handes of Barnabas and Saule.

CHAPTER: 12

Acts 12:1 In that tyme Herode the Kinge stretched forth hys handes to vexe certayne of the congregacyon.
Acts 12:2 And he killeth Iames the brother of Iohn wt the swearde
Acts 12:3 and because he sawe that it pleased the Iewes he proceaded forther, and toke Peter also. Then were the dayes of swete bread.
Acts 12:4 And when he had caught hym, he put hym in pryson, & deliuered hym to .iiij. quaternions of soudyers to be kept, entendynge after Easter to bryng hym forth to the people.
Acts 12:5 Then was Peter kept in pryson. But prayer was made without ceasing of the congregacyon vnto God for hym:
Acts 12:6 And when Herode woulde haue brought him out to the people, the same nyght slept Peter betwene two souldiours bound with two chaynes, and the kepers before the dore kepte the pryson.
Acts 12:7 And beholde the aungell of the lorde was there presente, and a light shyned in the lodge. And he smote Peter on the syde, and stered hym vp, saiyng: aryse vp quickly. And hys chaynes fell of from hys handes.
Acts 12:8 And the aungell sayed vnto him: gyrde thy selfe, and bind on thy sandales. And so he dyd. And he sayed vnto hym: cast thy mantle aboute the, & folow me.
Acts 12:9 And he came out, and folowed hym, and wist not that it was truthe, whiche was done by the aungell, but thought he had sene a vysion.
Acts 12:10 When they were past the fyrste and the second watche, they came vnto the Iron gate, that leadeth vnto the citie which opened to them by his owne accorde. And they went oute and passed thorowe one strete, and by and by the aungell departed from hym.
Acts 12:11 And when Peter was come to hym selfe, he sayde. Nowe I knowe of a suretye, that the Lorde hath sent hys aungell, and hath delyuered me out of the hande of Herode, and from all the waytyng for of the people of the Iewes.
Acts 12:12 And as he consydered the thynge, he came to the house of Mary the mother of one Iohn which was called Marke also, where manye were gathered together in prayer.
Acts 12:13 As Peter knocketh at the entry dore, a damsell came forth to herken, named Rhoda,
Acts 12:14 when she knew Peters voyce, she opened not the entrey for gladnes, but ran in and tolde, how Peter stode before the entrey.
Acts 12:15 And they sayde vnto her: thou arte mad. And she bare them doune that it was euen so. Then sayde they: it is hys Aungel.
Acts 12:16 But Peter contynued knockynge. And when they had opened the dore, and sawe hym, they were astonyed.
Acts 12:17 And he beckened vnto them with the hande to holde theyr peace, and tolde them by what meanes the Lord hath brought hym out of the pryson. And he sayde: go shew these thynges vnto Iames, and to the brethren. And he departed, and went into another place.
Acts 12:18 Assone as it was daye, there was no litell a do amouge the soudyers, what was become of Peter.
Acts 12:19 When Herode had called for hym, and founde hym not, he examined the kepers, and commaunded them to be caryed awaye. And he descended from Iewry to Cesarea, & there abode.
Acts 12:20 Herode was displeased with them of Tyre & Sydon, And they came all at once, and made intercessyon vnto Blastus the kinges chamberlayne, & desyred peace, because theyr countrey was nouryshed by the kynges lande.
Acts 12:21 And vpon a daye appoynted Herode arayed hym in royall apparell, and set hym in hys seate, and made an oracyon vnto them.
Acts 12:22 And the people gaue a shout, saiyng: it is the voyce of a God, and not of a man.
Acts 12:23 And immediatly the aungell of the Lorde smote hym, because he gaue not God the glorye, and he was eaten of wormes, and gaue vp the ghost.
Acts 12:24 And the worde of God grew and multyplyed.
Acts 12:25 And Barnabas and Paul returned to Hierusalem, when they had fulfylled theyr offyce, and toke with them Iohn whiche also called Marcus.

CHAPTER: 13

Acts 13:1 There were at Antioche in the congregacyon certayne Prophetes and teachers: as Barnabas and Symon called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene, & Manahen. Herode the Tetrarkes noursfelowe. and Saule.
Acts 13:2 As they ministred to the Lorde and fasted, the holy ghost sayde: separate me Barnabas and Saule, for the worke where vnto I haue called them.
Acts 13:3 Then fasted they and prayed, and put theyr handes on them, & let them go.
Acts 13:4 And they after they were sent of the holye ghost, came vnto Seleutia, & from thence they sayled to Cyprus.
Acts 13:5 And when they were come to Salamyne, they shewed the word of God in the synagoges of the Iewes. And they had Iohn to theyr minister.
Acts 13:6 When they had gone thorowout the yle vnto the citie of Paphos, they founde a certayne sorcerer, a false Prophet which was a Iewe named Bariesu,
Acts 13:7 whiche was with the ruler of the countrey one Sergius Paulus a prudent man. The same ruler called vnto hym Barnabas and Saule, and desyred to heare the word of God.
Acts 13:8 But Elymas the sorcerer (for so was hys name by interpretacyon) withstode them, & sought to turne awaye the ruler from the faith.
Acts 13:9 Then Saul which also is called Paul being full of the holy ghost set hys eyes on hym,
Acts 13:10 & sayde. O full of all subteltie and disseytfulnes the chylde of the deuyll, and the enemye of all ryghteousnes, thou ceasest not to peruerte the strayghte wayes of the Lorde.
Acts 13:11 And nowe beholde the hande of the Lorde is vpon the, and thou shalbe blynde, and not se the sunne for a season. And immediatlye there fell on hym a myste and a darcknes, and he wente about sekynge them that shoulde leade hym by the hande.
Acts 13:12 Then the rular when he saw what had happened, beleued, and wondered at the doctryne of the Lorde.
Acts 13:13 When they that were with Paule, were departed by shippe from Paphus, they came to Perga a cytie of Pamphilia: and there Iohn departed from them, and returned to Ierusalem.
Acts 13:14 But they wandred thorow the countreys from Perga to Antioche a citie of the countrye of Pisidia, and went into the synagoge on the Saboth daye, and sat doune.
Acts 13:15 And after the law and the prophetes we read, the rulers of the synagoge sent vnto them, saiyng: Ye men and brethren, yf ye haue anye sermon to exhort the people, saye on.
Acts 13:16 Then Paule stode vp, and beckened wyth the hande, and sayde: Men of Israell, and ye that feare God, geue audience.
Acts 13:17 The God of thys people chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they dwelt as straungers in the lande of Egypt, and with a myghtye arme brought them out of it,
Acts 13:18 and aboute the tyme of .xl. yeares suffred he theyr maners in the wyldernes.
Acts 13:19 And he destroyed .vij. nacyons in the lande of Canan, and deuyded theyr lande to them by Lot.
Acts 13:20 And afterwarde he gaue vnto them iudges about the space of .iiij.C. and .l. yeares vnto the tyme of Samuel the prophet.
Acts 13:21 And after that, they desyred a kyng, and God gaue vnto them Saul the sonne of Cis, a man of the trybe of Beniamin by the space of .xl. yeares.
Acts 13:22 And after he had put him doune, he set vp Dauid to be theyr kynge of whom he reported sayinge: I haue founde Dauid the sonne of Iesse, a man after myne owne hert, he shall fulfyll all my wyll.
Acts 13:23 Of thys mans seed hath God (accordynge to hys promes) brought forth to the people of Israell a sauyour, one Iesus,
Acts 13:24 when Iohn had fyrste preached before hys commyng the baptisme of repentaunce to Israel.
Acts 13:25 And when Iohn had fulfylled hys course he sayde: whome ye thinke that I am, the same am I not. But behold ther cometh one after me, whose shewes of hys fete I am not worthy to lowse.
Acts 13:26 Ye men and brethren, chyldren of the generacyon of Abraham, and whosoeuer amonge you, feareth God, to you is this worde of saluacyon sente.
Acts 13:27 The inhabiters of Ierusalem & theyr rulers, because they knowe him not, nor yet the voices of the prophetes which are reade euerye Saboth daye, they haue fulfylled them in condempnyng hym.
Acts 13:28 And when they found no cause of death in hym, yet desyred they Pylate to kyll hym.
Acts 13:29 And when they had fulfilled all that were written on hym, they toke hym doune from the tree, and put hym in a sepulchre.
Acts 13:30 But God raysed hym agayne from death,
Acts 13:31 and he was sene manye dayes of them whiche came with hym from Galile to Ierusalem, Which are hys wytnesses vnto the people.
Acts 13:32 And we declare vnto you, how that the promes made vnto the fathers,
Acts 13:33 God hath fulfylled vnto vs theyr children, in that he raysed vp Iesus agayne, euen as it is wryten in the fyrste psalme: Thou arte my sonne, thys same daye begat I the.
Acts 13:34 As concernyng that he raysed hym vp from death, nowe no more to returne to corrupcion, he sayed on thys wyse. The holy promyses made to Dauid, I wyll geue them faythfully to you.
Acts 13:35 Wherfore he sayth also in another place: Thou shalte not suffer thyne holy one to se corrupcyon.
Acts 13:36 Howbeit Dauid after he had in hys tyme fulfylled the wyll of God, he slepte, and was layde with hys fathers, and sawe corrupcyon.
Acts 13:37 But he whome God raysed agayne, sawe no corrupcyon.
Acts 13:38 Be it knowen vnto you therfore ye men & brethren, that thorowe thys man is preached vnto you the forgeuenes of synnes,
Acts 13:39 and that by hym are all that beleue iustifyed from all thynges from the which ye coulde not be iustifyed by the lawe of Moses.
Acts 13:40 Beware therfore leste that fall on you, whiche is spoken of in the Prophetes:
Acts 13:41 Beholde ye despysers, and wonder, and peryshe ye: for I do a worke in your dayes, whiche ye shall not beleue, yf a man woulde declare it you.
Acts 13:42 When they were come out of the Sinagoge of the Iewes, the gentyls besought that they woulde preache the folowyng wordes to them on the Saboth.
Acts 13:43 When the congregacyon was broken vp, many of the Iewes & vertuouse conuertes, folowed Paule and Barnabas, which spake to them, and exhorted them to continue in the grace of God.
Acts 13:44 And the next Saboth day came almost the whole citie together, to heare the worde of God.
Acts 13:45 When the Iewes saw the people, they were ful of indignacyon & spake agaynste those thynges, whiche were spoken of Paule, speakynge agaynst it, and railynge on it.
Acts 13:46 Then Paule and Barnabas wexed bolde, and sayed: it was mete that the worde of God shoulde fyrste haue ben preached to you. But seynge, ye put it from you, and thynke youre selues vnworthy of euerlastyng lyfe: lo, we turne to the gentyls:
Acts 13:47 For so hath the Lorde commaunded vs: I haue made the a lyghte to the gentyls, that thou be the saluacion to the ende of the worlde.
Acts 13:48 The gentyls hearde and were glad & glorifyed the worde of the Lorde, and beleued euen as many as were ordeyned vnto eternal lyfe.
Acts 13:49 And the worde of the Lorde was publyshed thorowout all the regyon.
Acts 13:50 But the, Iewes moued the worshypfull and honorable women, & the chiefe men of the citie, and raysed persecucion agaynste Paule and Barnabas, & expelled them out of theyr costes.
Acts 13:51 And they shoke of the dust of theyr fete agaynst them, and came vnto Iconium.
Acts 13:52 And the discyples were fylled wt ioye and with the holy ghoste.

CHAPTER: 14

Acts 14:1 And it fortuned in Iconium, that they went both together into the synagoge of the Iewes, and so spake that a greate multitude bothe of the Iewes, and also of the grekes beleued.
Acts 14:2 But the vnbeleuynge Iewes stered vp, and vnquieted the myndes of the gentyls agaynst the brethren.
Acts 14:3 Long tyme abode they there, and quyt them selues boldely with the helpe of the Lorde, which gaue testimonye vnto the worde of hys grace, & caused signes and wondres to be done by theyr handes.
Acts 14:4 The people of the citie were deuyded: and parte helde with the Iewes, and parte wt the Apostles.
Acts 14:5 When there was a sault made both of the gentyls, and also of the Iewes with theyr rulars, to put them to shame and to stone them,
Acts 14:6 they were ware of it, and fled vnto Lystra & Darba, cities of Lycaonia, and vnto the regyon that lyeth rounde aboute,
Acts 14:7 and there preached the Gospel.
Acts 14:8 And there sate a certayne man at Listra weake in hys fete, beyng creple from hys mothers wombe, and neuer walked.
Acts 14:9 The same hearde Paule preache. Whiche behelde hym, and perceyued that he had faythe to be whole,
Acts 14:10 and sayed with a loude voyce stande vpryght on the fete. And he sterte vp, & walked.
Acts 14:11 And when the people sawe, what Paule had done, they lyfte vp theyr voyces, saiynge in the speache of Lycaonia: Goddes are come doune to vs in the lykenes of men.
Acts 14:12 And they called Barnabas Iupiter and Paul Mercurius, because he was the preacher.
Acts 14:13 Then Iupiters prieste whiche dwelte before theyr citie, brought oxen and garlandes to the churche porche, and woulde haue done sacrifice with the people.
Acts 14:14 But when the Apostles Barnabas & Paul hearde that, they rent theyr clothes, and ran in amonge the people, criynge,
Acts 14:15 and saiynge: Syrs why do ye thys? We are mortall men lyke vnto you, and preache vnto you, that ye shoulde turne from these vanities vnto the liuynge God, which made heauen and earthe and the sea, and all that in them is:
Acts 14:16 the whiche in tymes paste suffered all nacyons to walke in theyr owne wayes.
Acts 14:17 Neuerthelesse he lefte not hym selfe without wytnes, in that he shewed hys benefytes, in geuynge vs rayne from heauen, and fruteful ceasons, fyllyng our hertes with fode and gladnes.
Acts 14:18 And with these saiynges scace refrayned they the people that they had not done sacrifyce vnto them.
Acts 14:19 Thyther came certayne Iewes from Antioche and Iconium, and obtayned the peoples consent, and stoned Paul, and drewe him out of the citie, supposyng he had bene dead.
Acts 14:20 Howbeit as the disciples stode rounde about him, he arose vp, and came into the citie. And the next daye, he departed with Barnabas to Derba.
Acts 14:21 After they had preached to that citie, and had taughte manye, they returned agayne to Lystra, and to Iconium and Antioche,
Acts 14:22 and strengthed the disciples soules exhortynge them to continue in the faith, affyrmyng that we must thorowe muche tribulacion enter into the kingdome of God.
Acts 14:23 And when they had ordeyned them elders by election in euery congregacion, and after they had prayed and fasted, they commended them to God on whom they beleued.
Acts 14:24 And they wente thorowout Pisidia and came into Pamphilia,
Acts 14:25 and when they had preached the worde of God in Perga, they descended into Attalia,
Acts 14:26 and thence departed by shyppe to Antioche, from whence they were delyuered vnto the grace of god, to the worke which they had fulfylled.
Acts 14:27 When they were come & had gathered the congregation together, they rehearsed all that God had done by them, and how he had opened the dore of fayth to the gentyls.
Acts 14:28 And there they abode longe tyme with the discyples.

CHAPTER: 15

Acts 15:1 Then came certayne from Iewrye, and taughte the brethren: excepte ye be circumcised after the maner of Moyses, ye can not be saued.
Acts 15:2 And when there was rysen dissention and disputyng not a lytle vnto Paul and Barnabas against them. They determyned that Paule and Barnabas, and certayne other of them, should ascende to Hierusalem vnto the Apostles and elders about this question.
Acts 15:3 And after they were brought on theyr waye by the congregacyon, they passed ouer Phenices and Samaria declarynge the conuersyon of the Gentyls, and they brought great ioye vnto all the brethren.
Acts 15:4 And when they were come to Ierusalem, they were receyued of the congregacyon, and of the Apostles and elders. And they declared what thynges God had done by them.
Acts 15:5 Then arose there vp certayne that were of the secte of the Pharises which dyd beleue, saying, that it was nedefull, to circumcyse them and to enioyne them to kepe the lawe of Moyses.
Acts 15:6 And the Apostles and elders came together to reason of thys matter.
Acts 15:7 And when there was muche disputynge, Peter rose vp, and sayde vnto them: Ye men and brethren ye knowe howe that a good whyle a go, God chose amonge vs that the gentils by my mouth shoulde heare the worde of the Gospell, and beleue.
Acts 15:8 And God which knoweth the herte bare them wytnes, and gaue vnto them the holy ghost, euen as he dyd vnto vs:
Acts 15:9 and he put no difference betwene them and vs, but with fayth purified theyr hertes.
Acts 15:10 Now therfore why tempte ye God, that ye woulde put a yoke on the disciples neckes, which neyther our fathers nor we were able to beare.
Acts 15:11 But we beleue that through the grace of the Lorde Iesu Christ, we shalbe saued, as they do.
Acts 15:12 Then all the multitude was peased, and gaue audience to Barnabas and Paul which told what sygnes and wondres God had shewed among the gentyls by them.
Acts 15:13 And when they helde theyr peace, Iames aunswered, saiynge: Men and brethren herken vnto me.
Acts 15:14 Simon told, how God at the beginnynge dyd visite the gentyls, and receyued of them people vnto hys name.
Acts 15:15 And to this agreeth the wordes of the Prophetes, as it is wryten.
Acts 15:16 After thys I wyll returne, and wyll buyld agayne the tabernacle of Dauid which is fallen doune, and that whiche is fallen in dekeye of it, wyll I buylde agayne, & I wyll set it vp,
Acts 15:17 that the resydue of men myghte seke after the Lorde, and also the gentyls vpon whome my name is named (sayth the Lorde) which doth all these thynges:
Acts 15:18 knowen vnto God are all hys workes from the beginning of the worlde.
Acts 15:19 Wherfore my sentence is that we trouble not them whiche from among the gentyls are turned to God,
Acts 15:20 but that we write vnto them, that they abstayne them selues from fylthynes of ymages, from fornicacyon, from stranglyde and from bloude.
Acts 15:21 For Moses of olde tyme hath in euerye cytie that preache hym, and he is reade in the synagoges euerye saboth daye.
Acts 15:22 Then pleased it the Apostles and elders with the whole congregacion, to sende chosen men of theyr owne companye to Antioche wt Paule and Barnabas. They sent Iudas called also Barsabas and Sylas, whiche were chiefe men among the brethren,
Acts 15:23 and gaue them letters in theyr handes after thys maner. The Apostles, elders, and brethren sende gretynges vnto the brethren whiche are of the gentyls in Antioche, Syria, and Celicia.
Acts 15:24 For as muche as we haue hearde that certayne whiche departe from vs, haue troubled you with wordes, and combred your myndes, saiynge: Ye must be circumcysed, and kepe the lawe, to whom we gaue no suche commaundement.
Acts 15:25 It semed therfore to vs a good thynge, when we were come together with one accord to sende chosen men vnto you, with our beloued Barnabas and Paule,
Acts 15:26 men that haue ieoperded theyr lyues for the name of our Lorde Iesu Christ.
Acts 15:27 We haue sent therfore Iudas & Sylas, whiche shall also tell you, the same thinges by mouth.
Acts 15:28 For it semed good to the holye ghost & to vs, to put no greuous thyng to you more then these necessarye thynges,
Acts 15:29 that is to saye that ye abstayne from thynges offered to ymages, from bloude, from strangled and fornicacion. From which yf ye kepe your selues ye shall do well. So fare ye well.
Acts 15:30 When they were departed, they came to Antioche, and gathered the multitude together, and delyuered the Epistle.
Acts 15:31 When they had reade it, they reioysed of that consolacion.
Acts 15:32 And Iudas and Sylas beynge prophetes, exhorted the brethren with muche preachyng, and strengthed them.
Acts 15:33 And after they had taryed there a space they were let go in peace of the brethren vnto the Apostles.
Acts 15:34 Notwithstandynge it pleased Sylas to abyde there styll.
Acts 15:35 Paule and Barnabas contynued in Antioche teachynge and preachynge the worde of the Lorde with other manye.
Acts 15:36 But after a certayne space, Paule sayd vnto Barnabas: Let vs go agayn and visite our brethren in euery citie where we haue shewed the worde of the Lorde, and se howe they do.
Acts 15:37 And Barnabas gaue counsell to take with them: Iohn called also Marke.
Acts 15:38 But Paule thoughte it not mete to take hym vnto theyr companye whiche departed from them at Pamphilia, and went not with them to the worke.
Acts 15:39 And the dissencyon was so sharpe betwene them, that they departed a sunder one from the other, so that Barnabas toke Marke and sayled vnto Cypers.
Acts 15:40 And Paule chose Sylas and departed, delyuered of the brethren vnto the grace of God.
Acts 15:41 And he went throughe al Ciria and Cilicia, stablyshynge the congregacions, commaundyng to kepe the preceptes of the Apostles and elders.

CHAPTER: 16

Acts 16:1 Then came he to Derba and to Lystra. And beholde a certayne disciple was there named Timotheus, a womans sonne whiche was a Ieweas and beleued: but hys father was a Greke.
Acts 16:2 Of whom reported well, the brethren of Lystra and Iconium.
Acts 16:3 The same Paule woulde that he shoulde go forthe with hym, and toke and circumcysed him, because of the Iewes whiche were in those quarters: for they knewe all, that hys father was a Greke.
Acts 16:4 As they went through the cities, they delyuered them the decrees for to kepe, ordeyned of the Apostles and elders, whiche were at Ierusalem.
Acts 16:5 And so were the congregacions stablysheth in the fayth, and encreased in noumbre daylye.
Acts 16:6 When they had gone through oute Phrygia, and the regyon of Galacia, and were forbidden of the holy ghost to preache the worde in Asia
Acts 16:7 they came to Misia, and sought to go into Bethinia. But the spirite suffered them not.
Acts 16:8 Then they went ouer Misia, and came doune to Troada.
Acts 16:9 And a visyon appeared to Paule in the nyght. There stode a man of Macedonia, and prayed hym, saiynge: come into Macedonia, and helpe vs.
Acts 16:10 After he had sene the vysyon, certifyed that the Lorde had called vs for to preache the Gospell vnto them.
Acts 16:11 Then loused we forth from Troada, and with a strayght course came to Samothracia, and the nexte daye to Neapolym,
Acts 16:12 and from thence to Phylyppos, which is the chiefe citie in the partes of Macedonia, and a fre citie. We were in that citie abydynge certayne dayes.
Acts 16:13 And on the Saboth dayes we wente out of the citie besydes a ryuer, where men were wonte to praye. And we sate doune, and spake vnto the women which resorted thyther.
Acts 16:14 And a certayne woman named Lydia a seller of purple of the citie of Thiatyra, which worshypped God, gaue vs audience. Whose hart the Lorde opened, that she attended vnto the thynges whiche Paul spake.
Acts 16:15 When she was baptysed and her housholde, she besoughte vs saiyng: Yf ye thynke that I beleue on the Lord come into my house, and abyde there. And she constrayned vs.
Acts 16:16 And it fortuned as we went to prayer, a certayne damsell possessed with a spirite that prophesyeth, met vs, which brought her mayster and maysters muche vauntage with prophesiynge.
Acts 16:17 The same folowed Paul and vs, & cryed, saiynge: These men are the seruauntes of the moste hye God, which shew vnto vs that waye of saluacyon.
Acts 16:18 And thys dyd she manye dayes. But Paule not content turned aboute, and sayed to the spirite: I commaunde the in the name of Iesu Christe, that thou come oute of her. And he came out the same houre.
Acts 16:19 And when her maister and maysters saw, that the hope of theyr gaynes was gone, they caughte Paule and Sylas, and drue them into the market place vnto the rulars,
Acts 16:20 & brought them to the offycers saiynges: These men trouble oure citie, whiche are Iewes,
Acts 16:21 and preache ordinaunces whiche are not laufull for vs to receyue, neyther to obserue, seynge we are Romayns.
Acts 16:22 And the people came on them, and the offycers rent theyr clothes, and commaunded them to be beaten with roddes.
Acts 16:23 And when thei had beaten them sore, they caste them into pryson, commaundynge the iayler to kepe them surelye.
Acts 16:24 Which iaylar when he had receyued such commaundemente thruste them into the ynner pryson, and made theyr fete fast in the stockes.
Acts 16:25 At mydnyght Paule and Sylas prayed, & lauded God. And the prysoners hearde them.
Acts 16:26 And sodenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundacion of the pryson was shaken, and by and by all the dores opened, and euery mannes bondes were loused.
Acts 16:27 When the keper of the pryson waked oute of hys slepe, and sawe the pryson dores open, he drue oute hys swearde, and woulde haue kylled hym selfe, supposynge the prysoners had bene fled.
Acts 16:28 But Paule cryed with a lowde voyce, saiyng: do thy selfe no harme, for we are all here.
Acts 16:29 Then he called for a lyght, and sprang in, and came tremblyng, and fell doune before Paule and Sylas,
Acts 16:30 and brought them out and sayde: Syr what muste I do to be saued?
Acts 16:31 And they sayd: beleue on the Lord Iesus & thou shalt be saued & thy housholde.
Acts 16:32 And they preached vnto him the worde of the Lorde, & to all that were in hys house.
Acts 16:33 And he toke them the same houre of the nyght, and washed theyr woundes, and was baptysed with all that belonged vnto him strayght waye.
Acts 16:34 When he had broughte them into hys house: he set meate before them, and ioyed that he with all hys housholde beleued on God.
Acts 16:35 And when it was daye, the offycers sente the ministers sayinge: Let those men go.
Acts 16:36 The keper of the pryson tolde this saiyng to Paul: the officers haue sent word to loose you. Now therfore get you hence, and go in peace.
Acts 16:37 Then sayde Paule vnto them. They haue beaten vs openly vncondempned, for all that we are Romaynes, and haue caste vs into pryson: & now woulde they sende vs awaye priuely? Naye not so, but let them come them selues, and set vs out.
Acts 16:38 When the ministers tolde these wordes vnto the offycers, they feared when they hearde that they were Romaynes,
Acts 16:39 and came and besought them, and brought them oute, & desyered them to departe out of the cytie.
Acts 16:40 And they went oute of the pryson, and entred into the housse, of Lydya, and when they had sene the brethren, they comforted them, and departed.

CHAPTER: 17

Acts 17:1 As they made theyr iorney thorowe Amphipolis, and Appolonia, they came to Thessalonica, where was a synagoge of the Iewes.
Acts 17:2 And Paule as his maner was, went in vnto them, and thre Saboth dayes declared oute of the scripture vnto them,
Acts 17:3 openynge and aledgynge that Christe muste nedes haue suffered and rysen agayne from death, and that thys Iesus was Christe, whom (sayed he) I preache to you.
Acts 17:4 And some of them beleued and came, and compayned with Paul and Sylas: also of the honorable Grekes a greate multytude, and of the chief women not a fewe.
Acts 17:5 But the Iewes which beleued not, hauing indignacyon, toke vnto them euyl men which were vagabondes, and gathered a companie, and set all the citie on a rore, and made asaulte vnto the house of Iason, and sought to bryng them out to the people.
Acts 17:6 But when they found them not, they drue Iason and certayne brethren vnto the heades of the citie, criynge: these that trouble the worlde are come hyther also,
Acts 17:7 which Iason hath receyued pryuely. And these all do contrary to the decrees of Cesar, affyrmyng another kynge, one Iesus.
Acts 17:8 And they troubled the people and the officers of the citie, when they hearde these thynges.
Acts 17:9 And when they were suffyciently aunswered of Iason, and of the other, they let them go.
Acts 17:10 And the brethren immediatly sente awaye Paule and Sylas by nyghte vnto Berrea. Whiche when they were come thyther, they entred into the synagoge of the Iewes.
Acts 17:11 These were the noblest of byrthe among them of Thessalonia whiche receyued the worde with al diligence of mynde, and searched the scriptures daylye whether those thynges were euen so.
Acts 17:12 And many of them beleued: also of worshipfull women which were Grekes, and of men not a feawe.
Acts 17:13 When the Iewes of Thessalonia had knowledge that the worde of GOD was preached of Paul at Berrea, they came and moued the people there.
Acts 17:14 And then by and by the brethren sente awaye Paule to go as it were to the sea: but Sylas and Timotheus abode there styll.
Acts 17:15 And they that gyded Paule brought hym vnto Athens, and receyued a commaundement vnto Sylas & Timotheus for to come to hym at once and came theyr waye.
Acts 17:16 Whyle Paule wayted for them at Athens, hys spirite was moued in hym, to se the cytye geuen to worshyppynge of ymages:
Acts 17:17 Then he disputed in the synagoge with the Iewes, and with the deuoute persones and in the market daylye with them that came vnto hym.
Acts 17:18 Certayne Philosophers of the Epicures and of the Stoickes, disputed with him. And some there were, whiche sayed. What wyll this babler saye? Other said he semeth to be a tydynges brynger of newe deuyls, because he preached vnto them Iesus and the resurreccyon.
Acts 17:19 And they toke hym, and broughte hym into Marsestrete, saiynge: maye we not knowe what thys newe doctrine whereof thou speakest is?
Acts 17:20 For thou bryngest straung tydynges to oure eares. We woulde knowe therfore what these thynges meane.
Acts 17:21 For all the Athenians and straungers which were there, gaue them selues nothynge els, but eyther to tell or to heare newe tydynges.
Acts 17:22 Paule rode in the myddes of Marsestrete, and sayd: Ye men of Athens I perceyue that in all thynges ye are to supersticyous.
Acts 17:23 For as I passed by, and behelde the master, howe ye worshyppe youre Goddes, I founde an Altare wherein was wrytten: vnto the vnknowen God. Whom ye then ignorauntelye worshyppe hym, shew I vnto you.
Acts 17:24 God that made the worlde, and all that are in it, seynge that he is Lorde of heauen and earth, he dwelleth not in temples made with handes, neyther is worshypped wt mennes handes,
Acts 17:25 as though he neded of any thing seynge he hym selfe geueth lyfe and brethe to al men euerye where,
Acts 17:26 and hath made of one bloude all nacyons of men, for to dwell on al the face of the earth, and hath assygned before howe longe tyme, and also the endes of theyr inhabitacyon,
Acts 17:27 that they shoulde seke God, yf they myght fele and fynde hym though he be not far from euerye one of vs.
Acts 17:28 For in him we lyue, moue, and haue our beyng, as certayne of your own Poetes sayd. For we are also hys generacion.
Acts 17:29 For as muche then as we are the generacyon of God, we ought not to thinke that the God hede is lyke vnto golde, syluer, or stone grauen by crafte and ymagynacyon of man.
Acts 17:30 And the tyme of thys ignoraunce God regarded not. But now he byddeth all men euerye where repent,
Acts 17:31 because he hath appoynted a daye, in the whiche he will iudge the world accordynge to ryghteousnes, by that man whom he hath apoynted, and hath offered fayth to all men, after that he had raysed hym from death.
Acts 17:32 When they hearde of the resurreccion from death, some mocked, and other sayd: we wyll heare the agayne of thys matter,
Acts 17:33 So Paul departed from amonge them.
Acts 17:34 Howbeit certayne men claue vnto Paule, and beleued, amonge the which was Dionisius a senatoure, and a woman named Damaris and other wyth them.

CHAPTER: 18

Acts 18:1 After that Paule departed from Athens, and came to Corinthum
Acts 18:2 and founde a certayne Iewe named Aquila, borne in Ponthus, latelye come from Italye wyth hys wyfe Priscilla (because that the Emperour Claudius had commaunded all Iewes to depart from Rome) and he drewe vnto them.
Acts 18:3 And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them and wroughte: theyr crafte was to make tentes.
Acts 18:4 And he preached in the Synagoge euerye Saboth daye and exhorted the Iewes and the gentyls.
Acts 18:5 When Silas and Timotheus were come from Macedonia, Paule was constrayned by the spirit to testify to the Iewes that Iesus was very Christ.
Acts 18:6 And when they sayde contrary and blasphemed, he shoke his raymente and sayed vnto them, youre bloude vpon youre owne heades, & frome henceforth I go blameles vnto the gentils.
Acts 18:7 And he departed thence, & entered into a certayne mannes house named iustus a worshypper of God, whose house ioyned harde to the synagoge.
Acts 18:8 How be it one Crispus the chiefe rular of the Synagoge beleued on the Lorde wyth al his houshold, & manye of the Corinthians gaue audience & beleued, and were baptised.
Acts 18:9 Then spake the Lorde to Paule in the nyght by a vision: be not afrayde, but speake, and hold not thy peace:
Acts 18:10 for I am with the, and no man shal inuad the that shal hurt the. For I haue much people in this citie.
Acts 18:11 And he continued there a yeare and sixe monethes, and taught them the word of God.
Acts 18:12 When Gallio was ruler of the countre of Achaia the Iewes made insurrection with one accorde agaynst Paule, & brought him to the iudgement seate
Acts 18:13 saiynge: this felowe councelleth men to worship God contrary to the lawe.
Acts 18:14 And as Paul was aboute to open hys mouthe. Gallio sayde vnto the Iewes: yf it were a matter of wronge, or an euyl dede (o ye Iewes) reason would that I should hear you:
Acts 18:15 but if it be a question of words or of names, or of your law, loke ye to it your selues. For I wil be no iudge in suche matters
Acts 18:16 and he draue them from the seate.
Acts 18:17 Then toke all the grekes Sostenes the chiefe ruler of the Synagoge, & smote hym before the iudges. seate. And Gallio cared for none of those thinges.
Acts 18:18 Paule after this, taried there, yet a whyle, and then toke his leaue of the brethren, & sayled thence into Ciria, Priscilla and Aquila accompaniynge him. And he shore hys heade in Ceuchrea, for he hadde a vowe.
Acts 18:19 And he came to Ephesus and lefte them there: but he him self entred into the sinagoge, and reasoned with the Iewes.
Acts 18:20 When they desyred him to tary longer tyme with them, he consented no
Acts 18:21 but bad them fare well saiynge. I must nedes at this feaste that cometh, be in Ierusalem: but I will returne agayne vnto you, yf God will. And he departed from Ephesus
Acts 18:22 and came vnto Cesarea: & ascended and saluted the congregacion, and departed vnto Antioch,
Acts 18:23 and when he had taryed there a while he departed. And went ouer al the countrey of Galacia and Phrigia by order, strenthinge al the disciples.
Acts 18:24 And a certayne Iewe named Apollos, borne at Alexandria, came to Ephesus, an eloquente man and mighty in the scriptures.
Acts 18:25 The same was informed in the waye of the Lorde, and spake feruently in the spirit, and taught diligently the thinges of the Lorde, and knewe but the baptysme of Iohn only.
Acts 18:26 And the same began to speake boldely in the Synagoge. And when Aquila & Priscilla had hearde him, they toke him vnto them & expounded vnto him the way of God more perfectly.
Acts 18:27 And when he was disposed to goe into Acaia, the brethren wrote exhortynge the disciples to receyue hym. After he was come thethere, he holpe them muche whych hadde beleued thorowe grace.
Acts 18:28 And myghtely he ouercame the Iewes, and that openly, shewinge by the scriptures that Iesus was Christe.

CHAPTER: 19

Acts 19:1 It fortuned, whyle Appollo was at Corinthum, that Paule passed thorowe the vtter costes and came to Ephesus, & founde certayne disciples
Acts 19:2 and sayed vnto them: haue ye receyued the holy ghoste sence ye beleued? And they sayd vnto hym: no we haue not heard whether there be anye holy Ghost or no.
Acts 19:3 And he sayed vnto them: wherewyth were ye then baptised? And they said wyth Iohns baptisme.
Acts 19:4 Then sayed Paule: Iohn verelye baptised with the baptisme of repentaunce, sayinge vnto the people that they should beleue on hym whyche shoulde come after hym: that is on Christe Iesus.
Acts 19:5 When they hearde that they were Baptised in the name of the Lorde Iesus,
Acts 19:6 and Paule layed hys handes vpon them, and the holy Ghoste came on them, and they spake wyth tonges and prophecied,
Acts 19:7 & all the men were about .xij.
Acts 19:8 And he went into the synagoge, & speake boldelye for the space of thre monethes, disputynge and geuynge them exhortacions of the kyngedome of God.
Acts 19:9 When diuers waxde hard herted & beleued not, but spake euyll of the waye, and that before the multitude: he departed from them, and seperated the disciples. And disputed dayly in the schole of one called Tyrannus.
Acts 19:10 And thys continued by the space of two yeares: so that all they whyche dwelt in Asia, hearde the worde of the Lorde Iesu, both Iewes & Grekes.
Acts 19:11 And God wrought no small miracles by the handes of Paule,
Acts 19:12 so that from his bodye, were brought vnto the sycke, napkyns or partletes, and the diseases departed from them, and the euill spirites went out of them.
Acts 19:13 Then certayne of the vagabounde Iewes exorcistes toke vpon them to call ouer them whyche had euyl spirites, the name of the Lorde Iesus saiynge: We adiure you by Iesu whom Paul preacheth.
Acts 19:14 And there were seuen sonnes of one Sceua a Iew and chiefe of the priestes which did so.
Acts 19:15 And the euyl spirite answered and said: Iesus I know and Paull I know: but who are ye?
Acts 19:16 And that man in whom the euyll spyryte was ranne on them and ouercame them, and preuayled agaynste them, so that they fledde out of that house naked and wounded.
Acts 19:17 And this was knowen to al the Iewes and Grekes also, which dwelt at Ephesus, and feare came on them al, and they magnified the name of the Lord Iesus.
Acts 19:18 And many that beleued, came and confessed, and shewed their workes.
Acts 19:19 Manye of them, whiche vsed curious craftes, broughte their bokes and burned them before al men, and they counted the price of them, & founde it fyfty thousand syluerlinges.
Acts 19:20 So myghtyly grew the word of God, and preuayled.
Acts 19:21 After these thynges were ended, Paul purposed in the spyryte, to passe ouer Macedonia and Achaia, and to go to Ierusalem, saiynge: After I haue ben there, I must also se Rome.
Acts 19:22 So sent he into Macedonia two of them that ministred vnto him Timotheus & Erastus: but he hym selfe remayned in Asia for a season.
Acts 19:23 The same tyme there arose no lytell ado about that way.
Acts 19:24 For a certain man named Demetrius, a siluersmith, whiche made siluer shrynes for Diana, was not a litel beneficial vnto the craftes men.
Acts 19:25 Whiche he called together with the workemen of like occupacion, & sayde: Syrs: ye knowe that by thys crafte we haue vauntage.
Acts 19:26 Moreouer ye se & heare that not alone at Ephesus, but almoste thorough out al Asia, this Paule hath persuaded and turned away muche people: saying that they be not Goddes, whiche are made wyth handes.
Acts 19:27 So that not onelye thys our craft cometh into pacel to be set at nought: but also that the temple of the great Goddas Diana shoulde be despised, and her magnificence should be destroied, which al Asia, and the world worshyppeth.
Acts 19:28 When they hearde these sayinges, they were full of wrath, and cryed oute sayinge: Great is Diana of the Ephesyans.
Acts 19:29 And all the cytye was on a rore, and they rushed into the commune hal wyth one assent, & caughte Gayus and Aristarcus, men of Macedonia, Paules companyons.
Acts 19:30 When Paul woulde haue entered in vnto the people, the dyscyples suffered hym not.
Acts 19:31 Certayne also of the chiefe of Asia, whiche were hys frendes, sent vnto him, desiringe hym that he woulde not prease into the commen hall.
Acts 19:32 Some cryed one thynge, and some another, and the congregacyon was all oute of quyete, and the more parte knewe not wherfore they were come together.
Acts 19:33 Some of the company drewe forth Alexander, the Iewes thrusting hym forwardes. Alexander beckened with the hand, & would haue geuen the people an aunswere.
Acts 19:34 When they knewe that he was a Iewe, there arose a shoute almost for the space of two houres, of all men cryinge, greate is Diana of the Ephesyans.
Acts 19:35 When the towne clarke had ceased the people he saied: ye men of Ephesus, what man is it that knoweth not how that the cytye of the Ephesyans is a worshypper of the great God as Diana, and of the ymage, which came from heauen.
Acts 19:36 Seyng then that no man sayth her agaynst, ye oughte to be contente, & to do nothyng rashlye,
Acts 19:37 for ye haue brought hether these men, which are neither robbers of churches, nor yet despysers of your Godas.
Acts 19:38 Wherfore yf Demetrius and the craftes men, whiche are wyth him haue any saiynge to any man, the law is open, and there are rulars let them accuse one another.
Acts 19:39 Yf ye go aboute any other thynge, it may be determined in a lawful congregacion.
Acts 19:40 For we are in ieoperdy to be accused of this dayes busines. For as much as there is no cause wherby we may geue a rekening of this concourse of people.
Acts 19:41 And when he had thus spoken he let the congregacyon departe.

CHAPTER: 20

Acts 20:1 After the rage was ceased: Paule called the disciples vnto him, & toke his leaue of them, & departed for to go into Macedonia.
Acts 20:2 And when he had gone ouer those partyes, and geuen them large exhortacyons he came into Grece,
Acts 20:3 and there abode thre monethes. And when the Iewes layde wayte for him as he was about to sail into Syria, he purposed to returne thorough Macedonia.
Acts 20:4 There accompanyed hym into Asia, Sopater of Berrea, and of Thessalonia Aristarcus and Secundus, & Gaius of Derba, and Timotheus, and out of Asia, Tichycus and Trophimos.
Acts 20:5 These wente before, & taryed vs at Troas.
Acts 20:6 And we sayled awaye from Philippus after the easter holy daies, and came vnto them do Troas in .v. dayes where we abode seuen dayes.
Acts 20:7 And on the morowe after the saboth day the disciples came together for to breake bread and Paule preached vnto them (readye to departe on the morowe) and contynued the preachynge vnto midnyght.
Acts 20:8 And there were manye lyghtes in the chamber where they were gathered together,
Acts 20:9 and there sate in a wyndowe a certayne yonge man named Eutichos, fallen into a depe slepe. And as Paule declared, he was the more ouercome with slepe, and fell doune from the thyrde lofte, and was taken vp dead.
Acts 20:10 Paule wente doune and fell on hym, and embrased hym, and sayed: make nothynge a do, for hys lyfe is in hym.
Acts 20:11 When he was come vp again, he brake bread and tasted, and commened a longe whyle euen tyll the mornynge, and so departed.
Acts 20:12 And they brought the yonge man alyue, and were not a lytle comforted.
Acts 20:13 And we went afore to shyppe, and loused vnto Asson there to receyue Paule. For so had he appoynted and woulde hym self go afore.
Acts 20:14 When he was come to vs to Assone, we toke hym in and came to Mitelenes.
Acts 20:15 And we sailed thence, and came the next daye ouer agaynste Chios. And the next daye we aryued at Samos, and taryed at Trogilio. The nexte daye we came to Mileton,
Acts 20:16 for Paule had determyned to leaue Ephesus as they sayled, because he woulde not spende the tyme in Asia. For he hasted to be (yf he coulde possible) at Ierusalem at the daye of Pentecoste.
Acts 20:17 Wherfore from Myleton he sent to Ephesus, and called the elders of the congregacyon.
Acts 20:18 And when they were come to hym, he sayde vnto them. Ye knowe from the fyrste daye that I came into Asia, after what maner I haue ben with you at al ceasons
Acts 20:19 seruynge the Lorde with all humblenes of mynde, and with many teares, and temptacyons whiche happened to me by the laiynges awayte of the Iewes,
Acts 20:20 and howe I kept backe nothyng that was profytable, but that I haue shewed you, and taughte you openlye, and at home in your houses,
Acts 20:21 wytnessyng both to the Iewes, and also to the Grekes, the repentaunce towarde God and fayth towarde oure Lorde Iesus.
Acts 20:22 And now beholde I go bounde in the spyryte vnto Ierusalem, and knowe not what shal come on me there,
Acts 20:23 but that the holy ghost wytnesseth in euerye citie, saiynge: that bondes and trouble abyde me.
Acts 20:24 But none of these thinges moue me: neyther is my lyfe dere vnto my selfe: that I myght fulfyl my course with ioye, and the ministracyon whiche I haue receyued of the Lord Iesus, to testifye the gospell of the grace of God.
Acts 20:25 And now beholde, I am sure that henceforth ye al (through whom I haue gone preachyng the kingdom of God) shal se my face no more.
Acts 20:26 Wherfore I take you to recorde this same daye that I am pure from the bloud of all men.
Acts 20:27 For I haue kept nothynge backe, but haue shewed you all the counsell of God.
Acts 20:28 Take hede therfore vnto youre selues, and to all the flocke wherof the holy ghoste hath made you ouersears, to rule the congregacyon of God, which he hath purchased wt hys bloude.
Acts 20:29 For I am sure of this, that after my departing shall greuous wolues enter in amonge you, which wyll not spare the flocke.
Acts 20:30 Moreouer of your own selues shal men aryse speakyng peruerse thinges to draw disciples after them.
Acts 20:31 Therfore awake & remember, that by the space of .iij. yeares I ceased not to warne euerye one of you both night and daye with teares.
Acts 20:32 And nowe brethren I commende you to God, and to the worde of hys grace, which is able to buylde further, and to geue you an inheritaunce amonge all them which are sanctifyed
Acts 20:33 I haue desyred no mans syluer, golde or vesture.
Acts 20:34 Ye knowe well that these handes haue ministred vnto my necessities, & to them that were with me,
Acts 20:35 I haue shewed you all thinges, how that so laborynge ye ought to receyue the weake & to remember the wordes of the lorde Iesu, how that he sayde: it is more blessed to geue then to receyue.
Acts 20:36 When he had thus spoken, he kneled doune & prayed with them all.
Acts 20:37 And they wept al aboundauntly, and fell on Paules necke, & kyssed him
Acts 20:38 sorowynge moste of all for the wordes which he spake, that they should se hys face no more. And they accompanied hym vnto the shyppe.

CHAPTER: 21

Acts 21:1 And it chaunsed that assone as we had launched forthe, & were departed from them, we came with a strayght course vnto Choon, & the daye folowing vnto the Rhodes, and from thence vnto Patara.
Acts 21:2 And we found a shyppe ready to sayle vnto Phenices & went a bourde and set forthe.
Acts 21:3 Then appeared vnto vs Cyprus, and we left it on the lefte hand, & sayled vnto Syria, & came vnto Tire. For ther the shyp vnladed her burthen.
Acts 21:4 And when we had founde brethren, we taryed there .vij. dayes. And they tolde Paule throughe the spirite that he shoulde not go vp to Hierusalem.
Acts 21:5 And when the dayes were ended, we departed and went our wayes, & they al brought vs on our way, with theyr wyues and children, tyll we were come out of the citye. And we kneled doune in the shore and prayde.
Acts 21:6 And when we had taken our leaue one of another, we toke shyp, and they returned home agayne.
Acts 21:7 When we had full ended the course from Tyre we arryued at Ptolomaida, and saluted the brethren, and abode with them one daye.
Acts 21:8 The nexte daye, we that were of Paules companye, departed and came vnto Cesarea. And we entred into the house of Philip the Euangeliste, whiche was one of the .vij. deacones, & abode wyth hym.
Acts 21:9 The same man had foure doughters virgens which dyd prophesy.
Acts 21:10 And as we taryed there a good manye of dayes, there came a certayne Prophete from Iewry, named Agabus.
Acts 21:11 When he was come to vs, he toke Paules gyrdell, and bound hys handes and fete, and sayed: thus sayeth the holye Ghoste: so shall the Iewes at Hierusalem bynde the man that oweth thys gyrdell, and shall delyuer hym into the handes of the gentyls.
Acts 21:12 When we hearde thys, both we and other of the same place, besoughte hym, that he would not go vp to Ierusalem.
Acts 21:13 Then Paul aunswered and sayd: what do ye wepynge and breakyng myne hert? I am ready not to be bound onelye: but also to dye at Hierusalem for the name of the Lorde Iesus.
Acts 21:14 When we coulde not turne hys mynde, we ceased saiynge: the wyll of the Lorde be fulfylled.
Acts 21:15 After those dayes we made oure selues readye, and went vp to Hierusalem.
Acts 21:16 There wente vp with vs also certayne of the discyples of Cesarea, and brought with them one Mnason of Cyprus, an olde disciple with whom we should lodge.
Acts 21:17 And when we were come to Hierusalem, the brethren receyued vs gladlye.
Acts 21:18 And on the morowe Paule wente in wyth vs vnto Iames. And all the elders came together.
Acts 21:19 And when he had saluted them, he tolde by ordre al thynges that God had wroughte amonge the Gentyles by hys ministracyon.
Acts 21:20 And when they hearde it, they glorifyed the Lorde, and sayed vnto hym: thou seest brother, howe manye thousande Iewes there are that beleue, & they are all zelous ouer the lawe.
Acts 21:21 And they are informed of the, that thou teacheste all the Iewes whiche are amonge the gentyls, to forsake Moyses, and sayest, that they oughte not to circumcyse theyr chyldren, neyther to lyue after the customes.
Acts 21:22 What is it therfore? The multytude muste nedes come together. For they shal heare that thou arte come.
Acts 21:23 Do therfore thys that we saye to the. We haue foure men which haue a vowe on them.
Acts 21:24 Them take and purifye thy self wt them, and do coste on them that they maye shaue theyr heades, and all shall knowe that those thinges, whiche they haue heard, concerning the, are nothinge: but that thou thy selfe also walkest and kepest the lawe.
Acts 21:25 For as touching the Gentylles whiche beleue, we haue writen and concluded, that they obserue no such thinges: but that they kepe them selues from thynges offered to Idols, from bloude, from strangled, and from fornicacyon.
Acts 21:26 Then the next daye Paule toke the men, and puryfyed hym selfe with them, and entred into the temple, declarynge that he obserued the dayes of the purifycation, vntyll that an offerynge shoulde be offered for euerye one of them.
Acts 21:27 And as the seuen dayes shoulde haue ben ended, the Iewes which were of Asia when they sawe hym in the temple, they moued all the people, and layed handes on hym,
Acts 21:28 criyng: Ye men of Israell, healpe. Thys is the man that teacheth all men euerye where agaynste the people and the lawe, and this place. More ouer also he hath brought Grekes into the temple, & hath polluted thys holy place.
Acts 21:29 For they sawe one Trophimus an Ephesyan with him in the cytie. Hym they supposed Paule had brought into the temple.
Acts 21:30 And all the citie was moued, and the people swarmed together. And they toke Paule, and drue hym out of the temple, and forthwith the dores were shut to.
Acts 21:31 As they wente aboute to kyll hym, tydinges came vnto the hye captayne of the souldyers, that all Ierusalem was moued.
Acts 21:32 Whiche immediatlye toke souldyers and vndercaptaynes, and ran doune vnto them. When they sawe the vpper captayne and the souldyers, they left smittynge of Paule.
Acts 21:33 Then the captayne came neare, and toke hym: and commaunded hym to be bounde with two chaynes, and demaunded what he was, and what he had done.
Acts 21:34 And one cryed thys, another that, among the people, And when he coulde not know the certaintye for the rage, he commaunded hym to be caryed into the castle.
Acts 21:35 And when he came vnto a grece, it fortuned that he was borne of the souldyers, for the violence of the people.
Acts 21:36 For the multitude of the people folowed after cryenge awaye with hym.
Acts 21:37 And as Paule shoulde haue bene caryed into the castle, he sayde vnto the hye captaine: maye I speake vnto the? Which sayde: canste thou speake Greke?
Acts 21:38 arte not thou that Egyptian whiche before these dayes made an vproure, and led oute into the wyldernes .iiij.M. men that were mortherers?
Acts 21:39 But Paule sayd: I am a man which am a Iewe of Tharsus a citie in Cicyll, a cytisyn of no vyle cytie, I beseche the, suffer me to speake vnto the people.
Acts 21:40 When he had geuen hym licence. Paul stode on the stoppes, and beckened with the hande vnto the people, and there was made a great silence. And he spake vnto them in the Hebrew tonge, saiynge.

CHAPTER: 22

Acts 22:1 Ye men, brethren, and fathers: heare myne aunswere whiche I make vnto you.
Acts 22:2 When they heard that he spake in the Hebrue tonge to them: they kept the more silence. And he sayd:
Acts 22:3 I am verely a man which am a Iewe borne in Tharsus, a citie in Cicil: neuerthelesse yet brought vp in thys citie at the fete of Gamaliel, and informed diligentlye in the lawe of the fathers, and was feruent mynded to godwarde, as ye all are this same day,
Acts 22:4 and I persecuted thys waye vnto the deathe, byndynge and delyuerynge into pryson both men and women,
Acts 22:5 as the chief priest doth beare me wytnes and all the elders, of whome also I receyued letters vnto the brethren, and went to Damasco to bring them which were there bounde vnto Ierusalem for to be punyshed.
Acts 22:6 And it fortuned as I made my iorney and was come nye vnto Damasco aboute none, that sodenlye there shone from heauen a greate lyght rounde aboute me,
Acts 22:7 and I fell to the earthe, and heard a voyce, saiynge vnto me: Saul, Saule, why persecutest thou me?
Acts 22:8 And I aunswered: what arte thou Lorde? And he sayde vnto me: I am Iesus of Nazareth whom thou persecutest.
Acts 22:9 And they that were with me sawe verelye a lyghte and were afrayde: but they hearde not the voyce of hym that spake with me.
Acts 22:10 And I sayde, what shall I do Lord? And the Lorde sayed vnto me. Aryse and go into Damasco, and there it shalbe tolde the of all thynges which are appoynted for the to do.
Acts 22:11 And when I sawe nothynge for the brightnes of that lyght, I was ledde by the hand of them that were with me, and came into Damasco.
Acts 22:12 And one Ananias a perfecte man, and as pertaynynge to the lawe hauynge good reporte of all the Iewes whiche there dwelte,
Acts 22:13 came vnto me, and stode, and sayde vnto me: brother Saule, loke vp. And that same houre I receyued my sighte, and sawe hym.
Acts 22:14 And he sayde: the God of oure fathers hath ordeyned the before, that thou shouldeste knowe hys wyll, and shouldeste se that which is ryghtfull: and shouldest heare the voyce of hys mouth:
Acts 22:15 for thou shalte be hys wytnes vnto all men of those thynges whiche thou haste sene and hearde.
Acts 22:16 And now, why taryest thou? aryse and be baptysed, and washe awaye thy synnes in callynge on the name of the Lorde.
Acts 22:17 And it fortuned when I was come agayn to Ierusalem, and prayde in the temple that I was in a traunce,
Acts 22:18 and sawe hym, saiyng vnto me: Make hast, and get the quickly out of Ierusalem: for they wyll not receyue the wytnes that thou bearest of me.
Acts 22:19 And I sayde: Lorde, they knowe that I prysoned and beate in euery synagoge then that beleued on the,
Acts 22:20 and when the bloude of thy witnes Stephan was shede: I also stode by, and consented vnto his death, and kepte the rayment of them that slew hym.
Acts 22:21 And he sayd vnto me: depart, for I wyl sende the a farre hence vnto the gentyls.
Acts 22:22 They gaue audience vnto thys worde, and then lyft vp theyr voyces, and sayde: awaye with suche a felowe from the earthe, it is pytye that he shoulde lyue.
Acts 22:23 And as they cryed, and caste of theyr clothes, and thrue duste into the ayer,
Acts 22:24 the captayne bad him to be brought into the castel and commaunded hym to be scourged, and to be examyned, that he myght knowe wherfore they cryed on hym.
Acts 22:25 And as they bounde hym with thonges, Paule sayde to the Centuryon that stode by. Is it lawfull for you to scourge a man that is a Romayne and vncondempned?
Acts 22:26 When the Centuryon hearde that, he wente, and tolde the vpper captayne saiynge: What intendest thou to do? This man is a Romayn.
Acts 22:27 Then the vpper Captayne came, and said to hym: tell me, arte thou a Romayne? He sayde: Yea.
Acts 22:28 And the captayn aunswered: with a great some obtayned I thys fredome: And Paul sayd: I was free borne.
Acts 22:29 Then strayght waye departed from hym, they which should haue examyned hym. And the hye Captayne also was afrayde, after he knewe that he was a Romayne: because he had bounde hym.
Acts 22:30 On the morowe because he woulde haue knowen the certaintye wherfore he was accused of the Iewes, he loused hym from his bondes, and commaunded the hye Priestes and all the counsell to come together, and brought Paule and set hym before them.

CHAPTER: 23

Acts 23:1 Paul behelde the counsell & said: men and brethren. I haue liued in al good conscience before God vntyll thys day.
Acts 23:2 The hye priest Ananias commaunded them that stode by, to smyte hym on the mouth.
Acts 23:3 Then sayde Paul to hym: God smite the thou paynted wall. Sittest thou and iudgest me after the lawe, and commaundest me to be smyten contrarye to the lawe?
Acts 23:4 And they that stode by, sayde: reuylest thou Gods hye priest?
Acts 23:5 Then sayde Paule: I wyste not brethren that he was the hye priest. For it is writen: thou shalt not cursse the ruler of thy people.
Acts 23:6 When Paule perceyued that the one part were Saduces, and the other Pharyses: he cryed oute in the counsell: Men and brethren, I am a Pharisey, the sonne of a Pharysey. Of the hope and resurreccyon from death. I am iudged.
Acts 23:7 And when he had so sayde, there arose a debate betwene the Pharyseis and the Saduces, and the multytude was deuyded:
Acts 23:8 For the Saduces saye, that there is no resurreccyon, neyther aungell, nor spirite. But the Pharyseis graunte both.
Acts 23:9 And there arose a great crye, and the Scrybes whiche were of the Phariseys parte arose and stroue, saiyng: we fynde none euyll in thys man. Thoughe a spirite or an angell haue appeared to hym, let vs not stryue agaynst God.
Acts 23:10 And when there arose great debate, the captayne fearynge lest Paule shoulde haue bene plucked a sundre of them, commaunded the souldyers to go doune, and to take hym from among them, and to bryng hym into the castle.
Acts 23:11 The nyght folowynge, God stode by hym and sayed: be of good cheare Paule: for as thou haste testifyed of me in Ierusalem, so must thou beare wytnes at Rome.
Acts 23:12 When daye was come, certayne of the Iewes gathered them selues together, & made a vowe, saiynge, that they woulde neyther eate nor drynke, tyll they had kylled Paul.
Acts 23:13 They were about .xl. which had made thus conspiracyon.
Acts 23:14 And they came to the chiefe priestes and elders, and sayde: we haue bounde our selues with a vowe, that we wyll eate nothynge vntyll we haue slayne Paule.
Acts 23:15 Nowe therfore geue ye knoweledge to the vpper captayne & to the counsell, that he brynge hym forthe vnto vs to morowe as thoughe we woulde knowe some thynge more perfectlye of hym: But we, or euer he come neare, are readye in the meane season to kyll hym.
Acts 23:16 When Paules systers sonne heard of theyr laiyng awayt: he went & entred into the castle, and tolde Paul.
Acts 23:17 And Paul called one of the vnder captaynes to hym, and sayde: brynge thys yongemen to the hye captayne, for he hathe a certayne thinge to shewe hym.
Acts 23:18 And he toke hym, & led hym to the hygh captayne, & sayde: Paul the prysoner called me vnto hym, and prayed me to brynge thys yonge man vnto the whiche hath a certayne matter to shewe the.
Acts 23:19 The hye captayne toke him by the hande, and wente aparte with hym oute of the way, and axed hym, what haste thou to saye vnto me?
Acts 23:20 And he sayde: the Iewes are determyned to desyre the that thou wouldest brynge forthe Paule to morowe into the counsell, as though they woulde enquyre some what of him more perfectely.
Acts 23:21 But folowe not theyr myndes: for there lye in wayte for hym of them, moo then .xl. men, which haue bounde them selues with a vowe, that they wyll neyther eate nor drinke tyll they haue kylled hym. And now are they readye, and loke for thy promes.
Acts 23:22 The vpper captayne let the yonge man departe, & charged hym: se thou tel it out to no man that thou hast shewed these thynges to me.
Acts 23:23 And he called vnto hym two vnder captaynes, saiynge: make readye two hundred souldyers to go to Cesarea, and horsmen thre score and ten, and speare men two hondred at the thyrde houre of the nyght.
Acts 23:24 And delyuer them beastes that they may put Paule on, and bryng hym safe vnto Felix the hye debitie,
Acts 23:25 and wrote a letter in thys maner.
Acts 23:26 Claudius Lisias to the moste myghtye rular Felix sendeth gretynges.
Acts 23:27 Thys man was taken of the Iewes, and shoulde haue ben kylled of them. Then came I with souldiers and reserued hym, and perceyued that he was a Romayne.
Acts 23:28 And when I woulde haue knowen the cause, wherfor they accused him, I brought hym forth into theyr counsell:
Acts 23:29 there perceyued I that he was accused of questyons of theyr lawe: but was not gyltye of any thynge worthy of death or of boundes.
Acts 23:30 Afterward when it was shewed me, how that the Iewes layde wayte for the man, I sent him strayght waye to the, and gaue commaundement to hys accusars, yf they had oughte agaynste hym to tell it vnto the. Fare well.
Acts 23:31 Then the souldyours as it was commaunded them, toke Paule and broughte hym by nyght to Antipatras.
Acts 23:32 On the morowe they lefte the horsmen to go with hym and returned vnto the castle.
Acts 23:33 Whiche when they came to Cesarea, they delyuered the Epistle to the debitie, and presented Paul before hym.
Acts 23:34 When the debitie had redde the letter, he axed of what countreye he was: and when he vnderstode that he was of Cicill,
Acts 23:35 I wyll heare the (sayde he) when thyne accusars are come also: and commaunded hym to be kepte in Herodes Pallayce.

CHAPTER: 24

Acts 24:1 After fyue dayes Ananias the hye prieste descended wt the elders and with a certayne oratour named Tertullus, and enformed the rular of Paul.
Acts 24:2 When Paule was called forth. Tartullus began to accuse hym, saiynge: Seynge that we lyue in a great quietnes by the meanes of the: & that manye good thynges are done vnto thys nacyon throughe thy prouidence:
Acts 24:3 that alowe we euer and in all places, most myghty Felix, wt all thankes.
Acts 24:4 Notwithstandyng that I be not tedyous vnto the. I praye the that thou wouldest heare vs of thy curtesy a fewe wordes.
Acts 24:5 We haue founde thys man a pestylent felowe, and a mouer of debate vnto all the Iewes thoroughout the world, and a mayntayner of the secte of the Nazarites,
Acts 24:6 and hath also enforsed to pollute the temple. Whome we toke, and woulde haue iudged accordynge to our law,
Acts 24:7 but the hye captayne Lysyas came vpon vs, and with great violence toke hym awaye out of our hande,
Acts 24:8 commaundyng hys accusars to come vnto the. Of whome thou mayest (yf thou wilt enquyre) knowe the certaintye of al these thynges, wherof we accuse hym.
Acts 24:9 The Iewes lykewyse affirmed, saiyng: that it was euen so.
Acts 24:10 Then Paule (after that the ruler him selfe had beckened vnto hym that he should speake) aunswered I shall with a more quyet mynde aunswere for my selfe, for as muche as I vnderstande that thou haste bene of manye yeares a iudge vnto thys people,
Acts 24:11 because that thou mayest know that there are yet but .xij. dayes sence I wente vp to Ierusalem for to praye,
Acts 24:12 & that they neyther founde me in the temple disputynge with anye man, eyther raysynge vp the people neither in the synagoges, nor in the citie.
Acts 24:13 Neyther can they proue the thynges wherof they accuse me.
Acts 24:14 But thys I confesse vnto the, that after that waye (which they call heresye) so worshyppe I the God of my fathers, beleuynge al thynges which are written in the lawe and the Prophetes,
Acts 24:15 and haue hope towardes God that the same resurreccyon of the dead (which they them selues loke for also) shall be both of iuste and vniuste.
Acts 24:16 And therfore studye I to haue a cleare conscience towarde God, and towarde man also.
Acts 24:17 But after many yeares I came & brought almes to my people and offerynges,
Acts 24:18 in the whiche they founde me puryfyed in the temple, neyther with multytude, nor yet with vnquyetnes. Howe be it there were certayne Iewes oute of Asia,
Acts 24:19 which ought to be here present before the, & accuse me, yf they had ought agaynste me:
Acts 24:20 or els let these same here saye, yf they haue founde anye euyll doynge in me, whyle I stand here in the councell:
Acts 24:21 excepte it be for thys one voyce that I cryed standynge amonge them, of the resurreccyon from death, am I iudged of you thys daye.
Acts 24:22 When Felix heard these thinges he deferred them, for he knewe verye well of that way, and sayed when Lisias the captayne is come, I wil knowe the vtmost of youre matters.
Acts 24:23 And he commaunded an vnder captaine to kepe Paul, and that he shoulde haue reste, and that he shoulde forbidde none of hys acquaintaunce to minister vnto hym, or to come vnto him.
Acts 24:24 And after a certaine daies came Felix and his wyfe Drusilla, which was a Iewas, and called forth Paul, and heard him of the fayth which is towarde Christ.
Acts 24:25 And as he preached of rightuousnes, temperaunce and iudgement to come. Felix trembled and aunswered: thou haste done inough at this tyme, departe. When I haue a conueniente tyme, I wil send for the.
Acts 24:26 He hoped also, that money should haue bene geuen hym of Paul, that he myght louse him: wherfore he called him the oftener, and communed wyth hym.
Acts 24:27 But after .ij. yeare Festus Porcius came into Felix roume. And Felix wyllynge to shewe the Iewes a pleasure, left Paule in prison bounde.

CHAPTER: 25

Acts 25:1 When Festus was come into the prouince, after .iij. dayes, he ascended from Cesarea to Hierusalem.
Acts 25:2 Then enfourmed hym the hye priestes and the chiefe of the Iewes, of Paule. And they besoughte hym,
Acts 25:3 and desiered fauoure agaynste him, that he would sende for him to Hierusalem: and layed awayte for him in the waye to kyl him.
Acts 25:4 Festus aunswered, that Paul shoulde be kepte at Cesaria, but that he him selfe would shortly departe thyther.
Acts 25:5 Let them therfore (saied he) whyche amonge you are able to do it, come doune with vs and accuse him, if there be any faulte in the man.
Acts 25:6 When he had taried there more then .x. dayes he departed vnto Cesarea, and the next daye sate doune in the iudgemente seate, and commaunded Paule to be broughte.
Acts 25:7 When he was come, the Iewes, whiche were come from Hierusalem, came about hym and layd many and greuous complayntes agaynste Paul, whiche they could not proue
Acts 25:8 as longe as he aunswered for him selfe, that he had neither againste the lawe of the Iewes, neither againste the temple, nor yet againste Cesar, offended any thynge at al.
Acts 25:9 Festus willing to do the Iewes a pleasure, aunswered Paule & sayd. Wylt thou go to Hierusalem, and there be iudged of these thinges before me?
Acts 25:10 Then saied Paule: I stand at Cesars iudgement seate, where I oughte to be iudged. To the Iewes haue I no harme done, as thou verye wel knowest.
Acts 25:11 Yf I haue hurte them, or committed anye thinge worthye of deathe, I refuse not to dye. Yf none of these thinges are, wherof they accuse me, no man ought to deliuer me to them. I appeale vnto Cesar.
Acts 25:12 Then spake Festus wyth deliberation, and aunswered. Thou haste appealed vnto Cesar, vnto Cesar shalt thou go.
Acts 25:13 After certaine daies, kynge Agrippa and Bernice came vnto Cesaria to salute Festus.
Acts 25:14 And when they had bene ther a good ceason, Festus rehersed Paules cause vnto the Kinge saiynge: there is a certaine man left in prison of Felix,
Acts 25:15 about whom when I came to Hierusalem, the hye priestes, and elders of the Iewes enfourmed me, and desiered to haue iudgemente againste him.
Acts 25:16 To whome I aunswered: It is not the maner of the Romaynes to deliuer any man that he shoulde perishe, before that he whiche is accused, haue the accusers before hym, & haue licence to aunswere for him selfe concerninge the crime layde against him:
Acts 25:17 when they were come hither, without delaye on the morowe, I sate to geue iudgemente, and commaunded the man to be brought forth.
Acts 25:18 Againste whom when the accusers stode vp, they brought none accusation of such thinges as I supposed,
Acts 25:19 but had certayne questyons againste him of their owne supersticion, and of one Iesus, whiche was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alyue,
Acts 25:20 And because I doubted of such maner questions, I axed him whether he would go to Ierusalem, and there be iudged of these matters.
Acts 25:21 Then when Paul had appealed to be kept vnto the knowledge of Cesar: I commaunded him to be kept, tyll I might send him to Cesar.
Acts 25:22 Agrippa saied to Festus: I woulde also heare the man my selfe. To morowe (saide he) thou shalt heare him.
Acts 25:23 And on the morow when Agrippa was come, and Bernice with greate pompe, & were entred into the counsel house wyth the captaines, and chiefmen of the cytye: at Festus commaundement Paule was brought forth.
Acts 25:24 And Festus said. Kinge Agrippa, and al men which are here present with vs: ye se this man about whom all the multitude of the Iewes haue bene with me both at Hierusalem & also here, crying that he ought not to lyue anye lenger.
Acts 25:25 Yet founde I nothinge worthy of death that he had committed. Neuertheles seynge that he hath appealed to Cesar: I haue determined to sende him.
Acts 25:26 Of whom I haue no certaine thynge to writte vnto my Lorde. Wherfore I haue broughte him vnto you, and specially vnto the, Kynge Agrippa, that after examination had, I myght haue some what to writte.
Acts 25:27 For me thinketh it vnreasonable, for to sende a prysoner, & not to shewe the causes, whiche are layed againste hym.

CHAPTER: 26

Acts 26:1 Agrippa sayd vnto Paule: thou art permitted to speake for thy selfe, Then Paule stretched forthe the hand, and aunswered for him selfe,
Acts 26:2 I thinke my selfe happye kynge Agrippa, because I shall aunswere this day before the, of all thinges wherof I am accused of the Iewes,
Acts 26:3 namely because thou art exparte in all customes and questions, which are amonge the Iewes. Wherfore I beseche the to heare me paciently.
Acts 26:4 My liuinge of a childe, whiche was at the fyrst amonge myne owne nacion at Ierusalem, knowe all the Iewes,
Acts 26:5 whyche knew me from the beginninge if they woulde testyfye it. For after the most strayteste secte of oure laye, lyued I a phariseye,
Acts 26:6 and now I stand, & am iudged for the hope of the promis made of God vnto our fathers
Acts 26:7 vnto whyche promys our .xij. trybes instantlye, seruynge God daie and nighte hope to come. For whiche hopes sake, king Agrippa, I am accused of the Iewes.
Acts 26:8 Why should it be thought a thinge vncredible vnto you, that God shoulde raise agayne the dead?
Acts 26:9 I also verely thought in my selfe, that I ought to do manie contrarye thinges, clene agaynste the name of Nazareth,
Acts 26:10 which thinge I also dyd in Ierusalem. Where manye of the sainctes I shut vp in prison, and had receiued authorite of the hye priestes. And when they were put to death, I gaue the sentence.
Acts 26:11 And I punyshed them ofte, in euerye synagoge, and compelled them to blaspheme, and was yet more madde vpon them, and persecuted them euen vnto straunge cities.
Acts 26:12 Aboute which thinges as I wente to Damasco with authoryte and licence of the hye priestes,
Acts 26:13 euen at mydday (O king) I saw in the way alyght from heauen, aboue the bryghtnes of the sunne, shyne rounde aboute me, and them whyche iorneyed wyth me.
Acts 26:14 When we were all fallen to the earth: I heard a voice speakinge vnto me, and saiynge in the Hebrue tonge: Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me? It is hard for the to kicke against the pricke.
Acts 26:15 And I said. Who art thou Lorde? And he sayd: I am Iesus whom thou persecutest,
Acts 26:16 but ryse and stand vp on thy fete. For I haue appeared vnto the for this purpose, to make the a minister, and a wytnes both of those thinges, whiche thou hast sene, and of those thinges in the which I wil appeare
Acts 26:17 vnto the deliuering the from the people, and from the gentils, vnto whiche nowe I sende the,
Acts 26:18 to open theyr eyes, that they myght turne from darckenes to lyght, and from the power of Satan vnto God: that they maye receiue forgeuenes of synnes, and inheritaunce amonge them whyche are sanctyfyed by fayth in me.
Acts 26:19 Wherfore kynge Agrippa I was not disobedient vnto the heauenly vision:
Acts 26:20 but shewed fyrst vnto them of Damasco, and at Hierusalem and through out all the coastes of Iewry, and to the gentyls, that they should repent, & tourne to God, and do the ryght workes of repentaunce.
Acts 26:21 For this cause the Iewes caught me in the temple, and went aboute to kyll me.
Acts 26:22 Neuerthelesse I obtained helpe of God, and continue vnto this daye wytnessinge both to smal and to great, saiyng none other thinges, then those which the prophetes and Moyses dyd saye shoulde come
Acts 26:23 that Christe shoulde suffer, and that he shoulde be the fyrste, that shoulde ryse from death, and shoulde shewe lyghte vnto the people, and to the gentyls.
Acts 26:24 As he thus aunswered for him selfe, Festus saied with a loude voyce. Paul, thou art besides thy selfe. Muche learninge hath made the mad.
Acts 26:25 And Paul saied: I am not mad, most deare Festus, but speake the wordes of trueth & sobernes.
Acts 26:26 The kinge knoweth of these thinges, before whom I speake frelye, neither thinke I that anye of these thinges are hydden from hym. For this thinge was not done in a corner.
Acts 26:27 Kinge Agrippa beleuest thou the prophetes? I wote well thou beleuest.
Acts 26:28 Agrippa saied to Paule: Some what thou bringest me in mynd for to become a Christian,
Acts 26:29 And Paul sayde: I would to God that not onlye thou: but also all that heare me to daye, were not some what onelye but altogether suche as I am, excepte these bondes.
Acts 26:30 And when he had thus spoken: the kynge rose vp, and the debitie, and Bernice and they that sate with them.
Acts 26:31 And when they were gone aparte: they talketh betwene them selues saiyng. Thys man doth nothinge worthy of death, nor of bondes.
Acts 26:32 Then sayde Agrippa vnto Festus: Thys man might haue bene loused if he had not appealed vnto Cesar.

CHAPTER: 27

Acts 27:1 When it was concluded that we shoulde sayle into Italye, they deliuered Paule, and certaine other prisoners vnto one named Iulius, an vnder captayne of Cesars souldiers.
Acts 27:2 And we entred into a ship of Adramicium, and lowsed from land, appointed to saile by the coastes of Asia, one Aristarcus out of Macedonia, of the countrey of Thessalia, beinge with vs.
Acts 27:3 And the next day we came to Sidon. And Iulius courteously entreated Paule, and gaue hym libertie to go vnto his frendes, and to refreshe him selfe.
Acts 27:4 And from thence lanched we, and sayled hard by Cypers, because the windes were contrarie.
Acts 27:5 Then sayled we ouer the sea of Cylycia, and Pamphilia, and came to Mira a citie in Lycia.
Acts 27:6 And there the vnder captaine founde a shyp of Alexander redy to sayle into Italy & put vs therin.
Acts 27:7 And when we had sailed slowly manye dayes, and scace were come ouer againste Gnidou (because the wynde withstode vs) we sayled harde by the coastes of Candy, ouer againste Salmo,
Acts 27:8 and with much worcke sayled beyonde it, and came vnto a place called good porte. Nye wherunto was a cytie called Lasea.
Acts 27:9 When muche tyme was spente and sailinge was nowe ieoperdous, because also that we had ouerlonge fasted, Paule put them in remembraunce,
Acts 27:10 and sayed vnto them Sirs: I perceiue that thys viage wilbe wyth hurte and much domage, not of the lodynge. And ship onely: but also of oure liues.
Acts 27:11 Neuerthelater the vndercaptaine beleued the gouerner & the maister, better then those thinges, which were spoken of Paule.
Acts 27:12 And because the hauen was not commodious to winter in, many toke counsell to departe thence, if by anye meanes they mighte attaine to Phenices, and there to winter, which is an hauen of Candy, and serueth to the southwest and northwest wind.
Acts 27:13 When the south wind blewe, they supposynge to obtayne theyr purpose, loused vnto Asson and sailed paste al Candy.
Acts 27:14 But anone after there arose againste their purpose, a flowe of winde out of the northeaste.
Acts 27:15 And when the shyp was caughte, and coulde not resiste the winde, we lette her go & draue with the wether.
Acts 27:16 And we came vnto an yle named Clauda, and had muche worke to come by a bote,
Acts 27:17 whiche they toke vp an vsed helpe, vndergerdinge the shippe, fearinge lest they shoulde haue fallen into Syrtes and we let doune a vessell and so were caried.
Acts 27:18 The nexte daye, when we were tossed with an excedinge tempest, they lightened the shippe,
Acts 27:19 & the third daye we cast out with oure owne handes, the tacklinge of the shippe.
Acts 27:20 When at the laste nether sunne nor starre in manye dayes appeared, and no smal tempest laye vpon vs, all hope that we shoulde be saued, was then taken awaye.
Acts 27:21 Then after longe abstinence, Paul stode forth in the middest of them and saied: Syrs ye shoulde haue herkened to me, and not haue loused from Candy, neyther to haue brought vnto vs this harme and losse.
Acts 27:22 And nowe I exhorte you to be of good chere, for there shall be no losse of anye mans lyfe amonge you, saue of the shyppe onelye.
Acts 27:23 For there stode by me this nyght the aungell of God. Whose I am, and whom I serue,
Acts 27:24 sayinge. Feare not Paule, for thou muste be broughte before Cesar. And lo, God hath geuen vnto the all that sayle wyth the.
Acts 27:25 Wherfore Syrs be of good cheare: for I beleue God, that so it shal be euen as it was tolde me.
Acts 27:26 How be it we must be cast into a certaine Ilande.
Acts 27:27 But when the fourtenth nyghte was come, as we were caryed in Adria about midnyght, the shipmen demed that there appeared some countreye vnto them:
Acts 27:28 and sounded, and founde it .xx. feadoms. And when they had gone a litle further, they sounded againe, and founde .xv. feadoms.
Acts 27:29 Then fearing lest they should haue fallen on some Rocke, they cast .iiij. ancres out the sterne, and wyshed for the day.
Acts 27:30 As the shipmen were about to flee out of the shyp, & had let doune the bote into the sea, vnder a coloure, as though they woulde haue cast ancres out of the forshyppe:
Acts 27:31 Paule sayed vnto the vnder captaine, and the souldiers: excepte these abyde in the shyp, ye can not be safe.
Acts 27:32 Then the souldiers cut of the rope of the bote, and let it fall away.
Acts 27:33 And in the meane tyme betwixt that and daye, Paule besoughte them al to take meate, sayinge: thys is the fourtenth daye, that ye haue taried, and continued fastinge, receiuinge nothinge at all.
Acts 27:34 Wherfore I praye you take meate: for thys no doubte is for your health: for there shall not an heire fal from the heade of anye of you.
Acts 27:35 And when he had thus spoken, he toke bread, and gaue thankes to God in presence of them all, and brake it, and began to eate.
Acts 27:36 Then were they all of good cheare, and they also toke meate.
Acts 27:37 We were all together in the shippe, two hundreth three score and sixtene soules.
Acts 27:38 And when they had eaten inough, they lyghtened the shippe, & cast out the wheate into the sea.
Acts 27:39 When it was daye, they knewe not the land, but they spied a certaine hauen wyth a banke, into the which they were minded (if it were possible) to thrust in the shippe.
Acts 27:40 And when they had taken vp the ancres, they committed them selues vnto the sea, and loused the rudder bondes, and hoysed vp the manye sayle to the winde and drue to lande.
Acts 27:41 But they chaunsed on a place, whiche had the sea on both the sydes, and thruste in the ship. And the fore part stucke fast and moued not, but the hinder brake wyth the violence of the wawes.
Acts 27:42 The souldiers counsel was to kyll the prysoners, lest anye of them, when he had swome out, shoulde flee awaye.
Acts 27:43 But the vnder captaine willing to saue Paule, kepte them from their purpose, and commaunded that they that could swyme, should cast them selues first into the sea, and scape to land.
Acts 27:44 And the other he commaunded to go, some on bourdes, & some on broken peces of the shyp. And so it came to passe, that they came al safe to lande.

CHAPTER: 28

Acts 28:1 And when they were scaped, then they knewe that the Ile was called Milete.
Acts 28:2 And the people of the countrey shewed vs no lytel kyndnes: for they kindled a fyre, and receiued vs euery one, because of the presente rayne, and because of the colde.
Acts 28:3 And when Paule had gathered a boundel of styckes, and put them into the fyre, there came a viper out of the heate, and lept on his hand.
Acts 28:4 When the men of the countrey sawe the worme hange on his hande, they sayd amonge them selues: this man must nedes be a murtherer. Whom (though he haue escaped the sea) yet vengeaunce suffreth not to lyue.
Acts 28:5 But he shouke of the vermen into the fyre and felt no harme.
Acts 28:6 Howe be it they wayted when he should haue swolne or fallen doune dead sodenly. But after they had loked a greate whyle, and sawe no harme come come to him, they chaunged their mindes, and said that he was a God.
Acts 28:7 In the same quarters the chiefe man of the yle whose name was Publius had a lordeshyp: the same receiued vs, and lodged vs thre dayes courteouslye.
Acts 28:8 And it fortuned that the father of Publius laie sicke of a fieuer and of a blouddy flixe. To whom Paule entred in and prayed, and layed his handes on him, and healed him.
Acts 28:9 When this was done, other also which had dyseases in the yle came and were healed.
Acts 28:10 And they dyd vs great honoure. And when we departed they loded vs with thinges necessary.
Acts 28:11 After thre monethes we departed in a shyppe of Alexandria, whiche had wintred in the yle whose badge was Castor and Pollux:
Acts 28:12 And when we came to Cyracusa, we taried ther .iij. dayes.
Acts 28:13 And from thence we set a compasse and came to Regium. And after one daye the south wynd blew, and we came the next daye to Putiolus:
Acts 28:14 where we founde brethren, and were desired to tarye wyth them seuen daies, and so came to Rome.
Acts 28:15 And from thence, when the brethren hearde of vs, they came against vs to Apiphorum, and to the thre tauernes. When Paule sawe them, he thanked God, and waxed bold.
Acts 28:16 And when he came to Rome, the vndercaptaine deliuered the prisoners to the chiefe captaine of the host: but Paule was suffred to dwelle by him selfe with one souldier that kepte him.
Acts 28:17 And it fortuned after thre dayes that Paul called the chiefe of the Iewes together. And when they were come, he saide vnto them: Men and brethren though I haue committed nothinge againste the people or lawes of oure fathers: yet was I deliuered prisoner from Ierusalem into the handes of the Romaynes.
Acts 28:18 Whiche when they had examyned me, woulde haue let me go, because they found no cause of death in me.
Acts 28:19 But when the Iewes cryed contrary, I was constrayned to appeale to Cesar: not because I had ought to accuse my people of.
Acts 28:20 For thys cause haue I called for you, euen to se you, and to speake wyth you: because that for the hope of Israell, I am bounde wyth thys chayne.
Acts 28:21 And they saide vnto him: We neyther receiued letters out of Iewrye partaininge vnto the, neyther came any of the brethren that shewed or spake anye harme of the.
Acts 28:22 But we wyll heare of the what thou thynkest. For we haue hearde of this secte that euery where it is spoken agaynste.
Acts 28:23 And when they had appoynted him a daye, there came manye vnto him into hys lodgynge, to whom he expounded and testifyed the kingedome of God, and preached vnto them of Iesu: both out of the Prophetes, euen from morninge to nyghte.
Acts 28:24 And some beleued the thinges, whyche were spoken, and some beleued not.
Acts 28:25 When they agreed not amonge them selues, they departed, after that Paule had spoken one word: Welspake the holy ghoste by Esay the prophet vnto youre fathers, saiyng: go vnto thys people,
Acts 28:26 and saye: wyth youre eares shall ye heare, & shall not vnderstande: and wyth youre eies shal ye se and shall not perceiue.
Acts 28:27 For the hert of this people is waxed grosse and their eares were thicke of hearinge, and theyr eyes haue they closed: lest they should se with their eyes, and heare with their eares, and vnderstande with their hertes, and should be conuerted, and I should heale them.
Acts 28:28 Be it knowen therfore vnto you, that this saluation of God is sente to the gentyls, and they shall heare it.
Acts 28:29 And when he had sayed that, the Iewes departed, and had greate despicions among them selues.
Acts 28:30 And Paule dwelt two yeares full in his lodgynge, and receyued all that came to hym,
Acts 28:31 preaching those thynges, whyche concerned the Lorde Iesus wyth all confydence vnforboden.

BOOK: Romans

CHAPTER: 1

Romans 1:1 Paule the seruaunte of Iesus Christ called to be an Apostle, put aparte to preache the Gospel of God,
Romans 1:2 whiche he promised afore by hys Prophetes in the holye scriptures
Romans 1:3 that make mention of hys sonne, the whyche was begotten of the sede of Dauid (as perteininge to the fleshe)
Romans 1:4 and declared to be the sonne of God, wyth power of the holye ghoste that sanctifyeth, sence the tyme that Iesus Christ our Lorde rose againe from death,
Romans 1:5 by whom we haue receyued grace and Apostleshyp, to brynge all maner heathen people vnto the obedience of the fayth that is in his name:
Romans 1:6 of the whyche heathen are ye a parte also, whyche are Iesus Christes by vocation.
Romans 1:7 To all you at Rome beloued of God, and sainctes by callynge Grace be wyth you and peace from God our father, and from our Lorde Iesus Christ.
Romans 1:8 Fyrste verelye I thanke my God thorowe Iesus Christe for you all, because your fayth is publyshed throughout all the worlde.
Romans 1:9 For God is my wytnes, whom I serue wyth my spyryte in the Gospel of hys sonne, that wythout ceasinge I make mencion of you alwayes in my prayers,
Romans 1:10 besechinge that at one tyme or other, a prosperous iorneye (by the wyll of God) myghte fortune me, to come vnto you.
Romans 1:11 For I longe to se you that I myght bestowe amonge you some spyrytuall gyfte, to strength you wyth all,
Romans 1:12 that is that I might haue consolacion together wyth you through the common fayth, whiche both ye and I haue.
Romans 1:13 I woulde that ye shoulde knowe bretherne, howe that I haue often tymes purposed to come vnto you (but haue bene let hitherto) to haue some fruite amonge you, as I haue amonge other of the Gentyls.
Romans 1:14 For I am detter both to the Grekes and to them, whyche are no Grekes, vnto the learned and also vnto the vnlearned.
Romans 1:15 Lykewyse as much as in me is. I am redy to preache the Gospel to you of Rome also.
Romans 1:16 For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, because it is the power of God vnto saluacion to all that beleue, namely to the Iewe and also to the gentyle.
Romans 1:17 For by it the rightuousnes, which commeth of God is opened from fayth to fayth.
Romans 1:18 As it is written: the iust shal liue by faith. For the wrath of God appeareth from heauen agaynste all vngodlynesse and vnryghtuousnes of men, whiche wythholde the trueth in vnryghtuousnes,
Romans 1:19 saiyng: what maye be knowen of God, that same is manifest amonge them. For God dyd shewe it vnto them.
Romans 1:20 So that his inuisible thinges, that is to saye, hys eternall power and Godhead, are vnderstand & sene by the workes from the creation of the worlde. So that they are wythout excuse,
Romans 1:21 in as muche as when they knewe God, they glorifyed him not as God, neither were thankful, but waxed full of vanities in theyr Imaginations, and their folishe hertes were blinded.
Romans 1:22 When they counted them selues wyse, they became foles,
Romans 1:23 and tourned the glorye of the immortall God, vnto the the similitude of the Image of mortall man, and of byrdes, and foure foted beastes, and of serpentes.
Romans 1:24 Wherfore God lykewyse gaue them vp vnto their hertes lustes vnto vncleanes, to defyle theyr owne bodies betwene them selues:
Romans 1:25 whyche turned hys truth vnto a lye, and worshipped and serued the creatures more then the maker, whyche is blessed for euer. Amen.
Romans 1:26 For this cause God gaue them vp vnto shamefull lustes. For euen theyr women dyd chandge the natural vse vnto the vnnaturall.
Romans 1:27 And lykewyse also the men lefte the naturall vse of the woman, and brent in theyr lustes one on another. And man with man wroughte fylthynes, and receiued in them selues the reward of theyr errour, as it was accordinge.
Romans 1:28 And as it semed not good vnto them to be a knowen of God, euen so God deliuered them vp vnto a leud minde, that they should do those thinges, whiche were not comly,
Romans 1:29 beyng ful of al vnryghtuous doing, of fornicacion, wickednes, couetousnes, maliciousnes, full of enuye, murther, debate, disceite, euyl condicioned, whisperers,
Romans 1:30 backbiters, haters of God, doers of wronge, proude, bosters, bryngers vp of euyll thinges, disobedient to father and mother,
Romans 1:31 wythout vnderstandynge, couenaunt breakers, vnlouinge, truce breakers and mercyles.
Romans 1:32 Whyche men though they knewe the ryghtuousnes of God, howe that they which such thinges commit, are worthy of death, yet not onely do the same, but also haue pleasure in them that do them.

CHAPTER: 2

Romans 2:1 Therfore arte thou inexcusable (O man) whosoeuer thou be that iudgest. For in that same wherin thou iudgest another, thou condemnest thy selfe. For thou that iudgeste doest euen the same selfe thynges.
Romans 2:2 But we are sure that the iudgement of God is accordynge to trueth agaynst them, which committe suche thinges.
Romans 2:3 Thinkest thou this (O thou man that iudgeste them, whiche do suche thinges) and yet dost euen the very same, that thou shalt escape the iudgement of God?
Romans 2:4 Eyther despysest thou the riches of hys goodnes, pacience and longe sufferaunce? and remembreste not howe that the kindnes of God leadeth the to repentaunce?
Romans 2:5 But thou after thyne harde herte that can not repente, heapeste the together the treasure of wrath againste the daye of vengaunce, when shall be opened the rightuous iudgement of God,
Romans 2:6 whyche wyll rewarde euerye man according to hys dedes:
Romans 2:7 that is to say, prayse, honoure and immortalytye, to them whyche continue in good doynge and seke eternall lyfe.
Romans 2:8 But vnto them that are rebellious and disobey the trueth, and folowe iniquitie, shall come indignacion and wrath,
Romans 2:9 tribulacion and anguishe, vpon the souls of euerye man that doeth euyll: of the Iewe fyrst, and also of the gentyll.
Romans 2:10 To euery man that doth good, shall come prayse, honoure, and peace, to the Iewe fyrst, and also to the gentil.
Romans 2:11 For ther is no parcialitie with God. But whosoeuer hath synned without lawe,
Romans 2:12 shall perishe wythout lawe. And as many as haue synned vnder the lawe, shalbe iudged by the law.
Romans 2:13 For before God they are not ryghtuous whiche heare the lawe: but the doers of the lawe shalbe iustifyed.
Romans 2:14 For yf the Gentyls whiche haue no lawe do of nature the thinges contayned in the lawe: then they hauynge no lawe, are a law vnto them selues,
Romans 2:15 which shew the dedes of the lawe wrytten in theyr hertes: whyle theyr conscience beareth witnes vnto them, and also theyr thoughtes, accusyng one another, or excusynge
Romans 2:16 at the daye when God shall iudge the secretes of men by Iesus Christ accordynge to my Gospell.
Romans 2:17 Beholde, thou art called a Iewe, and trustest in the lawe, and reioysest in God,
Romans 2:18 & knowest hys wyll, and haste experience of good, and bad, in that thou arte infourmed by the lawe,
Romans 2:19 and beleuest that thou thy selfe arte a guyde vnto the blynde, a lyght to them which are in darknes,
Romans 2:20 an infourmer of them whiche lacke discrecyon, a teacher of vnlearned, which haste the ensample of that whiche ought to be knowen, and of the trueth, in the lawe.
Romans 2:21 But thou whiche teachest not another, teacheste not thy selfe. Thou preachest, a man shoulde not steale, and yet thou stealest.
Romans 2:22 Thou sayst, a man shoulde not commyt aduoutrye: and thou breakest wedlocke. Thou abhorreste ymages, and robeste God of hys honoure.
Romans 2:23 Thou reioysest in the lawe and thorow breakynge the law, dishonourest God.
Romans 2:24 For the name of god is euyll spoken of amonge the gentyls thorow you, as it is wrytten.
Romans 2:25 Circumcysyon verelye auayleth, yf thou kepe the lawe. But yf thou breake the lawe, thy circumcysyon is made vncircumcisyon.
Romans 2:26 Therfore yf the vncircumcised kepe the right thynges conteyned in the lawe: shall not hys vncircumcysyon be counted for circumcision?
Romans 2:27 And shall not vncircumcysyon whiche is by nature (yf it kepe the lawe) iudge the, whiche beynge vnder the letter and circumcysyon, doest transgresse the lawe?
Romans 2:28 For he is not a Iewe, whiche is a Iewe outwarde. Neyther is that thynge circumcysyon, whiche is outewarde in the fleshe:
Romans 2:29 but he is a Iewe, which is hyd within, and the circumcisyon of the herte is the true circumcisyon, whiche is in the spirite & not in the letter, whose prayse is not of men, but of God.

CHAPTER: 3

Romans 3:1 What preferment then hathe the Iewe? other what auauntageth circumcysyon?
Romans 3:2 Surelye verye muche. Fyrste vnto them was commytted the word of God.
Romans 3:3 What then though some of them dyd not beleue? shall theyr vnbelefe make the promes of God withoute effecte?
Romans 3:4 God forbyd. Let God be true and all men lyars, as it is wrytten: That thou myghtest be iustifyed in thy saiynge, and shouldest ouercome when thou art iudged.
Romans 3:5 If our vnryghtuousnes make the ryghtuousnes of God more excellent: what shall we saye? Is God vnrightuous which taketh vengeaunce? I speake after the maner of men,
Romans 3:6 God forbyd. For how then shall God iudge the worlde?
Romans 3:7 Yf the veritie of God appeare more excellent thorow my lye, vnto hys praise why am I hence forth iudged as a synner?
Romans 3:8 & saye not rather (as men euyl speake of vs, and as some affyrme that we saye) let vs do euyll that good maye come thereof. Whose damnacyon is iuste.
Romans 3:9 What saye we then? Are we better then daye? No, in no wyse. For we haue alreadye proued, howe that both Iewes and Gentyls are all vnder synne:
Romans 3:10 as it is wrytten: There is none righteous, no not one:
Romans 3:11 there is none that vnderstandeth, there is none that seketh after God,
Romans 3:12 they are all gone out of the waye, they are all made vnprofytable, there is none that doeth good, no not one.
Romans 3:13 Theyr throte is an open sepulchre, with theyr tonges they haue disceyued, the poyson of aspes is vnder their lippes.
Romans 3:14 Whose mouthes are full of curssyng and bytternes.
Romans 3:15 Theyr fete are swyfte to sheed bloude.
Romans 3:16 Destruccyon and wretchednes are in theyr wayes.
Romans 3:17 And the way of peace they haue not knowen.
Romans 3:18 There is no feare of God before theyr eyes.
Romans 3:19 Yea and we knowe that whatsoeuer the law sayeth, he saith it to them which are vnder the lawe. That all mouthes maye be stopped, and all the world be subdued to God,
Romans 3:20 because that by the dedes of the lawe, shall no fleshe be iustifyed in the syght of God. For by the lawe commeth the knoweledge of synne.
Romans 3:21 Nowe verelye is the ryghteousnes that commeth of God, declared withoute the fulfyllynge of lawe, hauynge wytnes yet of the lawe and of the Prophetes.
Romans 3:22 The ryghteousnes no doubte whiche is good before God commeth by the fayth of Christe, vnto all and vpon all that beleue. There is no difference:
Romans 3:23 for al haue sinned, and lacke the prayse that is of valoure before God,
Romans 3:24 but are iustifyed frelye by hys grace thorowe the redempcion that is in Christe Iesus,
Romans 3:25 whome God hath made a seate of mercye thorowe fayth in hys bloude, to shewe the rightuousnes whiche before hym is of valoure, in that he forgeueth the synnes that are passed, whiche God dyd suffer
Romans 3:26 to shewe at thys time the ryghteousnes that is alowed of hym that he myghte be counted iuste, and iustifyar of hym which beleueth on Iesus.
Romans 3:27 Where is then thy reioysynge? It is excluded. By what lawe? by the lawe of workes? Naye, but by the lawe of faythe.
Romans 3:28 For we suppose that a man is iustified by fayth withoute the dedes of the lawe.
Romans 3:29 Is he the God of Iewes onely? Is he not also the God of the gentyls? Yes, euen of the gentyls also.
Romans 3:30 For it is God onelye which iustifyeth circumcysyon whiche is of fayth, and vncircumcysyon thorowe fayth.
Romans 3:31 Do we then destroye the lawe thorowe fayth? God forbyd. But we rather mayntayne the lawe.

CHAPTER: 4

Romans 4:1 What shall we saye then, that Abraham oure father as pertaynyng to the fleshe, dyd fynde?
Romans 4:2 Yf Abraham were iustifyed by dedes, then hath he wherein to reioyce but not with god.
Romans 4:3 For what sayth the scripture? Abraham beleued God, and it was counted vnto hym for ryghteousnes.
Romans 4:4 To hym that worketh, is the rewarde not reckened of fauoure: but of dutye.
Romans 4:5 To hym that worketh not, but beleueth on hym that iustifyeth the vngodly, is hys fayth counted for ryghteousnes.
Romans 4:6 Euen as Dauid descrybeth the blessedfulnes of the man vnto whome God ascrybeth ryghteousnes withoute dedes.
Romans 4:7 Blessed are they, whose vnryghteousnes are forgeuen, and whose synnes are couered.
Romans 4:8 Blessed is that man to whome the Lord imputeth not synne.
Romans 4:9 Came thys blessednes then vpon the circumcysed or vpon the vncircumcysed? We say verelye how that fayth was rekened to Abraham for ryghtuousnes.
Romans 4:10 Howe was it rekened: in the tyme of circumcysyon? or in the tyme before he was circumcysed? Not in tyme of circumcisyon: but when he was yet vncircumcysed.
Romans 4:11 And he receyued the sygne of circumcysyon, as a seale of the ryghtuousnes whiche is by fayth, whiche fayth he had yet beynge vncyrcumcysed: that he shoulde be the father of all them that beleue, thoughe they be not circumcysed, that ryghtuousnes myght be imputed to them also:
Romans 4:12 and that he myghte be the father of the circumcysed, not because they are circumcysed only: but because they walke also in the steppes of that faythe that was in oure father Abraham before the tyme of circumcysyon.
Romans 4:13 For the promes that he shoulde be the heyre of the worlde, was not geuen to Abraham or to hys sede thorowe the lawe: but thorow the ryghtuousnesse which commeth of fayth.
Romans 4:14 For yf they whiche are of the lawe, be heyres, then is fayth but vayne, and the promes of none effecte.
Romans 4:15 Because the lawe causeth wrath. For where no lawe is, there is no transgressyon.
Romans 4:16 Therfore by fayth is the inheritaunce geuen, that it myght come of fauoure: and the promes myghte be sure to all the seed. Not to them onelye, which are of the lawe: but also to them whiche are of the fayth of Abraham, which is the father of vs all.
Romans 4:17 As it is written: I haue made the a father to manye nacyons, euen before God whome thou haste beleued, whiche quickeneth the deade, and called those thinges whiche be not, as thoughe they were.
Romans 4:18 Whiche Abraham contrary to hope, beleued in hope that he shoulde be the father of manye nacyons, accordynge to that whiche was spoken.
Romans 4:19 So shall thy seed be. And he fainted not in the fayth, nor yet consydered hys owne bodye which was now dead, euen when he was almost an hondred year olde: neyther yet that Sara was past chylde bearynge.
Romans 4:20 He stackered not at the promes of God thorowe vnbelefe: but was made stronge in the fayth and gaue honoure to God,
Romans 4:21 full certifyed, that what he had promysed, that he was able to make good.
Romans 4:22 And therfore was it reckened to hym for ryghteousnes.
Romans 4:23 It is not wryten for hym only, that it was reckened for hym for ryghteousnes: but also rekened to hym for ryghtuousnes:
Romans 4:24 but also for vs, to whom ye shalbe counted for rightuousnes, so we beleue on hym that raysed vp Iesus oure Lorde from death.
Romans 4:25 Whiche was deliuered for oure synnes and rose agayne for to iustifye vs.

CHAPTER: 5

Romans 5:1 Because therfore that we are iustifyed by fayeth we are at peace wyth God thorowe oure Lorde Iesus Christe
Romans 5:2 by whom we haue a waye in thorowe fayeth vnto thys grace where in we stande & reioye in hope of the prayse that shalbe geuen of God.
Romans 5:3 Nether do we so only: but also we reioice in tribulacion. For we know that tribulation bryngeth pacience,
Romans 5:4 pacience bringeth experience, experience bringeth hope.
Romans 5:5 And hope maketh not ashamed, for the loue of God is sheed abroade in our hertes by the holye ghost, which he is geuen vnto vs.
Romans 5:6 For when we were yet weake accordyng to the tyme: Christ died for vs whiche were vngodly.
Romans 5:7 Yet scrace will anye man dye for a ryghtuouse man. Parauenture for a good man durst a man dye.
Romans 5:8 But God setteth out his loue that he hath to vs, seing that whil we wer yet sinners, Christ died for vs.
Romans 5:9 Much more then now (seing we are iustified in hys bloud) shall we be saued from wrath thorowe hym.
Romans 5:10 For yf when we were enemyes, we were reconciled to God by the death of hys sonne muche more, seynge we are reconciled, we shall be preserued by his lyfe.
Romans 5:11 Not only so, but we also ioy in god by the means of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, by whom we haue receiued the attonment.
Romans 5:12 Wherfore as by one man synne entred into the worlde, and death by the means of synne:
Romans 5:13 And so death went ouer all men, in so much that al men synned. For euen vnto the tyme of the lawe was synne in the worlde, but sinne was not regarded, as long as there was no lawe:
Romans 5:14 neuerthelesse death reygned from Adam to Moyses, euen ouer them also that synned not, with lyke transgression as did Adam: whyche is the similytude of hym that is to come.
Romans 5:15 But the gyfte is not lyke as the synne. For yf thorowe the synne of one, manye be dead: muche more plentuous vpon manye was the grace of God and gyfte by grace: Which grace was geuen by one man Iesus Christe.
Romans 5:16 And the gyfte is not ouer one that sinned. For damnacion came of one synne vnto condemnation but the gyfte came to iustify from many synnes.
Romans 5:17 For if by the synne of one death reygned by the meanes of one: muche more shall they whiche receyue aboundaunce of grace & of the gyfte of ryghtuousnes reigne in life by the meanes of one (that is to saye) Iesus Christe.
Romans 5:18 Lykewyse then as by the synne of one, condemnacion came on al men: euen so by the iustifiyng of one commeth the ryghtuousnes that bryngeth lyfe vpon al men.
Romans 5:19 For as by one mans disobedience many became synners: so by the obedience of one, shall manye be made ryghtuouse.
Romans 5:20 But the law in the meane tyme entred in, that sinne should encreace. Neuerthelater where aboundaunce of synne was, there was more plentuousnes of grace,
Romans 5:21 that as synne had reygned vnto death, euen so myght grace raygne thorow rightuousnes vnto eternall lyfe, by the helpe of Iesus Christe.

CHAPTER: 6

Romans 6:1 What shall we saye then? Shal we continue in synne, that there maye be aboundaunce of grace?
Romans 6:2 God forbide. How shal we that are deade as touchynge synne, lyue any lenger therin?
Romans 6:3 Remembre ye not that al we which are baptised in the name of Iesus Christe, are baptised to dye wyth hym?
Romans 6:4 We are buried wyth hym by baptisme, for to dye that lykewyse as Christe was raysed vp from death by the glorye of the father: euen so we also shoulde walke in a newe lyfe.
Romans 6:5 For yf we be grafted in deathe lyke vnto hym: euen so muste we be in the resurrection.
Romans 6:6 Thys we muste remember, that oure olde man is crucified wyth hym also, that the bodye of synne myght vtterlye be destroyed, that hence forthe we should not be seruauntes of synne.
Romans 6:7 For he that is dead is iustifyed from synne.
Romans 6:8 Wherefore yf we be deade wyth Christe, we beleue that we shall lyue with hym:
Romans 6:9 remembrynge that Christe ones raysed from death, dieth no more, death hath nomore power ouer hym.
Romans 6:10 For as touchynge that he dyed, he died concernynge synne, ones. And as touchinge that he liueth, he liueth vnto God.
Romans 6:11 Lyke wyse ymagyne ye also, that ye are dead concernynge synne: but are a lyue vnto God thorowe Iesus Christe oure Lorde.
Romans 6:12 Lette not synne reygne therefore in youre mortall bodyes, that ye shoulde thereunto obey in the lustes of yt.
Romans 6:13 Neyther geue ye youre members as instrumentes of vnrightuousnes vnto sinne: but geue yourselues vnto god, as they that are aliue from death. And geue your membres as instrumentes of ryghtuousnes vnto God,
Romans 6:14 Let not synne haue power ouer you. For ye are not vnder the lawe, but vnder grace.
Romans 6:15 What then? Shall we synne, because we are not vnder the lawe: but vnder grace? God forbyd.
Romans 6:16 Remember ye not howe that to whomsoeuer ye commit your selues as seruauntes to obey, hys seruauntes ye are to whom ye obey: whether it be of synne vnto death, or of obedience vnto rightuousnes?
Romans 6:17 God be thanked that though ye were ones the seruauntes of synne ye haue yet obeyed with herte vnto the forme of doctrine wherunto ye were delyuered.
Romans 6:18 Ye are then made fre from sinne, & are become the seruauntes of rightuousnes.
Romans 6:19 I will speake grossely because of the infirmitie of youre fleshe. As ye haue geuen your members seruauntes to vnclennes and to iniquitie: from iniquitie vnto iniquitie: euen so now geue your membres seruauntes vnto rightuousnes, that ye may be sanctifyed.
Romans 6:20 For when ye were the seruauntes of synne, ye were not vnder rightuousnes.
Romans 6:21 What fruit had ye then in those thynges, where of ye are nowe ashamed. For the ende of those thynges is deathe.
Romans 6:22 But nowe are ye deliuered from synne, and made the seruauntes of God, and haue youre fruyte that ye shoulde be sanctified, & the ende euerlastynge lyfe.
Romans 6:23 For the rewarde of sinne is death: but eternal lyfe is the gyfte of God, thorow Iesus Christ oure Lorde.

CHAPTER: 7

Romans 7:1 Remembre ye not brethren (I speake to them that knowe the lawe) howe that the lawe hath power ouer a man as longe as yt endureth?
Romans 7:2 For the woman whiche is in subiection to a man, is bounde by the lawe to the man as longe as he liueth. If the man be dead, she is lowsed from the lawe of the man.
Romans 7:3 So then if whyle the man liueth the completh her selfe wyth an other man, she shall be counted a wedlocke breaker. But yf the man be dead, she is fre from the law, so that she is no wedlocke breaker, though she couple her selfe wyth an other man.
Romans 7:4 Euen so ye my brethren, are dead concerning the lawe by the bodye of Christ, that ye shoulde be coupled to another (I meane to hym that is risen agayne from death) that we shoulde brynge forth fruite vnto God.
Romans 7:5 For when we were in the fleshe the lustes of synne whych were sterred vp by the law reygned in oure membres, to brynge forthe fruyte vnto deathe.
Romans 7:6 But nowe are we deliuered from the lawe, & dead from that where vnto we were in bondage, that we should serue in a newe conuersacion of the spirite, and not in the olde conuersacion of the letter.
Romans 7:7 What shall we saye then? Is the lawe synne? God forbid: but I knewe not what synne meante but by the law. For I had not knowne what luste had meant, except the lawe had sayed, thou shalte, not lust.
Romans 7:8 But synne toke an occasion by the meanes of the commaundement, and wrought in me al maner of concupiscence. For without the lawe, synne was dead.
Romans 7:9 I ones liued without lawe. But when the commaundemente came, synne reuyued, & I was deade.
Romans 7:10 And the verye same commaundemente which was ordeyned vnto lyfe, was founde to be vnto me an occasion of death,
Romans 7:11 for synne toke occasion by the meanes of the commaundement and so disceyued me, and by the selfe commaundemente slewe me.
Romans 7:12 Wherfore the lawe is holye and the commaundement holy, iuste and good.
Romans 7:13 Was that then whiche is good, made death vnto me? God forbid. Naye, synne was death vnto me, that yt might appere, howe that synne by the meanes of that which is good, had wrought death in me: that sinne which is vnder the commaundemente, myghte be out of measure synfull.
Romans 7:14 For we knowe that the lawe is spirituall but I am carnal, sold vnder synne,
Romans 7:15 because I wote not what I do. For what. I would do, that I do not: but what I hate, that do I.
Romans 7:16 Yf I do nowe that which I would not. I graunt to the lawe that it is good.
Romans 7:17 So then now, yt is not I that do yt, but sinne that dwelleth in me.
Romans 7:18 For I knowe that in me (that is to saye in my fleshe) dwelleth no good thynge. To wyll is present wyth me: but I fynde no meanes to performe that whiche is good.
Romans 7:19 For I doo not the good thynge whyche I woulde: but that euyll do I which I woulde not.
Romans 7:20 Finallye, if I do that I woulde not, then is yt not I that do it, but synne that dwelleth in me, doeth it.
Romans 7:21 I fynde then by the lawe that when I woulde do good, euyll is present with me.
Romans 7:22 I delite the lawe of God, concernynge the inner man.
Romans 7:23 But I se another lawe in my membres rebellynge agaynst the lawe of my mynde and subduynge me vnto the lawe of synne whyche is in my membres.
Romans 7:24 O wretched man that I am: who shall deliuer me frome this bodye of deathe?
Romans 7:25 I thanke God thorowe Iesus Christe oure Lorde. So then I my selfe in my mynde serue the law of God, & in my flesh the lawe of synne.

CHAPTER: 8

Romans 8:1 There is then no damnation to them which are in Christ Iesu, which walke not after the flesh: but after the spirite.
Romans 8:2 For the law of the spirite that bringeth lyfe through lyfe through Iesus Christe, hath delyuered me from the lawe of synne & death.
Romans 8:3 For what the lawe coulde not do in as much as it was weake because of the fleshe: that performed God, and sente hys sonne in the similitude of synfull fleshe,
Romans 8:4 and by synne dampned synne in the fleshe: that the ryghtuousnes requyred of the law myghte be fulfylled in vs, which walke not after the flesh but after the spirite.
Romans 8:5 For they that are carnally, are carnally mynded. But they that are spirituall, are ghostly minded.
Romans 8:6 To be carnally mynded is death. But to be spiritually minded is lyfe and peace.
Romans 8:7 Because that the fleshlye minde is enemy agaynste God: for it is not obediente to the lawe of God, neyther can be.
Romans 8:8 So then they that are geuen to the fleshe, can not please God.
Romans 8:9 But ye are not geuen to the fleshe, but to the spirite yf so be that the spirite of God dwell in you. Yf there be any man that hath not the spirite of Christ, the same is none of hys.
Romans 8:10 Yf Christe be in you, the bodye is deade because of synne: but the spirite is lyfe for ryghtuousnes sake.
Romans 8:11 Wherfore yf the spirit of him that raysed vp Iesus frome deathe dwell in you, euen he that raysed vp Christe from death shall quicken your mortall bodyes, because that his spirite dwelleth in you.
Romans 8:12 Therfore brethren we are nowe detters not to the fleshe,
Romans 8:13 to lyue after the fleshe. For yf ye liue after the, fleshe, ye muste dye. But if ye mortifye the dedes of the bodye, by the helpe of the spirite, ye shall liue.
Romans 8:14 For as many as are led by the spirite of God:
Romans 8:15 they are the sonnes of God. For ye haue not receiued the spirite of bondage to feare anye more: but ye haue receiued the spirite of adoption, where by we crye Abba father.
Romans 8:16 The same spirite certifieth oure spirite that we are the sonnes of God.
Romans 8:17 Yf we be sonnes, we are also heyres, the heyres I meane of God, and heyres annexed with Christe yf so be that we suffer together, that we maye be glorified together.
Romans 8:18 For I suppose that the afflictions of thys lyfe are not worthy of the glory which shall be shewed vpon vs.
Romans 8:19 Also the feruente desyre of the creatures abydeth lokynge when the sonnes of God shal appere,
Romans 8:20 because the creatures are subdued to vanitie agaynst their wyl but for his will which subdueth them in hope.
Romans 8:21 For the verye creatures shall be deliuered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious libertye of the sonnes of God.
Romans 8:22 For we knowe that euerye creature groneth with vs also & traueyleth in payne euen vnto this tyme.
Romans 8:23 Not they onely, but euen we also which haue the fyrst fruytes of the spirite, mourne in oure selues and wayte for the (adoption) & luke for the deliueraunce of oure bodyes.
Romans 8:24 For we are saued by hope, But hope that is sene is no hope. For howe can a man hope for that which he seyth?
Romans 8:25 But and yf we hope for that we se not, then do we with pacience abyde for yt.
Romans 8:26 Lykewyse the spirite also helpeth our infirmityes. For we knowe not what to desyre as we ought: but the spirite maketh intercession mightelye for vs wyth gronynges whiche can not be expressed with tonge.
Romans 8:27 And he that searcheth the hertes knoweth what is the meanynge of the spirite: for he maketh intercession for the sayntes accordinge to the pleasure of God.
Romans 8:28 For we knowe that all thynges worke for the beste vnto them that loue God, whyche also are called of purpose.
Romans 8:29 For those which he knewe before he also ordeyned before, that they shoulde be like fashioned vnto the shape of hys sonne that he myght be the fyrste begotten sonne amonge manye brethren.
Romans 8:30 More ouer whiche he appointed before, them he also called. And which he called, them also he iustified, whiche he iustified, them he also glorifyed.
Romans 8:31 What shall we then say vnto these thynges? yf God be on oure syde: who can be agaynste vs?
Romans 8:32 whyche spared not his owne sonne but gaue hym for vs all: how shall he not wyth hym geue vs all thynges also?
Romans 8:33 Who shall laye anye thynge to the charg of Goddes chosen? It is God that iustifieth
Romans 8:34 who then shall condempne? It is Christe whyche is dead, ye rather which is rysen agayne, which is also on the right hande of God, and maketh intercession for vs.
Romans 8:35 Who shall seperate vs from the loue of God shall tribulation? or anguyshe? or persecution? othere honger? other nakednesse? other peryll? other swearde?
Romans 8:36 As it is wrytten: For thy sake are we killed al day longe, and are counted as shepe appointed to be slayne.
Romans 8:37 Neuerthelesse in all these thynges we ouercome stronglye thorowe hys helpe that loued vs.
Romans 8:38 Yea and I am sure that neyther death, neither life, neyther angels, nor rule, neythere power, neythere thinges presente, neyther thynges to come,
Romans 8:39 neyther heyght, neyther loweth, neyther any other creature? shall be able to depart vs from the lowe of God, shewed in Christ Iesu our Lord.

CHAPTER: 9

Romans 9:1 I say the trueth in Christe and lye not, in that where of my conscience beareth me wytnes in the holy goste,
Romans 9:2 that I haue great heauines and continuall sorowe in my hert.
Romans 9:3 For I haue wyshed my selfe to be cursed from Christ, for my brethren and my kynsmen (as pertaynynge to the fleshe)
Romans 9:4 whiche are the Israelites. To whom pertayneth the adoption, and the glory, and the couenauntes, & the lawe that was geuen, & the seruice of God, & the promises:
Romans 9:5 whose also are the fathers & they of whom (as concerninge the flesh) Christe came, whiche is God ouer al thynges blessed for euer. Amen.
Romans 9:6 I speake not these thinges as though the wordes of God had taken none effect. For they are not al Israelites whiche came of Israell,
Romans 9:7 neither are they al chyldren strayght way, because they are the seede of Abraham. But in Isaac shall thy seede be called:
Romans 9:8 that is to saye, they whiche are the chyldren of the fleshe, are not the chyldren of God. But the chyldren of promise are counted the seede.
Romans 9:9 For this is a worde of promyse, aboute this tyme wyll I come, and Sara shall haue a sonne.
Romans 9:10 Neither was it so with her onely: but also when Rebecca was wyth childe by one, I meane by oure father Isaac,
Romans 9:11 yer the children were borne, when they had neither done good nor bad: that the purpose of God whiche is by election, might stand, it was sayed vnto her, not by the reason of workes, but by grace of the caller:
Romans 9:12 the elder shall serue the yonger.
Romans 9:13 As it is wrytten: Iacob loued, but Esau he hated.
Romans 9:14 What shall we saye then? is there any vnrightuousnes with God? God forbid.
Romans 9:15 For he sayth to Moyses: I will shewe mercy to whom I shewe mercy: and wyll haue compassion
Romans 9:16 on whom I will haue compassion. So lyeth it not then in a mans wil or cunnynge, but in the mercy of God.
Romans 9:17 For the scripture sayeth vnto Pharao. Euen for this same purpose haue I sterred the vp, to shewe my power on the and that my name myghte be declared thorowout al the worlde.
Romans 9:18 So hath he mercie on whom he wyll, and whom he wyll, he maketh harde herted.
Romans 9:19 Thou wylt saye then vnto me: why then blameth he vs yet? For who can resist hys wyll?
Romans 9:20 But O man, what arte thou whiche disputeste wyth God? Shall the worke saye to the workeman, why haste thou made me on thys fashion?
Romans 9:21 Hath not the potter power ouer the clay euen of the same lumpe to make one vessell vnto honoure, and another vnto dishonoure?
Romans 9:22 Euen so God wyllynge to shewe his wrath, and to make his power knowen, suffered wyth longe pacience the vessels of wrath, ordeined to damnacion,
Romans 9:23 that he myght declare the riches of his glory on the vesseles of mercye, whiche he had prepared vnto glorye:
Romans 9:24 that is to saye, vs whom he called, not of the Iewes only, but also of the gentils.
Romans 9:25 As he sayeth in Osee I wyll call them my people which were not my people: and her beloued which was not beloued.
Romans 9:26 And it shall come to passe in the place where it was sayed vnto them, ye are not my people: that there shalbe called the children of the liuinge God.
Romans 9:27 But Esayas cryeth concernynge Israell, thoughe the nomber of the chyldren of Israel be as the sande of the sea, yet shall a remnaunt be saued.
Romans 9:28 He fynysheth the worde verely, and maketh it shorte in ryghtuousnes. For a short worde wyll God make on earth.
Romans 9:29 And as Esayas sayed before. Excepte the Lorde of Sabaoth had left vs seede, we had bene made as Zodoma, and had ben lykened to Gomorra.
Romans 9:30 What shall we saye then? We saye that the Gentyles which folowed not ryghteousnes haue ouertaken ryghtuousnes: I meane the ryghtuousnes whiche cometh of faythe.
Romans 9:31 But Israell whiche folowed the lawe of rightuousnes, coulde not attayne vnto the lawe of ryghtuousnes.
Romans 9:32 And wherfore? Because they sought it not by fayth: but as it were by the workes of the lawe. For they haue stombled at the stomblynge stone.
Romans 9:33 As it is wrytten. Beholde I put in Syon a stomblyng stone, and a rocke which shall make men faule. And none that beleue on hym, shalbe a shamed.

CHAPTER: 10

Romans 10:1 Bretherne, my hertes desyre, and prayer to God for Israell is that they myghte be saued.
Romans 10:2 For I beare them recorde that they haue a feruent mynde to Godwarde, but not accordynge to knoweledge.
Romans 10:3 For they are ignoraunte of the ryghteousnes whiche is alowed before God, and go aboute to stablish theyr owne ryghtuousnes, and therfore are not obediente vnto the ryghtuousnes whiche is of valoure before God.
Romans 10:4 For Christe is the ende of the lawe, to iustifye all that beleue.
Romans 10:5 Moyses descrybeth the ryghtuousnes whiche cometh of the lawe, howe that the man which doeth the thynges of the lawe, shal liue therein.
Romans 10:6 But the ryghtuousnes which cometh of fayth, speaketh on thys wyse. Saye not in thyne herte who shall ascende into heauen? (that is nothyng els, but to fetch Christ doune)
Romans 10:7 Other who shall descende into the depe? (that is nothynge els, but to fetche vp Christe from death).
Romans 10:8 But what sayeth the scripture? The worde is nye the, euen in thy mouth & in thyne herte. Thys worde is the word of faith which we preache.
Romans 10:9 For yf thou shalt knoweledge with thy mouthe that Iesus is the Lorde, and shalte beleue with thyne herte that God raysed hym vp from death, thou shalte be safe.
Romans 10:10 For the beliefe of the herte iustifyeth: and to knoweledge with the mouth, maketh a man safe.
Romans 10:11 For the scripture sayth whosoeuer beleueth on hym, shall not be ashamed.
Romans 10:12 There is no difference betwene the Iewe, & the gentyll. For one is Lorde of all whiche is ryche vnto all that call on hym.
Romans 10:13 For whosoeuer shall call on the name of the Lorde, shalbe safe.
Romans 10:14 But how shall they call on hym, on whom they beleued not? howe shall they beleue no hym of whom they haue not hearde? howe shall they heare withoute a preacher?
Romans 10:15 And howe shall they preache except they be sent? As it is wrytten: howe beautyfull are the fete of them whiche brynge glad tydynges of peace, and bryng glad tydynges of good thynges.
Romans 10:16 But they haue not all obeyed to the Gospell. For Esayas sayeth: Lorde, who shal beleue oure saiynges?
Romans 10:17 So then fayth cometh by the worde of God.
Romans 10:18 But I axe. Haue they not hearde? No doubte, theyr sounde went out into all landes, and theyr wordes into the endes of the worlde.
Romans 10:19 But I demaund, whether Israel dyd knowe or not? Fyrste Moyses sayth: I will prouoke you for to enuye, by them that are no people, and by a folyshe nacyon I will anger you.
Romans 10:20 Esayas after that is bolde and sayth: I am founde of the, that soughte me not, & haue appeared to them that axed not after me.
Romans 10:21 And agaynste Israell he sayth: All daye long haue I stretched forth my handes vnto a people that beleueth not, but speaketh agaynste me.

CHAPTER: 11

Romans 11:1 I saye then: hath God cast away hys people? God forbyd. For euen I verelye am an Israelite, of the sede of Abraham, and of the trybe of Beniamin,
Romans 11:2 GOD hath not caste awaye hys people whiche he knewe before. Eyther wote ye not what the scripture sayth by the mouth of Helyas, how he maketh intercessyon to God agaynst Israel, saiynge:
Romans 11:3 Lorde they haue killed thy prophetes and dygged downe thyne alters: and I am lefte onelye, and they seke my lyfe?
Romans 11:4 But what sayth the aunswere of God to hym agayne? I haue reserued vnto me seuen thousande men whiche haue not bowed the knee to Baal.
Romans 11:5 Euen so at thys tyme is there a remnaunte left thorow the election of grace.
Romans 11:6 Yf it be of grace, then is it not of workes. For then were grace no more grace. Yf it be of workes, then is it no more grace. For then were deseruynge no lenger deseruynge.
Romans 11:7 What then? Israell hath not obtayned that, that he soughte. No but the electyon hath obtayned it. The remnaunte are blynded,
Romans 11:8 accordynge as it is wrytten. God hath geuen them the spirite of vnquyetnes: eyes that they should not se, and eares that they shoulde not heare euen vnto thys daye.
Romans 11:9 And Dauyd sayth: Let theyr table be made a snare to take them wyth all, and an occasyon to fall, and a reward vnto them.
Romans 11:10 Let theyr eyes be blynded that they se not: and euer bowe doune theyr backes.
Romans 11:11 I saye then: Haue they therfore stombled, that they shoulde but falle onelye? God forbyd: but thorowe theyr fall is saluacyon happened vnto the gentyles for to prouoke them withall.
Romans 11:12 Wherfore yf the fall of them, be the ryches of the worlde: and the minyshynge of them the ryches of the gentyles: Howe much more shoulde it be so, yf they all beleued?
Romans 11:13 I speake to you gentyls, in as much as I am the Apostle of the gentyls: I wil magnify myne offyce,
Romans 11:14 that I myght prouoke them which are my fleshe, and myght saue some of them.
Romans 11:15 For yf the castynge awaye of them, be the reconcilinge of the worlde: what shall the receyuing of them be but lyfe agayne from death?
Romans 11:16 For yf one piece be holye, the whole heape is holy & yf the rose be holy, the braunches are holy also.
Romans 11:17 Thoughe some of the braunches be broken of, and thou beynge a wylde olyue tree, arte grafte in among them, and made partaker of the rote and fatnes of the olyue tree,
Romans 11:18 bost not thy selfe agaynst the braunches. For yf thou boste thy selfe, remember that thou bearest not the rote, but the rote the.
Romans 11:19 Thou wylte saye then: the braunches are broken of, that I might be grafte in.
Romans 11:20 Thou sayeste well: because of vnbelefe they are broken of, & thou standest stedfaste in faythe.
Romans 11:21 Be not hye mynded, but feare seyng that God spared not the naturall braunches, leste happlye he also spare not the.
Romans 11:22 Beholde the kyndnes and rigorousnes of God on them which fell, rygorousnes: but towardes the kyndnes, yf thou contynue in hys kyndnes. Or els thou shalte be hewen of,
Romans 11:23 and yf they byde not styll in vnbelefe, shalbe graffed in agayne. For God is of power to graffe them in agayn.
Romans 11:24 For yf thou wast cut out of a naturall wylde olyue tree, and waste graffed contrary to nature into a true olyue tre, howe muche more shall the naturall braunches be graffed into theyr owne olyue tree agayne.
Romans 11:25 I woulde not that thys secrete shoulde be hyd from you my brethren (leste ye should be wyse in youre owne conceptes) that partelye blyndenes is happened in Israell, vntyll the fulnes of the gentyls be come in:
Romans 11:26 and so al Israel shalbe saued. As it is wrytten: There shal come oute of Syon he that doeth delyuer, and shall turne away the vngodlynes of Iacob.
Romans 11:27 And this is my couenaunte vnto them, when I shall take awaye theyr synnes.
Romans 11:28 As concernynge the Gospell, they are ennemyes for youre sakes: but as touchynge the eleccyon, they are beloued for the fathers sakes.
Romans 11:29 For verelye the giftes and callyng of god are suche, that it cannot repente hym of them,
Romans 11:30 for loke as ye in time passed, haue not beleued God, yet haue nowe obtayned mercy thorow theyr vnbelefe:
Romans 11:31 euen so nowe haue they not beleued the mercye whiche is happened vnto you, that they also maye obtayne mercy.
Romans 11:32 God hath wrapped all nacyons in vnbelefe, that he myght haue mercye on all.
Romans 11:33 O the deapnes of the abundaunte wysedome and knoweledge of God: howe vnsearcheable are his iudgementes, and hys wayes paste fyndynge out?
Romans 11:34 For who hath knoweth the mynde of the Lord? Or who was his counseller?
Romans 11:35 Other who hath geuen vnto hym fyrst that he myghte be recompensed agayne?
Romans 11:36 For of hym, and thorowe hym, and for hym, are all thynges. To hym be glorye for euer. Amen

CHAPTER: 12

Romans 12:1 I beseche you therfore brethren, by the mercyfulnes of God, that ye make your bodyes a quicke sacrifyce holye and acceptable vnto God, which is youre reasonable seruynge of God:
Romans 12:2 And fashyon not youre selues lyke vnto thys worlde. But be ye chaunged in youre shape, by the renuynge of youre wyttes, that ye may fele what thynge that good, that acceptable, and perfect wyll of God is.
Romans 12:3 For I say (thorowe the grace that vnto me geuen is) to euery man among you, that no man esteme of hym selfe more then it becommeth hym to esteme: but that he discretelye iudge of hym selfe, accordynge as GOD hath dealt to euery man the measure of fayth.
Romans 12:4 As we haue many members in one bodye, & all members haue not one offyce:
Romans 12:5 so we beyng many, are one body in Christ & euery man (amonge our selues) one anothers members.
Romans 12:6 Seynge that we haue dyuers gyftes, accordynge to the grace that is geuen vnto vs: yf any man haue the gyft of prophesy, let him haue it that it be agreyng vnto the fayth.
Romans 12:7 Let hym that hath an offyce, wayte on hys office. Let hym that teacheth, take hede to hys doctryne.
Romans 12:8 Let hym that exhorteth, geue attendaunce to hys exhortacyon. Yf any man geue, let hym do it with singlenes. Let him that ruleth do it with diligence. Yf anye man shew mercy let hym do it with cherfulnes.
Romans 12:9 Let loue be without dissimulacyon. Hate that whiche is euyll, and cleaue vnto that which is good.
Romans 12:10 Be kynde one to another with brotherlye loue. In geuynge honoure, go one before another.
Romans 12:11 Let not the busynes whiche ye haue in hande, be tedyous to you. Be feruente in the spirite. Applye youre selues to the time.
Romans 12:12 Reioyce in hope. Be pacyent in trybulacyon. Contynue in prayer.
Romans 12:13 Distribute vnto the necessitie of the Saynctes, and be diligente to harboure.
Romans 12:14 Blesse them whiche persecute you: blesse, but cursse not.
Romans 12:15 Be merye with them that are merye. Wepe with them that wepe.
Romans 12:16 Be of lyke affeccyon one towardes an other. Be not hyghe mynded, but make youre selues equall to them of the lower sorte. Be not wyse in youre owne opinions.
Romans 12:17 Recompence to no man euyll for euyll. Prouyde afore hande thynges honest in the syght of all men.
Romans 12:18 If it be possyble, how be it of your part, haue peace with all men.
Romans 12:19 Derely beloued auenge not youre selues, but geue roume vnto the wrathe of God. For it is wrytten: vengeaunce is myne, and I wyll rewarde sayeth the Lorde.
Romans 12:20 Therfore yf thyne enemye hunger, feede hym: yf he thurste, geue hym drinke, for in so doyng thou shalt heape coles of fyre on hys head.
Romans 12:21 Be not ouercome of euyl: But ouercome euil with goodnesse.

CHAPTER: 13

Romans 13:1 Let euery soule submit him selfe vnto the authoritie of the hygher powers. For there is no power but of God.
Romans 13:2 The powers that be are ordeyned of God. Whosoeuer therfore resisteth power, resisteth the ordinaunce of GOD. And they that resiste, shall receyue to them selfe damnacyon.
Romans 13:3 For rulars are not to be feared for good workes, but for euyll. Wylte thou be wyth oute feare of the power? Do well then: and so shalte thou be praysed of the same.
Romans 13:4 For he is the minister of GOD, for thy welth. But and yf thou do euyll, then feare: for he beareth not a swearde for noughte, but is the minister of God, to take vengeaunce on them that do euyll.
Romans 13:5 Wherfore ye muste nedes obeye, not for feare of vengeaunce onelye, but also because of conscience.
Romans 13:6 And euen for thys cause paye ye trybute. For they are Goddes ministers, seruynge for the same purpose.
Romans 13:7 Geue to euerye man therfore hys dutye: Tribute to whom trybute belongeth: Custome to whom custome is due: feare to whome feare belongeth: Honoure to whom honoure pertayneth.
Romans 13:8 Owe nothynge to anye man: but to loue one another. For he that loueth another, fulfylleth the lawe.
Romans 13:9 For these commaundementes Thou shalte not commyt aduoutrye: Thou shalte not kyll: Thou shalt not steale: Thou shalte not beare false wytnesse: Thou shalte not desyre: and so forth (yf there be anye other commaundente) they are all comprehended in thys saiynge: Loue thyne neyghboure as thy selfe.
Romans 13:10 Loue hurteth not hys neyghbour. Therfore is loue the fulfyllynge of the lawe.
Romans 13:11 Thys also we knowe, I meane the season, howe that it is tyme, that we should now awake oute of slepe. For nowe is oure saluacyon nearer, then when we beleued.
Romans 13:12 The night is passed, and the day is come ny. Let vs therfore caste awaye the dedes of darcknes, & let vs put on the Armoure of lyghte.
Romans 13:13 Let vs walke honestlye as it were in the daye lyght: not in eatynge and drynkynge: neyther in chamburynge and wantonnes, neyther in stryfe & enuiynge:
Romans 13:14 but put ye on the Lorde Iesus Christ. And make not prouysyon for the fleshe, to fulfyll the lustes of it.

CHAPTER: 14

Romans 14:1 Hym that is weake in the fayth, receyue vnto you, not in disputynge and troublyng hys conscience.
Romans 14:2 One beleued that he maye eate all thynge. Another whiche is weake, eateth herbes.
Romans 14:3 Let not hym that eateth, dispyse hym that eateth not. And let not hym whiche eateth not, iudge him that eateth. For God hath receyued hym,
Romans 14:4 What arte thou, that iudgeste another mans seruaunte? Whether he stande or fall that pertayneth vnto hys mayster: yea he shall stande. For God is able to make him stande.
Romans 14:5 Thys man putteth difference betwene day and daye. Another man counted all dayes a lyke. Se that no man wauer in hys owne meanynge.
Romans 14:6 He that obserueth one daye more then another, doth it for the Lordes pleasure. And he that obserueth not one day more then another, doeth it to please the Lorde also. He that eateth, doeth it to please the Lorde, for he geueth God thankes.
Romans 14:7 And he that eateth not, eateth not to please the Lorde with all, & geueth God thankes.
Romans 14:8 For none of vs lyueth his owne seruaunt: neyther doeth anye of vs dye hys owne seruaunte. Yf we lyue, we lyue to be at the Lordes wyll. And yf we dye, we dye at the Lordes wyll. Whether we lyue therfore or dye, we are the Lordes.
Romans 14:9 For Christe therfore dyed, and rose agayne, and reuyued that he myght be Lord both of dead & quicke.
Romans 14:10 But why doest thou then iudge thy brother? Other why doeste thou despyse thy brother? We shall all be brought before the iudgement seate of Christe.
Romans 14:11 For it is wrytten: as truelye as I lyue sayth the Lorde: all knees shall bowe to me, and all tonges shall geue a knowledge to God.
Romans 14:12 So shall euery one of vs, geue accomptes of hym selfe to GOD.
Romans 14:13 Let vs not therfore iudge one another anye more. But iudge thys rather, that no man put a stumblynge blocke or an occasyon to falle in hys brothers waye.
Romans 14:14 For I knowe and am ful certifyed in the Lorde Iesus, that there is nothynge comen of it selfe, but vnto hym that iudgeth it to be commen: to hym is it comen.
Romans 14:15 Yf thy brother be greued with thy meat, now walkest thou not charytablye. Destroye not him with thy meate, for whome Christ dyed.
Romans 14:16 Cause not youre treasure to be euyll spoken of.
Romans 14:17 For the kyngedome of God is not meate and drynke, but ryghtuousnes, peace, & ioye in the holye ghoste.
Romans 14:18 For whosoeuer in these thynges serueth Christe, pleaseth well God, & is commendeth of men.
Romans 14:19 Let vs folowe those thynges which make for peace, and thynges wherewith one maye edifye another.
Romans 14:20 Destroye not the worke of God for a lytell meates sake. All thynges are pure: but it is euyll for that man, whiche eateth with hurte of hys conscience.
Romans 14:21 It is good neyther to eate flesh, neyther to drynke wyne neyther anye thynge whereby thy brother stombleth, eyther falleth, or is made weake.
Romans 14:22 Haste thou faythe? haue it wyth thy selfe before GOD. Happye is he that condempneth not hym selfe in that thynge whiche he aloweth.
Romans 14:23 For he that maketh conscience, is dampned yf he eate, because he doeth it not of faythe. For whatsoeuer is not of faythe, that same is synne.

CHAPTER: 15

Romans 15:1 We whiche are strong, ought to beare the fraylnes of them whiche are weake, and not to stande in our owne conceptes.
Romans 15:2 Let euery man please his neyghboure vnto his wealth and edifiynge.
Romans 15:3 For Christe pleased not hym selfe, but as it is writen: The rebukes of them whiche rebuke the, fell on me.
Romans 15:4 Whatsoeuer thynges are wrytten afore tyme, are wrytten for oure learnyng, that we thorowe pacyence and comforte of the scrypture myght haue hope.
Romans 15:5 The God of pacience and consolatyon, geue vnto euery one of you, that ye be lyke mynded one towardes another after the ensample of Christe Iesu,
Romans 15:6 that ye all agreynge together, maye with one mouthe prayse God the father of oure Lorde Iesus,
Romans 15:7 Wherfore receyue ye on another, as Christe receyued vs, to the prayse of God.
Romans 15:8 And I saye that Iesu Christ was a mynyster of the circumcysyon for the trueth of God is to confyrme the promyses made vnto the fathers.
Romans 15:9 And let the Gentyles prayse God for hys mercye, as it is written: For thys cause I wyll prayse the amonge the Gentyles, & sing in thy name.
Romans 15:10 And agayne he sayth: reioyse ye Gentyles with his people.
Romans 15:11 And agayn. Prayse the Lorde all ye gentyles, and laude hym all nacyons.
Romans 15:12 And in another place Esayas saith: there shalbe the rote of Iesse, and he that shall ryse to reygne ouer the Gentyles: in hym shal the Gentyles truste.
Romans 15:13 The God of hope fil you with all ioye, and peace in beleuynge, that ye maye be ryche in hope thorowe the power of the holye ghoste.
Romans 15:14 I my selfe am full certifyed of you my brethren. that ye your selues are full of goodnes and fylled with all knoweledge, and are able to exhorte one another.
Romans 15:15 Neuerthelesse brethren I haue some what boldelye wrytten vnto you, as one that putteth you in remembraunce thorowe the grace that is geuen me of God,
Romans 15:16 that I should be the minister of Iesu Christe amonge the Gentyles, and should minister the glad tydynges of God, that the gentils myghte be an acceptable offerynge, sanctifyed by the holye ghoste.
Romans 15:17 I haue therfore where of I maye reioyce in Christe Iesu, in those thynges which partayne to God.
Romans 15:18 For I dare not speake of anye of those thynges whiche Christe hath not wrought by me, to make the gentyls obedient, with worde and dede,
Romans 15:19 in myghty sygnes and wonders, by the power of the spirite of God: so that from Hierusalem and the coastes rounde about vnto Illiricum, I haue fylled al countreys with the glad tydynges of Christe.
Romans 15:20 So haue I enforced my selfe to preache the Gospell, not where Christe was named, leste I shoulde haue buylt on another mannes foundacyon:
Romans 15:21 but as it is wrytten: To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see, and they that heard not, shall vnderstande.
Romans 15:22 For thys cause I haue ben ofte let to come vnto you:
Romans 15:23 but nowe seyng I haue no more to do in these countreys, & also haue ben desyrous manye yeares to come vnto you,
Romans 15:24 when I shall take my iorneye into Spayne, I wyll come to you. I truste to set you in my iourneye, and to be broughte on my way thytherwarde by you after that I haue somwhat enioyed you.
Romans 15:25 Now go I vnto Hierusalem, and ministre vnto the saynctes.
Romans 15:26 For it hath pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certayne distribution vpon the pore saynctes, whiche are at Hierusalem.
Romans 15:27 It hath pleased them verely, and theyr detters are they. For yf the gentyles be made partakers of theyr spirituall thynges, theyr dutye is to ministre vnto them in carnall thynges.
Romans 15:28 When I haue perfourmed thys, and haue broughte them thys frute sealed. I wyll come backe agayne by you into Spayne.
Romans 15:29 And I am sure when I come, that I shall come with aboundaunce of the blessinge of the Gospell of Christe.
Romans 15:30 I beseche you brethren for oure Lorde Iesus Christes sake, and for the loue of the spyryte, that ye healpe me in my busynes, with your prayers to God for me,
Romans 15:31 that I maye be delyuered from them whiche beleue not in Iewry, and that thys my seruyce, whiche I haue to Hierusalem, maye be accepted of the saynctes,
Romans 15:32 that I maye come vnto you wyth ioye, by the wyll of God, and maye with you be refreshed.
Romans 15:33 The God of peace be with you. Amen.

CHAPTER: 16

Romans 16:1 I commende vnto you Phebe our syster (whiche is a minister of the congregacion of Cenchrea)
Romans 16:2 that ye receyue her in the Lorde as it becommeth saynctes, & that ye assiste her in whatsoeuer busynes she neadeth of youre ayde. For she hath suckered many, & myne owne selfe also.
Romans 16:3 Grete Prisca & Aquyla my helpers in Christe Iesu,
Romans 16:4 whiche haue for my lyfe layde doune theyr owne neckes. Vnto which not I onlye geue thankes, but also the congregacyon of the gentyls.
Romans 16:5 Lykewyse grete all the companye that is in her house. Salute my welbeloued Epenetos, whiche is the fyrst frute amonge them of Achaia.
Romans 16:6 Grete Marye whiche bestowed much laboure on vs.
Romans 16:7 Salute Andronicus and Iunia my cosyns, whiche were prysoners with me also, which are well taken among the Apostles, and were in christ before me.
Romans 16:8 Grete Amplias my beloued in the Lorde.
Romans 16:9 Salute Vrban oure helper in Christ, & Stachys my beloued.
Romans 16:10 Salute Appelles approued in Christ. Salute them whiche are of Aristobolus housholde.
Romans 16:11 Salute Herodion my kynsman. Grete them of the houshold of Narcissus whiche are in the Lorde.
Romans 16:12 Salute Tryphena and Triphosa, whiche women dyd laboure in the Lorde. Salute the beloued Persis, which laboured in the Lorde.
Romans 16:13 Salute Rufus chosen in the Lorde, and hys mother and myne.
Romans 16:14 Grete Asincritus, Phlegon, Herman, Patrobas, Hermen, and the brethren whiche are with them.
Romans 16:15 Salute Philologus & Iulia, Nereus and hys syster, and Olympha, and all the saynctes whiche are with them.
Romans 16:16 Salute one another with an holye kysse. The congregacyons of Christe salute you.
Romans 16:17 I beseche you brethren, marke them which cause diuisyon, and geue occasyons of euyl, contrary to the doctryue which ye haue learned: and auoyd them.
Romans 16:18 For they that are such, serue not the Lorde Iesus Christ: but theyr owne bellyes, and with swete preachynges & flatterynge wordes deceyue the hertes of the innocentes.
Romans 16:19 For youre obedience extendeth to all men I am glad no doubte of you. But yet I woulde haue you wyse vnto that whiche is good, and to be innocent as concernyng euill.
Romans 16:20 The God of peace treade Sathan vnder your fete shortelye. The grace of oure Lorde Iesu Christe be with you.
Romans 16:21 Timotheus my worcke felowe and Lucyos and Iason and Sosipater my kynsmen, salute you.
Romans 16:22 I Tertius salute you, whiche wrote thys Epistle in the Lorde.
Romans 16:23 Gayus myne hoste and the hoste of all the congregacion, saluteth you. Erastus the chamberlayne of the citie saluteth you. And Quartus a brother, saluteth you.
Romans 16:24 The grace of oure Lorde Iesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
Romans 16:25 To hym that is of power to stablysh you, accordynge to my Gospell and preachinge of Iesus Christe, in vtterynge of the mysterye whiche was kepte secrete sence the worlde began,
Romans 16:26 but nowe is opened by the scriptures of prophesye, at the commaundemente of the euerlastynge God, to stere vp obedience to the fayth publyshed among all nacions:
Romans 16:27 To the same God, which alone is wyse, be all prayse thorowe Iesus Christe for euer. AMEN.

BOOK: 1 Corinthians

CHAPTER: 1

1 Corinthians 1:1 Paule by vocacyon an Apostle of Iesus Christe thorow the wyll of God, & brother Sostenes.
1 Corinthians 1:2 Vnto the congregacyon of GOD whiche is at Corinthum. To them that are sanctifyed in Christ Iesu, saynctes by callyng with al that call on the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christe in euerye place, bothe of theyrs and of oures.
1 Corinthians 1:3 Grace be with you and peace from God oure father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christ.
1 Corinthians 1:4 I thanke my God alwayes on youre behalfe, for the grace of God whiche is geuen you by Iesus Christ,
1 Corinthians 1:5 that in all thynges ye are made ryche by hym, in all learnynge and in al knoweledge
1 Corinthians 1:6 euen as the testimony of Iesus Christ was confyrmed in you,
1 Corinthians 1:7 so that ye are behynd in no gyfte, and wayte for the appearynge of oure Lorde Iesus Christe,
1 Corinthians 1:8 which shal strength you vnto the ende, that ye may be blamelesse in the daye of oure Lorde Iesus Christ.
1 Corinthians 1:9 For God is faythfull, by whome ye are called vnto to the felowshyppe of hys sonne Iesus Christ oure Lorde.
1 Corinthians 1:10 I beseche you brethren in the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, that ye all speake one thynge, and that there be no dissencyon amonge you: but be ye knyt together in one mynde, and in one meanynge.
1 Corinthians 1:11 It is shewed vnto me (my brethren) of you, by them that are of the housse of Cloe, that there is stryfe amonge you. And thys is it that I meane,
1 Corinthians 1:12 how that communly among you, one saith: I hold of Paul, another I holde of Apollo, the thyrd I holde of Cephas, the fourth I holde of Christ.
1 Corinthians 1:13 Is Christe diuided? was Paule crucifyed for you? eyther were ye baptysed in the name of Paule?
1 Corinthians 1:14 I thanke God, that I christened none of you, but Crispus & Gaius,
1 Corinthians 1:15 lest any should say that I had baptysed in myne own name.
1 Corinthians 1:16 I baptysed also the housholde of Stephana. Furthermore knowe I not whether I baptysed anye man or no.
1 Corinthians 1:17 For Christe sente me not to baptyse, but to preache the gospel, not with wysdom of wordes leaste the crosse of Christe shoulde haue bene made of none effecte.
1 Corinthians 1:18 For the preachyng of the crosse is to them that peryshe folyshnes, but vnto vs whiche are saued, it is the power of God.
1 Corinthians 1:19 For it is written: I will destroye the wysdome of the wyse, and wyll caste awaye the vnderstandinge of the prudent.
1 Corinthians 1:20 Where is the wyse? Where is the scribe? Where is the searcher of this worlde?
1 Corinthians 1:21 Hath not God made the wysdome of thys worlde folyshnes? For when the world thorough wysdome knewe not God, in the wisdom of God, it pleased God thorough folishnes of preachynge to saue them that beleue.
1 Corinthians 1:22 For the Iewes require a signe, and the Grekes seke after wisdom.
1 Corinthians 1:23 But we preache Christe crucifyed vnto the Iewes an occasion of fallinge, and vnto the Grekes folishnes,
1 Corinthians 1:24 but vnto them, whiche are called both of Iewes and Grekes we preache Christe the power of God, and the wisdome of God.
1 Corinthians 1:25 For the folyshnes of God is wyser then men, and the weaknes of God is stronger then men.
1 Corinthians 1:26 Brethren loke on youre callinge howe that not manye wyse men after the fleshe, not manie myghty, not manye of hye degre are called:
1 Corinthians 1:27 but God had chosen the folyshe thynges of the worlde, to confounde the wise. And God hath chosen the weake thinges of the worlde, to confounde thynges, whyche are myghty.
1 Corinthians 1:28 And vile thinges of the world, and thinges whiche are despysed, hath God chosen, yea and thinges of no reputation for to bringe to nought thinges of reputation,
1 Corinthians 1:29 that no flesh shoulde reioise in his presence.
1 Corinthians 1:30 And vnto him partaine ye in Christe Iesus, whiche of God is made to vs wysdome, and also rightuousnes, and sanctifiynge and redemption.
1 Corinthians 1:31 That accordynge as it is written: he whiche reioiseth should reioyse in the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 2

1 Corinthians 2:1 And I brethren when I came to you, came not in gloriousnes of wordes, or of wysdome, shewynge vnto you the testimonye of God.
1 Corinthians 2:2 Neither shewed I my selfe that I knew any thinge amonge you saue Iesus Christe, euen the same that was crucified.
1 Corinthians 2:3 And I was amonge you in weaknes, & in feare and in muche tremblinge.
1 Corinthians 2:4 And my wordes and my preachinge were not wyth entisynge wordes of mannes wysdome but in shewinge of the spirite, and of power,
1 Corinthians 2:5 that youre fayth shoulde not stande in the wysdome of men, but in the power of God.
1 Corinthians 2:6 That we speake of, is wisdome amonge that are perfecte: not the wisdome of this world (whiche go to nought)
1 Corinthians 2:7 but we speake that wysdome of God, whiche is in secrete and lyeth hyd, whiche God ordeined before the world vnto oure glory,
1 Corinthians 2:8 whiche wisdome none of the rulars of this worlde knewe. For had they knowen it, they would not haue crucified the Lorde of Glorye.
1 Corinthians 2:9 But as it was written: The eye hath not sene, and the eare hath not hearde, neither haue entred into the herte of man the thinges, which God hath prepared for them that loue him.
1 Corinthians 2:10 But God hath opened them to vs by hys spirite. For the spirite searcheth al thinges, ye the bottome of Goddes secretes.
1 Corinthians 2:11 For what man knoweth the thynges of a man, saue the spyryte of a man, whiche is wythin him. Euen so the thinges of God knoweth no man, but the spirite of God.
1 Corinthians 2:12 And we haue not receiued the spirite of the world: but the spyryte whiche cometh of God, for to knowe the thinges, that are geuen to vs of God,
1 Corinthians 2:13 which thinges also we speake, not in the conninge wordes of mannes wysdome, but wyth the conning wordes of the holye ghost, makinge spyritual comparisons of spirituall thinges.
1 Corinthians 2:14 For the naturall man perceiueth not the thinges of the spyrite of God. For they are but folishnes vnto him. Neither can he perceiue them, because he is spiritually examined.
1 Corinthians 2:15 But he that is spyrytuall, discusseth all thinges: yet he hym selfe is iudged of no man.
1 Corinthians 2:16 For who knoweth the minde of the Lorde? other who shall informe him? But we vnderstand the minde of Christ.

CHAPTER: 3

1 Corinthians 3:1 And I coulde not speake vnto you brethren as vnto spiritual, but as vnto carnal, euen as it were to babes in Christ:
1 Corinthians 3:2 I gaue you milke to drinke, & not meat. For ye then were not stronge, no neyther yet are. For ye are yet carnall.
1 Corinthians 3:3 As longe verelye as there is amonge you enuiynge, stryfe and dissencion: are ye not carnall, and walke after the maner of men?
1 Corinthians 3:4 As long as one sayeth, I holde of Paul, and another I am of Apollo, are ye not carnall?
1 Corinthians 3:5 What is Paule? What thinge is Apollo? Dulye ministres are they, by whom ye beleued, euen as the Lorde gaue euerye man grace.
1 Corinthians 3:6 I haue planted, Apollo watred: but God gaue the increase.
1 Corinthians 3:7 So then neyther is he that planteth anye thinge neyther he that watreth: but God that gaue the increase.
1 Corinthians 3:8 He that planteth and he that wathereth, are neither better then the other. Euerye man yet shall receyue hys rewarde accordynge to hys laboure.
1 Corinthians 3:9 We are Goddes labourer, ye are Goddes husbandrye ye are Goddes buyldinge.
1 Corinthians 3:10 According to the grace of God geuen vnto me, as a wyse buylder haue I layde the foundation. And another buylte theron. But let euery man take hede how he buildeth vpon.
1 Corinthians 3:11 For other foundation can no man laie, then that whiche is layde, whiche is Iesus Christ.
1 Corinthians 3:12 Yf any man buylde on this foundacion, golde, syluer, precyous stones timber, haye or stobble:
1 Corinthians 3:13 euerye mans worke shall appeare. For the daye shal declare it, & it shalbe shewed in fyre. And the fyre shall trye euery mannes worke, what it is.
1 Corinthians 3:14 Yf any mannes worke that he hath buylt vpon, byde: he shall receiue a rewarde.
1 Corinthians 3:15 If any mannes worke burne, he shall suffer losse: but he shalbe safe him selfe: neuerthelesse yet as it were thorow fyre.
1 Corinthians 3:16 Are ye not ware that ye are the temple of God, and how that the spyryte of God dwelleth in you?
1 Corinthians 3:17 Yf anye man defyle the temple of God him shall God destroy. For the temple of God is holy, whyche temple ye are.
1 Corinthians 3:18 Let no man deceyue hym selfe. Yf anye man seme, wyse amonge you, let hym be a fole in thys worlde that he maye be wyse.
1 Corinthians 3:19 For the wysdome of this worlde is folyshnes wyth God. For it is wrytten: he compaseth the wyse in theyr craftynes.
1 Corinthians 3:20 And agayne, God knoweth the thoughtes of the wyse that they be vayne.
1 Corinthians 3:21 Therfore let no man reioice in men. For all thinges are youres
1 Corinthians 3:22 whether it be Paule, other Apollo, other Cephas: whether it be the world, other lyfe, other deathe, whether they be present thynges or thinges to come: all are youres,
1 Corinthians 3:23 and ye are Christes & Christ is Gods.

CHAPTER: 4

1 Corinthians 4:1 Let men thus wyse esteme vs, euen as the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secretes of of God.
1 Corinthians 4:2 Furthermore it is requyred of the dysposers, that they be found faithfull.
1 Corinthians 4:3 Wyth me it is but a very smal thinge, that I shoulde be iudged of you, eyther of (mans daye). No I iudge not myne owne selfe.
1 Corinthians 4:4 I knowe nought by my selfe: yet am I not therby iustified. It is the Lorde that iudgeth me.
1 Corinthians 4:5 Therfore iudge nothinge before the tyme vntill the Lorde come, who wyll lyghten thinges, that are hyd in darckenes, and open the counsels of the hertes. And then shall euery man haue praise of God.
1 Corinthians 4:6 These thinges brethren I haue described in myne owne person and Apollos for youre sakes, that ye myght learne by vs, that no man counte of him selfe beionde that, which is aboue written: that one swell not against another for anye mans cause.
1 Corinthians 4:7 For who preferreth the? What haste thou, that thou hast not receyued? Yf thou haue receyued it ewhy reioyseste thou as thoughe thou haddeste not receiued it?
1 Corinthians 4:8 Now ye are ful: now ye are made rych: ye reigne as kinges without vs: and I would to God ye dyd reygne that we might reygne wyth you.
1 Corinthians 4:9 Me thinketh that God hath sente forth vs, which are Apostles for the lowest, of al as it were men appointed to death. For we are a gasyng stoke vnto the world, and to the aungels, and to men.
1 Corinthians 4:10 We are foles for Christes sake and ye are wise thorow Christe. We are weake, and ye are stronge. Ye are honorable, and we are despised.
1 Corinthians 4:11 Euen vnto this daye we honger and thyrst, and are naked, and are boffetted wyth fystes, and haue no certayne dwellinge place,
1 Corinthians 4:12 and labour workinge wyth oure handes. We are reuiled, & yet we blesse. We are persecuted and suffer it.
1 Corinthians 4:13 We are euyl spoken of and we pray. We are made as it were the filthines of the worlde, the ofscowring of all thynges, euen vnto this time.
1 Corinthians 4:14 I wryte not these thinges to shame you but as my beloued sonnes I warne you.
1 Corinthians 4:15 For thoughe ye haue ten thousand instructours in Christ: yet haue ye not many fathers. In Christe Iesu, I haue begotten you thorowe the Gospell.
1 Corinthians 4:16 Wherfore I desyre you to folowe me.
1 Corinthians 4:17 For this cause haue I sent vnto you Tymotheus, which is my deare sonne, and faithfull in the Lorde, whiche shall put you in remembraunce of my waies, whiche I haue in Christ euen as I teache euery wher in all congregations.
1 Corinthians 4:18 Some swell as though, I would come no more at you.
1 Corinthians 4:19 But I wil come to you shortly yf God wil: and will knowe not the wordes of them, which swel, but the power,
1 Corinthians 4:20 for the kyngdom of God is not in wordes, but in power.
1 Corinthians 4:21 What wyll ye? Shall I come vnto you with a rodde, or els in loue and in the spyryte of mekenes?

CHAPTER: 5

1 Corinthians 5:1 There goeth a commen, saiynge: that there is fornicacion amonge you, and such fornication as is not ones named amonge the Gentiles: that one should haue his fathers wyfe.
1 Corinthians 5:2 And ye swell and haue not rather sorowed, that he whiche hath done this dede, myght be put from amonge you.
1 Corinthians 5:3 For I verelye as absent in bodye, euen so present in spirite, haue determined alredye (as though I were present) that he that hath done this dede,
1 Corinthians 5:4 in the name of oure Lord Iesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, in my spyryte, wyth the power of the Lorde Iesus Christe,
1 Corinthians 5:5 be delyuered vnto Sathan, for the destruccion of the fleshe, that the spirite maye be saued in the daye of the Lorde Iesus.
1 Corinthians 5:6 Your reioysing is not good: knowe ye not that a lytle leuen sowreth the whole lompe of dowe.
1 Corinthians 5:7 Pourge therfore the olde leuen, that ye may be new dowe, as ye are swete bread. For Christ oure easterlambe is offered vp for vs.
1 Corinthians 5:8 Therfore let vs kepe holy daye, not wyth olde leuen, neither with the leuen of malycyousnes and wyckednes, but with the swete bread of purenes and trueth.
1 Corinthians 5:9 I wrote vnto you in an Epystle that ye shoulde not companye wyth fornicatours.
1 Corinthians 5:10 And I meant not at al of the fornicatours of this worlde, eyther of the couetous, or of extorsioners, eyther of the ydolaters: for then muste ye nedes haue gone oute of the world.
1 Corinthians 5:11 But nowe I writte vnto you, that ye companye not together, if anie that is called a brother be a fornicatour, or couetous, or a worshiper of ymages, eyther a raylar, either a drounkard, or an extorcionar: with him that is such, se that ye eate not.
1 Corinthians 5:12 For what haue I to do, to iudge them which are without? Do ye not iudge them, that are within?
1 Corinthians 5:13 Them that are wythout, God shal iudge. Put awaye from amonge you, that euyl person.

CHAPTER: 6

1 Corinthians 6:1 Howe dare one of you hauynge busines wyth another, go to law vnder the wycked, and not rather vnder the sainctes?
1 Corinthians 6:2 Do ye not knowe that the sainctes shall iudge the worlde? Yf the world shal be iudged by you: are ye not good ynoughe to iudge smal tryfles:
1 Corinthians 6:3 know ye not how that we shal iudge the aungels? Howe much more maye we iudge thinges that pertayne to the lyfe?
1 Corinthians 6:4 Yf ye haue iudgementes of worldlye matters, take them whiche are despised in the congregacion, and make them iudges.
1 Corinthians 6:5 Thys I saye to youre shame. Is there vtterlye no wyse man amonge you. What, not one at al, that can iudge betwene brother and brother,
1 Corinthians 6:6 but one brother goeth to lawe with another, and that vnder the vnbeleuers?
1 Corinthians 6:7 Nowe therfore, there is vtterlye a faute amonge you, because ye go to law one wyth another. Why rather suffer ye not wronge? Why rather suffre ye not youre selues to be robbed?
1 Corinthians 6:8 naye, ye youre selues do wronge, and robbe: and that the brethren.
1 Corinthians 6:9 Do ye not remembre, howe that the vnrightuous shall not inheret the kyngdome of God? Be not deceyued. For neither fornicatours, neither worshipers of ymages, neither whormongers, neyther weaklinges, neither abusers of them selues wyth the mankynde,
1 Corinthians 6:10 neither theues, neythe couetous, neither dronkardes, neither cursed speakers, neither pyllars, shall inherete the kyngedome of God.
1 Corinthians 6:11 And suche were ye verelye, but ye are washed, ye are sanctifyed, ye are iustifyed by the name of the Lorde Iesus, and by the spyryte of our God.
1 Corinthians 6:12 All thinges are lawfull vnto me: but all thinges are not profitable. I may do all thynges, but I wil be brought vnder no mans power,
1 Corinthians 6:13 Meates are ordeyned for the belly, and the belly for meates, but God shall destroye both it and them. Let not the bodye be applied vnto fornication, but vnto the Lorde, and the Lorde vnto the body.
1 Corinthians 6:14 God hath raysed vp the Lorde, and shal rayse vs vp by his power.
1 Corinthians 6:15 Either remembre ye not, that youre bodyes are the membres of Christe, shal I now take the membres of Christ, and make them the membres of an harlotte? God forbid.
1 Corinthians 6:16 Do ye not vnderstande, that he whiche coupleth him selfe with an harlot, is become one body? For two (sayth he) shalbe one flesh.
1 Corinthians 6:17 But he that is ioyned vnto the Lorde, is one spyryte.
1 Corinthians 6:18 Fle fornycatyon. Al synnes that a man doth, are without the body. But he that is a fornicatour, sinneth agaynst his owne bodye.
1 Corinthians 6:19 Either knowe ye not howe that youre bodies are the temple of the holye ghoste, whyche is in you, whome ye haue of God, and how that ye are not your owne?
1 Corinthians 6:20 For ye are dearlye boughte. Therfore glorifye ye God in youre bodyes, and in youre spyrytes, for they are Goddes.

CHAPTER: 7

1 Corinthians 7:1 As concerninge, wherof ye wrote vnto me, it is good for a man, not to touche a woman.
1 Corinthians 7:2 Neuerthelesse to avoide fornication, let euery man haue his wyfe: and let euerye woman haue her husbande.
1 Corinthians 7:3 Let the man geue vnto the wyfe due beneuolence. Lykewyse also the wyfe vnto the man.
1 Corinthians 7:4 The wyfe hath not power ouer her owne bodie, but the husbande. And lykewyse the man hath not power ouer his owne bodye, but the wyfe.
1 Corinthians 7:5 Withdrawe not your selues one from another, excepte it be wyth consente for a tyme, for to geue your selues to fastinge, and prayer. And afterward come agayne to the same thinge, leste Sathan tempte you for your incontinencye.
1 Corinthians 7:6 Thys I saye of fauoure, and not of commaundement.
1 Corinthians 7:7 For I woulde that all men were as I my selfe am: but euerie man hath hys proper gyfte of God, one after this maner, another after that.
1 Corinthians 7:8 I saye vnto the vnmaryed men and wyddowes: it is good for them, if they abyed euen as I do.
1 Corinthians 7:9 But and if they cannot abstayne, let them mary. For it is better to mary, then burne.
1 Corinthians 7:10 Vnto the maryed commaunded not I but the Lorde: that the wyfe separate not her selfe from the man.
1 Corinthians 7:11 Yf she separate her selfe, let her remayne vnmaryed, or be reconcilied to her husband againe. And let not the husband put away his wife from him.
1 Corinthians 7:12 To the remnaunte speake I and not the Lord. Yf anye brother haue a wyfe that beleued not, if she be contente to dwel with hym, let him not put her awaye.
1 Corinthians 7:13 And the woman, which hath to her husband an infidele, if he consente to dwell with her, let her not put him awaie.
1 Corinthians 7:14 For the vnbeleuinge husbande, is sainctified by the wyfe: and the vnbeleuinge wife, is sainctified by the husbande. Or els were youre chyldren vnclene: but nowe are they pure.
1 Corinthians 7:15 But and if the vnbeleuinge departe, let him departe. A brother or a syster is not in subieccion to suche. God hath called vs in peace.
1 Corinthians 7:16 For howe knowest thou O woman, whether thou shalt saue that man or no? Other howe knoweste thou O man, whether thou shalt saue that woman or no?
1 Corinthians 7:17 but euen as God hath distributed to euery man. As the Lorde hath called euery person so let him walke: and so ordeine I in all congregations.
1 Corinthians 7:18 If any man be called beynge circumcised, let him adde nothing thereto. If any be called vncircumcised: let him not be circumcised.
1 Corinthians 7:19 Circumcison is nothinge, vncircumcision is nothinge, but the kepinge of the commaundementes of God is altogether.
1 Corinthians 7:20 Let euery man abyde in the same state, wherin he is called.
1 Corinthians 7:21 Art thou called a seruauntes, care not for it. Neuertheles if thou maiest be fre, vse it rather.
1 Corinthians 7:22 For he that is called in the Lord beynge a seruaunte, is the Lordes freman. Lykewyse he that is called beynge fre, is Christes seruaunte.
1 Corinthians 7:23 Ye are dearlye bought, be not mennes seruauntes.
1 Corinthians 7:24 Brethren let euery man wherin he is called, therin abide with God.
1 Corinthians 7:25 As concerninge virgins, I haue no commaundemente of the Lorde: yet geue I counsel, as one that hath obteyned mercy of the Lord to be faithfull.
1 Corinthians 7:26 I suppose that it is good for the presente necessitie. For it is good for a man so to be.
1 Corinthians 7:27 Arte thou bounde vnto a wife? seke not to be loused. Arte thou loused from a wife? seke not a wife.
1 Corinthians 7:28 But and if thou take a wyfe, thou sinnest not. Lykewise if a virgine mary: she sinneth not. Neuerthelesse such shal haue trouble in theyr fleshe: but I fauoure you.
1 Corinthians 7:29 This saye I brethren the tyme is short. It remaineth that they which haue wiues, be as though they had none,
1 Corinthians 7:30 and they that wepe be as though they wept not, and they that reioyse be as though they reioysed not: & they that bye, be as though they possessed not:
1 Corinthians 7:31 and they that vse this worlde, be as though they vsed it not. For the fashion of this world goeth away.
1 Corinthians 7:32 I would haue you without care. The single man careth for the thinges of the Lorde howe he maye please the Lorde.
1 Corinthians 7:33 But he that hath maried, careth for the thinges of the worlde howe he may please his wyfe.
1 Corinthians 7:34 There is difference betwene a virgine and a wyfe. The single woman careth for the thinges of the Lorde, that she maye be pure both in bodye and also in spyryte. But she that is maried, careth for the thinges of the worlde, howe she maye please her husbande.
1 Corinthians 7:35 This speake I for youre profite, not to tangel you in a snare, but for that whiche is honeste and comely vnto you, and that ye maye quietly cleaue vnto the Lorde without separacion.
1 Corinthians 7:36 If anye man thinke that it is vncomelye for his virgine if we passe the tyme of mariage, and yf so nede require, let hym do what he listeth, he sinneth not: let them be coupled in mariage.
1 Corinthians 7:37 Neuerthelesse, he that purposeth surely in his herte, hauing none nede, but hath power ouer his owne wyll, and hath so decreed in his herte that he wyl kepe his virgin, doeth well. So then he that ioyneth his virgine in mariage doeth well.
1 Corinthians 7:38 But he that ioyneth not his virgine in mariage doeth better.
1 Corinthians 7:39 The wife is bounde to the lawe as longe as her husband liueth. If her husbande slepe, she is at libertye to mary with whome she wyll, onely in the Lorde.
1 Corinthians 7:40 But she is happyer if she so abyde, in my iudgemente. And I thinke verely that I haue the spirite of God.

CHAPTER: 8

1 Corinthians 8:1 To speake of thinges dedicate vnto Idols, we are sure that we all haue knowledge, knowledge maketh a man swel, but loue edyfyeth.
1 Corinthians 8:2 If anye man thinke that he knoweth anie thinge, he knoweth nothinge yet as he ought to knowe.
1 Corinthians 8:3 But yf anye man loue God, the same is knowen of hym.
1 Corinthians 8:4 To speake of meate dedicate vnto Idols, we are sure that there is none Idol in the world and that there is none other God but one.
1 Corinthians 8:5 And though there be that are called Goddes, whether in heauen other in earthe (as there be Goddes manye and Lordes manye)
1 Corinthians 8:6 yet vnto vs is there but one God, whiche is the father, of whom are al thinges, and we in him: and one Lorde Iesus Christ, by whom are all thinges, and we by hym.
1 Corinthians 8:7 But euery man hath not knowledge. For some suppose that there is an Idole, vntyll this houre, and eate as of a thinge offered vnto the Idole, and so their consciences beynge yet weake are defyled.
1 Corinthians 8:8 Meate maketh vs not acceptable to God. Neither yf we eate are we the better. Neither, yf we eate not, are we the worsse.
1 Corinthians 8:9 But take hede that your libertye cause not the weake to faule.
1 Corinthians 8:10 For yf some man se the, whiche hast knowledge, syt at meate in the Idoles temple, shall not the conscience of him which is weake, be boldened to eate those thinges, whiche are offered vnto the Idole?
1 Corinthians 8:11 And so thorowe thy knowledge shal the weake brother perishe for whom Christ dyed.
1 Corinthians 8:12 When ye synne so againste the brethren, and wound theyr weake consciences, ye synne agaynste Christe.
1 Corinthians 8:13 Wherfore yf meate hurte my brother, I wyll eate no fleshe, whyle the worlde standeth, because I wyll not hurte my brother.

CHAPTER: 9

1 Corinthians 9:1 Am I not an Apostle? am I not free? haue I not sene Iesus Christ our Lorde?
1 Corinthians 9:2 Are not ye my worke in the Lorde? Yf I be not an Apostle vnto other, yet am I vnto you. For the seale of myne Apostleshyppe are ye in the Lord.
1 Corinthians 9:3 Mine aunswere to them that axe me, is this.
1 Corinthians 9:4 Haue we not power to eate, and to drinke?
1 Corinthians 9:5 Either haue we not power to leade aboute a syster to wyfe as well as other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas?
1 Corinthians 9:6 Either onely I and Barnabas haue not power this to do?
1 Corinthians 9:7 who goeth a warfare anye time at hys owne cost? Who planteth a vineiarde, and eateth not of the fruite? Who fedeth a flocke and eateth not of the mylke?
1 Corinthians 9:8 Saye I these thinges after the maner of men? Or sayeth not the lawe the same also?
1 Corinthians 9:9 For it is written in the lawe of Moyses. Thou shalt not mosell the mouth of the oxe that treadeth out the corne. Doeth God take thought for oxen?
1 Corinthians 9:10 Either saith he it not altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubte this is written: that he whiche eareth, shoulde eare in hope: & that he whych thresheth in hope, should be partaker of hys hope.
1 Corinthians 9:11 Yf we sowe vnto you spyrytuall thinges: is it a great thinge yf we reape youre carnall thinges.
1 Corinthians 9:12 Yf other be partakers of this power ouer you: wherfore are not we rather? Neuerthelesse we haue not vsed thys power but suffer all thinges leste we shoulde hinder the Gospell of Christe
1 Corinthians 9:13 Do ye not vnderstande howe that they whiche minister in the temple, haue their fyndynge of the temple? And they whych wayte at the aulter, are partakers of the aulter?
1 Corinthians 9:14 Euen so also dyd the Lord ordaine, that they which preach the Gospel, shoulde lyue of the Gospell.
1 Corinthians 9:15 But I haue vsed none of these thinges. Neither wrote I these thinges, that it should be so done vnto me. For it were better for me to dye, then that anye shoulde take this reioysinge from me.
1 Corinthians 9:16 In that I preache the Gospel, I haue nothinge to reioyce of. For necessytye is put vnto me. Wo is it vnto me yf I preach not the Gospel.
1 Corinthians 9:17 Yf I do it wyth a good wil, I haue a rewarde. But yf I do it against my wyl, an offyce is committed vnto me.
1 Corinthians 9:18 What is my reward then? Verelye, that when I preache the Gospell, I make the Gospell of Christ fre, that I misuse not myne authoryte in the Gospell.
1 Corinthians 9:19 For though I be fre from all men, yet haue I made my selfe seruaunte vnto all men, that I myght winne the mo.
1 Corinthians 9:20 Vnto the Iewes, I became as a Iewe, to winne the Iewes. To them that were vnder the lawe, was I made as though I had ben vnder the lawe, to winne them that were vnder the lawe.
1 Corinthians 9:21 To them that were without lawe, became I as though I had ben without the lawe (when I was not without lawe as perteyninge to God, but vnder a lawe as concerninge Christe) to wynne them that were without lawe.
1 Corinthians 9:22 To the weake became I as weake, to wynne the weake. In all thinge I fashioned my selfe to all men, to saue at the lest waye some.
1 Corinthians 9:23 And thys I do for the Gospel sake, that I might haue my parte thereof.
1 Corinthians 9:24 Perceyue ye not howe that they whyche runne in a course, runne all, yet but one receiueth the reward. So runne that ye maye obtayne.
1 Corinthians 9:25 Euery man that proueth maysters abstaineth from all thinges. And they do it to obtaine a corruptible croune: but we to obtaine an vncorruptible croune.
1 Corinthians 9:26 I therfore so runne, not as an uncertaine thinge. So fight I not as one that beateth the ayer:
1 Corinthians 9:27 but I tame my bodye and bringe it into subieccion, leste after that I haue preached to other, I my selfe should be a cast away.

CHAPTER: 10

1 Corinthians 10:1 Brethren I would not that ye should be ignoraunte of this, howe that oure fathers were all vnder a cloude, and al passed thorowe the sea,
1 Corinthians 10:2 and were all baptysed vnder Moyses, in the cloude, and in the sea:
1 Corinthians 10:3 and dyd al eate of one spyrytual meate,
1 Corinthians 10:4 and dyd al drincke of one maner of spyrytual drincke. And they drancke of that spyrytuall rocke that folowed them, which rocke was Christe.
1 Corinthians 10:5 But in manie of them had God no delite. For they were ouerthrowen in the wyldernes.
1 Corinthians 10:6 These are ensamples to vs that we should not luste after euyll thinges, as they lusted.
1 Corinthians 10:7 Neyther be ye worshippers of Images as were some of them accordynge at it is written: The people sate doune to eate and drynke, and rose vp agayne to playe.
1 Corinthians 10:8 Neyther let vs committe fornicacion as some of them committed fornycacyon, and were destroied in one day .xxiij. thousand.
1 Corinthians 10:9 Neither let vs tempte Christe as some of them tempted, and were destroyed of serpentes.
1 Corinthians 10:10 Neyther murmure ye as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.
1 Corinthians 10:11 Al these thinges happened vnto them for ensamples, and were written to put vs in remembraunce, whom the endes of the world are come vpon.
1 Corinthians 10:12 Wherfore let him that thynketh he standeth, take hede leste he fall.
1 Corinthians 10:13 There hath none other temptacion taken you, but suche as foloweth the nature of man. But God is faythful whiche shall not suffre you to be tempted aboue your strength: but shall in the middest of the temptacion make a waye to escape out.
1 Corinthians 10:14 Wherfore my deare beloued, fle from worshipping of Idols.
1 Corinthians 10:15 I speake as vnto them, whiche haue dyscrecion, iudge ye what I saye.
1 Corinthians 10:16 Is not the cuppe of blessinge whiche we blesse, partaking of that bloude of Christe?
1 Corinthians 10:17 is not the breade which we breake, partakinge of the bodye of Christ? because that we (thoughe we be manye) yet are one bodye in as muche as we all are partakers of one breade.
1 Corinthians 10:18 Beholde Israell whiche walketh carnally. Are not they which eate of the sacrifyce, partakers of the aultre?
1 Corinthians 10:19 What saye I then? that the Image is any thinge? or that it whiche is offered to Images is anye thinge?
1 Corinthians 10:20 Naye, but I saye, that these thinges, whiche the Gentyles offer, they offer to deuyls, and not to God. And I woulde not that ye should haue felloushippe wt the deuyls.
1 Corinthians 10:21 Ye can not drinke of the cuppe of the Lorde: and of the cuppe of the deuils. Ye can not be partakers of the Lordes table, and of the table of the deuils.
1 Corinthians 10:22 Either shall we prouoke the Lorde? Or are we stronger then he? All thinges are laufull vnto me, but all thinges are not expedient.
1 Corinthians 10:23 All thinges are lauful to me, but all thinges edifye not.
1 Corinthians 10:24 Let no man seke his owne profyte: but let euerye man seke anothers wealth.
1 Corinthians 10:25 Whatsoeuer is solde in the market, that eate and axe no questions for consciens sake.
1 Corinthians 10:26 For the earth is the Lordes, and all that therin is.
1 Corinthians 10:27 Yf anye of them whiche beleue not, byd you to a feste, & yf ye be disposed to go, whatsoeuer is set before you, eate, axing no question for conscience sake.
1 Corinthians 10:28 But and yf anye man saye vnto you: this is dedicate vnto Idols, eate not of it for his sake that sheweth it, and for hurtyng of conscience (The earth is the Lordes, & al that therin is)
1 Corinthians 10:29 Conscience I saye, not thine but the conscience of that other. For why should my libertie be iudged of another mannes conscience?
1 Corinthians 10:30 For yf I take my parte wyth thankes: why am I euil spoken of for the thinge, wherfore I geue thankes.
1 Corinthians 10:31 Whether therfore ye eate or drynke, or whatsoeuer ye do, do al to the praise of God.
1 Corinthians 10:32 See that ye geue occasion of euil, neither to the Iewes, nor yet to the Gentiles, neither to the congregation of God:
1 Corinthians 10:33 euen as I please al men in al thinges, not sekinge myne owne profite, but the profit of manye, that they myghte be saued.

CHAPTER: 11

1 Corinthians 11:1 Folowe me, as I do Christe.
1 Corinthians 11:2 I commende you brethren that ye remembre me in al thinges, & kepe the ordinaunces euen as I deliuered them to you.
1 Corinthians 11:3 I woulde you knewe that Christ is the heade of euery man. And the man is the womans heade. And God is Christes heade.
1 Corinthians 11:4 Euery man praiynge or prophesiynge hauing any thinge on his heade, shameth his head.
1 Corinthians 11:5 Euery woman that prayeth or prophesyeth bare headed, dishonesteth her heade. For it is euen all one, and the very same thinge, euen as though she were shauen.
1 Corinthians 11:6 If the woman be not couered, let her also be shoren. If it be shame for a woman to be shorne or shauen let her couer her head.
1 Corinthians 11:7 A man oughte not to couer his heade, for as muche as he is the ymage and glorye of God. The woman is the glorye of the man.
1 Corinthians 11:8 For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man.
1 Corinthians 11:9 Neither was the man created for the womans sake: but the woman for the mannes sake.
1 Corinthians 11:10 For thys cause ought the woman to haue power on her heade, for the aungels sakes.
1 Corinthians 11:11 Neuerthelesse, neyther is the man wythout the woman neyther the woman wythout the man in the Lorde.
1 Corinthians 11:12 For as the woman is of the man, euen so is the man by the woman: but al is of God.
1 Corinthians 11:13 Iudge in your selfes whether it be comelye, that a woman praye vnto God beare headed.
1 Corinthians 11:14 Or els doeth not nature teache you that it is a shame for a man,
1 Corinthians 11:15 yf he haue longe heyr, & prayse to a woman, yf she haue longe heyre? For her heyre is geuen her to couer her wythall.
1 Corinthians 11:16 If there be anye man amonge you, that lusteth to striue let hym knowe that we haue no suche custome, neither the congregations of God.
1 Corinthians 11:17 This I warne you of, and commende not that ye come together: not after a better maner but after a worsse.
1 Corinthians 11:18 Fyrste of all when ye come together in the congregacion, I heare that there is dyssencyon amonge you, and I partely, beleue it.
1 Corinthians 11:19 For there muste be sectes amonge you, that they whyche are perfecte amonge you, myghte be knowen.
1 Corinthians 11:20 When ye come together a man can not eate the Lordes supper. For euery man beginneth afore to eate hys owne supper.
1 Corinthians 11:21 And one is houngerye, and another is drounken. Haue ye not houses to eate and to drinke in?
1 Corinthians 11:22 Or els despise ye the congregacion of God and shame them that haue not? What shall I saye vnto you? shall I prayse you: In thys prayse I you not.
1 Corinthians 11:23 That whiche I delyuered you, I receiued of the Lorde. For the Lorde Iesus the same nyght, in whyche he was betrayed, toke breade,
1 Corinthians 11:24 and thanked and brake, and sayde. Take ye, eate ye thys is my bodye whiche is broken for you. Thys do ye in the remembraunce of me.
1 Corinthians 11:25 After the same maner he toke the cuppe, when supper was done, saying. Thys cuppe is the newe testamente in my bloude. Thys do as ofte as ye drynke it, in the remembraunce of me.
1 Corinthians 11:26 For as often as ye shal eate thys breade, and drincke this cuppe, ye shall shewe the Lordes death tyll he come.
1 Corinthians 11:27 Wherfore whosoeuer shall eate of this bread, or drinke of the cuppe vnworthely, shall be gyltie of the bodye and bloude of the Lorde.
1 Corinthians 11:28 Let a man therfore examen hym selfe, and so let hym eate of the breade and drynke of the cuppe.
1 Corinthians 11:29 For he that eateth or drinketh vnworthelye, eateth and drynketh his owne dampnation, because he maketh no difference of the Lordes bodye.
1 Corinthians 11:30 For this cause manye are weake and sycke amonge you, and manye slepe.
1 Corinthians 11:31 Yf we had truely iudged our selues, we should not haue ben iudged.
1 Corinthians 11:32 But when we are iudged of the Lorde, we are chastened, because we shoulde not be dampued wyth the worlde.
1 Corinthians 11:33 Wherfore my brethren, when ye come together to eate, tary one for another.
1 Corinthians 11:34 If any man hunger, let hym eate at home, that ye come not together vnto condempnation. Other thynges wil I set in order when I come.

CHAPTER: 12

1 Corinthians 12:1 In spiritual thinges brethren I would not haue you ignoraunt.
1 Corinthians 12:2 Ye knowe that ye were Gentyles, and wente your wayes vnto domme Idols, euen as you were led.
1 Corinthians 12:3 Wherfore I declare vnto you, that no man speakinge in the spirite of God, defieth Iesus. Also no man saye that Iesus is the Lorde: but by the holye ghoste.
1 Corinthians 12:4 There are diuersities of gyftes verelye, yet but one spirite.
1 Corinthians 12:5 And there are differences of administracions, & yet but one Lorde.
1 Corinthians 12:6 And there are diuerse maners of operations, and yet but one God, which worketh all thinges that are wrought, in all creatures.
1 Corinthians 12:7 The giftes of the spirite are geuen to euerie man to profite the congregation.
1 Corinthians 12:8 To one is geuen thorowe the spirite the vtteraunce of wysdome. To another is geuen the vtteraunce of knowledge by the same spirite.
1 Corinthians 12:9 To another is geuen fayth by the same spirite. To another the giftes of healinge, by the same spirite.
1 Corinthians 12:10 To another power to do miracles. To another prophecie. To another iudgement of spirites. To an other diuerse tounges. To another the interpretation of tounges.
1 Corinthians 12:11 And these all worketh euen the selfe same spyryte, deuydynge to euerye man seuerall gyftes, euen as he wyll.
1 Corinthians 12:12 For as the bodye is one, and hath manye membres, and all the membres of one bodye though they be many, yet are they but one bodye: euen so is Christ.
1 Corinthians 12:13 For in one spyryte are we al baptysed to make one body, whether we be Iewes or Gentiles, whether we be bounde or fre: and haue al drounke of one spirite.
1 Corinthians 12:14 For the body is not one member, but manye.
1 Corinthians 12:15 Yf the fote saye: I am not the hand, therfore I am not of the bodye: is he therfore not of the bodye?
1 Corinthians 12:16 And yf the eare saye, I am not the eye: therfore I am not of the bodye: is he therfore not of the bodie?
1 Corinthians 12:17 If al the bodye were an eye, where were then the eare? If all were hearinge? wher were the smellynge?
1 Corinthians 12:18 But nowe hath God disposed the membres euerye one of them in the bodye, at hys owne pleasure,
1 Corinthians 12:19 If they were al one member: where were the bodye?
1 Corinthians 12:20 Nowe are there manye membres, yet but one bodye.
1 Corinthians 12:21 And the eye can not saye vnto the hand: I haue no nede of the: nor the heade also to the fete. I haue no nede of you.
1 Corinthians 12:22 Yea rather a greate deale those members of the bodye, whyche seme to be moste feble, are moste necessarye.
1 Corinthians 12:23 And vpon those membres of the bodie, which we thinke leste honest, put we moste honestye on. And oure vngodlye parties haue most beauty on.
1 Corinthians 12:24 For our honeste members nede it not. But God hath so disposed the bodye, and hath geuen moste honoure to that parte whyche lacked,
1 Corinthians 12:25 lest there should be anye stryfe in the bodye: but that the membres shoulde indifferentlye care one for another.
1 Corinthians 12:26 And yf one member be had in honoure, all the membres be glad also.
1 Corinthians 12:27 Ye are the bodye of Christe, and membres one of another.
1 Corinthians 12:28 And God hath also ordeined in the congregation, fyrst the Apostles, secondarely prophetes, thyrdely teachers then them that do miracles: after that the giftes of healinge, helpers, gouernes, diuersitie of tounges.
1 Corinthians 12:29 Are all Apostles? Are all Prophetes? Are all teachers? Are all doers of miracles:
1 Corinthians 12:30 Haue al the gyftes of healinge? Do all speake with tounges? Do al interprete?
1 Corinthians 12:31 Couet after the beste gyftes. And yet shewe I vnto you a more excellente waye.

CHAPTER: 13

1 Corinthians 13:1 Thought I speake with tounges of men and angels, and yet had no loue, I were euen as soundinge brasse, or as a tynklinge Cimbal.
1 Corinthians 13:2 And though I could prophecye, and vnderstande all secretes, and all knowledge: yea, yf I had all fayth so that I coulde moue mountaines out of theyr places, and yet had no loue, I were nothing.
1 Corinthians 13:3 And thought I bestowed all my goodes to fede the pore, and though I gaue my bodye euen that I burned, and yet had no loue, it profeteth me nothinge.
1 Corinthians 13:4 Loue suffreth longe, and is curteous. Loue enuieth not. Loue doth not frowardelye, swelleth not, dealeth not dishonestlye,
1 Corinthians 13:5 seketh not her owne, is not prouoketh to anger, thinketh not euil,
1 Corinthians 13:6 reioiceth not in iniquitie: but reioiseth in the trueth,
1 Corinthians 13:7 suffreth all thinge, beleueth all thinges, hopeth al thinges, endureth in all thinges.
1 Corinthians 13:8 Though that propheciynge fayle, other tounges shall cease, or knowledge vanishe awaye, yet loue falleth neuer awaye.
1 Corinthians 13:9 For oure knowledge is vnperfect, & oure prophesiynge is vnperfecte.
1 Corinthians 13:10 But when that which is perfect, is come: then that which is vnperfect, shal be done awaye:
1 Corinthians 13:11 When I was a child, I spake as a chylde, I vnderstode as a child, I Imagined as a chylde. But assone as I was a man, I put away childishnes.
1 Corinthians 13:12 Nowe we se in a glasse euen in a darke speakinge, but then shall we se face to face. Nowe I knowe vnperfectlye, but then shall I knowe euen as I am knowen.
1 Corinthians 13:13 Nowe abideth fayth, hope, and loue, euen these thre: but the chiefe of these is loue.

CHAPTER: 14

1 Corinthians 14:1 Laboure for loue, and couete spyrytuall gyftes: and moste chiefely for to prophecye.
1 Corinthians 14:2 For he that speaketh wyth tounges speaketh not vnto men, but vnto God, for no man heareth hym, howe be it in the spyryte he speaketh mysteryes.
1 Corinthians 14:3 But he that prophecyeth, speaketh vnto men, to edifiynge, to exhortation and to comforte.
1 Corinthians 14:4 He that speaketh wyth tounges profyteth hym selfe: he that prophecieth edifyeth the congregation.
1 Corinthians 14:5 I woulde that ye all spake with tounges: but rather that ye prophecyed. For greater is he that prophecieth, then he that speaketh with tounges, excepte he expounde it also, that the congregacion maye haue edifiyng.
1 Corinthians 14:6 Nowe brethren yf I come vnto you speakinge with tounges, what shall I profite you, excepte I speake vnto you, other by reuelation or knowledge, or propheciynge, or doctryne.
1 Corinthians 14:7 Moreouer when thynges wythout lyfe, geue sounde: whether it be a pipe or an harpe excepte they make a distinction in the soundes, howe shal it be knowen what is piped or harped?
1 Corinthians 14:8 And also yf the trompe geue an vncertaine voice, who shall prepare him selfe to fyght?
1 Corinthians 14:9 Euen so likewyse when ye speake with tounges, excepte ye speake wordes that haue signifycacion, howe shall it be vnderstande what is spoken? For ye shall but speake in the ayer.
1 Corinthians 14:10 Manye kindes of voices are in the worlde and none of them are wythout significacion.
1 Corinthians 14:11 If I knowe not what the voice meaneth, I shalbe vnto hym that speaketh, an alient: and he that speaketh shall be alient vnto me
1 Corinthians 14:12 Euen so ye (for as much as ye couete spiritual gyftes) seke that ye maye haue plentye vnto the edifiyng of the congregation.
1 Corinthians 14:13 Wherfore let him that speaketh with tounges praye, that he maye interprete also.
1 Corinthians 14:14 If I praye wyth tounges, my spyryte prayeth: but my mynde is wythout fruite.
1 Corinthians 14:15 What is it then? I wyl praye with the spirite, and wyll praye with mynde also. I wil singe with the spyrite, and wil singe with the minde also.
1 Corinthians 14:16 For els when thou blessest with the spirite howe shal he that occupieth the roume of the vnlearned saye amen at thy geuynge of thankes, saynge: he vnderstandeth not what thou sayeste?
1 Corinthians 14:17 Thou verelye geueste thankes wel, but the other is not edifyed.
1 Corinthians 14:18 I thanke my God, I speake with tounges more then ye all.
1 Corinthians 14:19 Yet had I leuer in the congregation, to speake fyue wordes with my mynd to the information of other, rather then .x. thousand wordes with the tounge.
1 Corinthians 14:20 Brethren be not chyldren in wyt howebeit as concerninge maliciousnes be children: but in wyt be perfect.
1 Corinthians 14:21 In the lawe it is written, wyth other tounges, and with other lippes wyl I speake vnto thys people, and yet for al that wil they not heare me, sayeth the Lorde.
1 Corinthians 14:22 Wherfore, tounges are for a signe, not to them that beleue, but to them that beleue not. Contrarywyse propheciyng serueth not, for them that beleue not: but for them whiche beleue.
1 Corinthians 14:23 Yf therfore when all the congregation is come together, and all speake wyth tounges, there come in they that are vnlearned, or they whyche beleue not: wyll they not saye that ye are out of your wyttes?
1 Corinthians 14:24 But and yf all prophecye, and there come in one that beleueth not, or one vnlearned, he is rebuked of al men, and is iudged of euerye man:
1 Corinthians 14:25 and so are the secretes of hys herte opened, and so falleth he doune on hys face, and worshyppeth God, & sayeth that God is wyth you in dede.
1 Corinthians 14:26 Howe is it then brethren? When ye come together, euerye man hath his songe, hath his doctryne, hath his tounge, hath hys reuelation, hath hys interpretation. Let al thynges be done vnto edifiynge.
1 Corinthians 14:27 If anye man speake wyth tounges, let it be two at ones, or at the moste thre at ones, and that by course: and let another interprete it.
1 Corinthians 14:28 But yf there be no interpreter, let him kepe silence in the congregation, and let him speake to him selfe and to God.
1 Corinthians 14:29 Let the Prophetes speake two at ones, or thre at ones, and let other iudge.
1 Corinthians 14:30 And yf anye reuelation be made to another that sitteth by, let the fyrste holde hys peace.
1 Corinthians 14:31 For ye maye all prophecye, one by one that all maye learne, and all maye haue comforte.
1 Corinthians 14:32 For the spirites of the Prophetes are in the power of the Prophetes.
1 Corinthians 14:33 For God is not causer of strife, but of peace, as he is in all other congregations of the sainctes.
1 Corinthians 14:34 Let your wyues kepe silence in the congregations. For it is not permitted vnto them to speake: but let them be vnder obedience, as sayeth the lawe.
1 Corinthians 14:35 If they wil learne anye thynge, let them axe theyr husbandes at home. For it is shame for women to speake in the congregation.
1 Corinthians 14:36 Spronge the worde of God from you? Eyther came it vnto you onelye.
1 Corinthians 14:37 Yf anye man thinke hym selfe a Prophet, either spyrytuall. let him vnderstand, what thinges I write vnto you. For they are the commaundementes of the Lorde.
1 Corinthians 14:38 But and yf anye man be ignoraunte, let him be ignoraunt.
1 Corinthians 14:39 Wherfore brethren couete to prophecye, and forbyd not to speake wyth tounges.
1 Corinthians 14:40 And let al thynges be done honestlye and iu ordre.

CHAPTER: 15

1 Corinthians 15:1 Brethren as pertaininge to the Gospel, whiche I preached vnto you, whiche ye haue also accepted, and in the whiche ye continue,
1 Corinthians 15:2 by whiche also ye are saued: I do you to wit, after what maner I preached vnto you yf ye kepe it, except ye haue beleued in vaine.
1 Corinthians 15:3 For fyrste of al I deliuered vnto you that which I receiued how that Christe dyd for oure synnes, agreinge to the scriptures:
1 Corinthians 15:4 and that he was buried, and that he rose agayne the thyrde daye accordinge to the scriptures
1 Corinthians 15:5 and that he was sene of Cephas, then of the twelue.
1 Corinthians 15:6 After that he was sene of more then fyue hundred brethren at ones of whiche manie remaine vnto this daie, and many are fallen a slepe.
1 Corinthians 15:7 After that appeared he to Iames, then to al the Apostles.
1 Corinthians 15:8 And last of al, he was sene of me, as of one that was borne out of due time.
1 Corinthians 15:9 For I am the leste of al the Apostles, whiche am not worthy to be called an Apostle, because I persecuted the congregation of God.
1 Corinthians 15:10 But by the grace of God I am that I am. And his grace which is in me, was not in vaine, but I laboured more aboundantly then they al, not I but the grace of God which is with me.
1 Corinthians 15:11 Whether it were I or they, so we preache, and so haue ye beleued.
1 Corinthians 15:12 If Christe be preached howe that he rose from death: howe saye some? that are amonge you, that there is no resurreccion from death?
1 Corinthians 15:13 If ther be no rysinge agayne from death, then is Christe not rysen.
1 Corinthians 15:14 If Christ be not rysen, then is our preachinge vayne, and your faith is also in vaine.
1 Corinthians 15:15 Ye and we are founde false witnesses of God. For we haue testifyed of God, howe that he raysed vp Christe, whom he raysed not vp yf it be so that the deade ryse not vp againe.
1 Corinthians 15:16 For yf the dead rise not againe then is Christ not rysen againe.
1 Corinthians 15:17 Yf it be so that Christe rose not, then is youre faith in vayne, and yet are ye in youre synnes.
1 Corinthians 15:18 And ther to they which are fallen a slepe in Christ, are peryshed.
1 Corinthians 15:19 If in thys lyfe onelye we beleue on Christ, then are we of all men the miserablest.
1 Corinthians 15:20 But now in Christ rysen from the dead, and is become the fyrste fruytes of them that slepte.
1 Corinthians 15:21 For by a man came death, and by a man came the resurceccion of the dead.
1 Corinthians 15:22 For as by Adam all dye: euen so by Christe, shall all be made aliue,
1 Corinthians 15:23 and euery man in his owne order. The fyrste is Christe, then they that are Christes at his comminge.
1 Corinthians 15:24 Then commeth the ende when he hath delyuered vp the kyngedome to God the father, when he hath put doune all rule, authoritie, and power.
1 Corinthians 15:25 For he muste reigne tyll he haue put all hys enemies vnder his fete.
1 Corinthians 15:26 The laste enemy that shalbe destroied is death.
1 Corinthians 15:27 For he hath put all thinges vnder hys fete. But when he sayeth, all thinges are put vnder hym it is manifest that he is excepted, whyche dyd put all thinges vnder him.
1 Corinthians 15:28 When all thinges are subdued vnto hym: then shall the sonne also him selfe be subiecte to him that put al thinges, vnder him that God maye be all in all thinges.
1 Corinthians 15:29 Eyther els what do they, which are baptysed ouer the dead, yf the dead ryse not at all? Why are they then baptysed ouer the dead?
1 Corinthians 15:30 yea and why stande we in ieoperdy euerye houre?
1 Corinthians 15:31 By our reioysinge, whyche I haue in Christe Iesu our Lorde, I dye dayly.
1 Corinthians 15:32 That I haue fought wyth beastes at Ephesus, after the maner of men what auauntageth it me, yf the dead rise not againe? Let vs eate and drincke, to morowe we shall dye.
1 Corinthians 15:33 Be not deceiued: malicious speakinges corrupte good maners.
1 Corinthians 15:34 Awake truelye out of slepe and synne not. For some haue not the knowledge of God. I speake this vnto you: rebuke.
1 Corinthians 15:35 But some man wyl saye: howe aryse the dead? wyth what bodyes come they in?
1 Corinthians 15:36 Thou fole, that whiche thou sowest is not quickened except it dye.
1 Corinthians 15:37 And what sowest thou? Thou sowest not that bodye that shall be, but are corne (I meane either of what, or of some other)
1 Corinthians 15:38 and God geueth it a body at his pleasure, to euery seede a seuerall body.
1 Corinthians 15:39 Al fleshe is not one maner of fleshe: but there is one maner fleshe of men, another maner fleshe of beastes, another maner fleshe of fyshes, and another of byrdes.
1 Corinthians 15:40 There are celestiall bodyes, and there are bodyes terrestriall. But the glorye of the celestiall is one, and the glorye of the terrestriall another.
1 Corinthians 15:41 There is one maner glory of the sunne and another glorye of the mone, and another glory of the starres. For one starre dyffereth from another in glorye.
1 Corinthians 15:42 So is the resurreccion of the dead. It is sowen in corruption, and ryseth in incorruption.
1 Corinthians 15:43 It is sowen in dishonoure, and ryseth in honoure. It is sowen in weakenes, and ryseth in power. It is sowen a naturall bodye, and ryseth a spyrytuall bodye.
1 Corinthians 15:44 There is a naturall bodye, and there is a spiritual bodye,
1 Corinthians 15:45 as it is written: the fyrste man Adam was made a lyuinge soule, and the last Adam was made a quickeninge spirite.
1 Corinthians 15:46 Howbeit that is not fyrste whiche is spyrytual: but that which is naturall, and then that which is spyrytual.
1 Corinthians 15:47 The fyrste man is of the earth, earthlye: the seconde man is the Lorde from heauen.
1 Corinthians 15:48 As is the earthlye, such are they that are earthlye. And as is the heauenlye, suche are they that are heauenlye.
1 Corinthians 15:49 And as we haue borne the ymage of the earthly so shal we beare the Image of the heauenlye.
1 Corinthians 15:50 This saye I brethren, that fleshe and bloude can not inheryte the kyngedome of God. Neyther corruption inheryte: vncorruption.
1 Corinthians 15:51 Beholde I shewe you a mysterye. We shal not al slepe: but we shal al be chaunged,
1 Corinthians 15:52 and that in a momente & in the twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the last trompe. For the trompe shall blowe, and the dead shal rise incorruptible and we shal be chaunged.
1 Corinthians 15:53 For this corruptible must put on incorruptibilitie; and this mortal muste put on immortalytye.
1 Corinthians 15:54 When this corruptible, hath put on incorruptibilitie, and this mortal hath put on immortalite, then shalbe brought to passe the saiyng that is written.
1 Corinthians 15:55 Death is consumed into victory. Death wher is thy stynge? Hel wher is thy victory?
1 Corinthians 15:56 The stinge of death is sinne: & the strength of sinne is the lawe.
1 Corinthians 15:57 But thankes be vnto God, which hath geuen vs victory, thorowe our Lorde Iesus Christ.
1 Corinthians 15:58 Therfore my deare brethren, be ye stedfast and vnmouable alwayes ryche in the workes of the Lorde, for as much as ye knowe, howe that your labour is not in vaine in the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 16

1 Corinthians 16:1 Of the gatheringe for the sainctes, as I haue ordeined in the congregations of Galatia, euen, so do ye.
1 Corinthians 16:2 Vpon some sonday let euerye one of you put a syde at home, and laye vp whatsoeuer he thinketh meate that there be no gatheringes when I come.
1 Corinthians 16:3 When I am come, whomsoeuer ye shall alowe by youre letters, them will I sende to bringe your liberalitie vnto Ierusalem.
1 Corinthians 16:4 And yf it be mete that I go, they shal go with me.
1 Corinthians 16:5 I wyl come vnto you after I haue gone ouer Macedonia. For I wyl go throughout Macedonia.
1 Corinthians 16:6 With you peraduenture I wil abide a while, or els winter, that ye maye bringe me on my waye whethersoeuer I go.
1 Corinthians 16:7 I wil not se you nowe in my passage: but I truste to abyde a while wyth you, yf God shal suffer me.
1 Corinthians 16:8 I wyll tary at Ephesus vntyl whitsontyde.
1 Corinthians 16:9 For a greate dore, and a frutefull is opened to me, and there are manye aduersaryes.
1 Corinthians 16:10 If Timotheus come, se that he be with you. For he worketh the worke of the Lorde as I do.
1 Corinthians 16:11 Let no man despyse hym: but conuaye hym forthe in peace, that he maye come vnto me. For I loke for hym wyth the brethren.
1 Corinthians 16:12 To speake of brother Apollo: I greatlye desyred hym to come vnto you wyth the brethren but hys mynd was not at all to come at this tyme. Howbeit he wil come when he shal haue conueniente tyme.
1 Corinthians 16:13 Watche ye, stande faste in the fayth, quyte you lyke men and be stronge,
1 Corinthians 16:14 & let youre busynes be done in loue.
1 Corinthians 16:15 Brethren (ye know the house of Stephana, howe that they are the fyrste fruites of Achaia, and that they haue appoynted them selues to minister vnto the sainctes)
1 Corinthians 16:16 I beseche you that ye be obedient vnto suche, and to all that helpe and laboure.
1 Corinthians 16:17 I am glad of the comminge of Stephana. Fortunatus and Achaichus: for that which was lackinge on youre parte, they haue supplied.
1 Corinthians 16:18 They haue comforted my spyrite and youres. Loke therfore that ye knowe them that are suche.
1 Corinthians 16:19 The congregations of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscylla salute you muche in the Lorde, and so doth the congregation that is in theyr house.
1 Corinthians 16:20 Al the brethren grete you. Grete ye one another wyth an holy kysse.
1 Corinthians 16:21 The salutation of me Paule with myne owne hande.
1 Corinthians 16:22 Yf anye man loue not the Lorde Iesus Christ the same be anathema maranatha.
1 Corinthians 16:23 The grace of the Lorde Iesus Christe be wyth you all,
1 Corinthians 16:24 My loue be wyth you all in Christe Iesus. Amen.

BOOK: 2 Corinthians

CHAPTER: 1

2 Corinthians 1:1 Paule an Apostle of Iesu Christ by the wyll of God, and brother Timotheus. Vnto the congregation of God, whithe is at Corinthum, with all the sainctes, which are in all Achaia.
2 Corinthians 1:2 Grace be wyth you, and peace from God oure father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christ.
2 Corinthians 1:3 Blessed be God the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, the father of mercy, and the God of all comforte,
2 Corinthians 1:4 whiche comforteth vs in all oure tribulacion, in so muche that we are able to comforte them, which are troubled in whatsoeuer tribulation it be, with the same comforte wherwith we our selues are comforted of God.
2 Corinthians 1:5 For as the affliccions of Christ are plenteous in vs: euen so is our consolacion plenteous by Christe.
2 Corinthians 1:6 Whether we be troubled for youre consolacion & saluacion, whiche saluacion, sheweth her power in that ye suffer the same afflictions which we also suffer: or whether we be comforted for your consolacion, and saluation,
2 Corinthians 1:7 yet oure hope is stedfast for you, in as muche as we knowe howe that as ye haue youre parte in affliccions, so shall ye be partakers of consolacion.
2 Corinthians 1:8 Brethren I woulde not haue you ignoraunt of oure trouble, whiche happened vnto vs in Asia. For we were greued out of measure passinge strength, so greatlye that we despeared euen of lyfe.
2 Corinthians 1:9 Also we receiued and aunswere of death in our selues, and that because we woulde not put oure truste in oure selues: but in God, whiche rayseth the dead to lyfe again,
2 Corinthians 1:10 & which delyuered vs from so greate a death, and doth delyuer. On whom we truste that yet here after he will delyuer,
2 Corinthians 1:11 by the helpe of your prayer for vs: that by the meanes of manye occasions, thankes maye be geuen of manye on our behalfe, for the grace geuen vnto vs.
2 Corinthians 1:12 Oure reioysinge is this, the testimony of oure conscience, that in synglenes and Godly purenes, and not in fleshely wysdome, but by the grace of God, we haue had oure conuersation in the worlde, and moste of all to youwardes.
2 Corinthians 1:13 We write no nother thinges vnto you, then that ye read and also knowe, yea & I truste ye shall fynde vs vnto the ende euen as ye haue founde vs partelye,
2 Corinthians 1:14 for we are your reioysinge, euen as ye are oures in the day of the Lorde Iesus.
2 Corinthians 1:15 And in this confidence was I minded the other tyme to haue come vnto you, that ye myghte haue had yet one pleasure more,
2 Corinthians 1:16 and to haue passed by you into Macedonia, and to haue come againe out of Macedonia vnto you, & to haue bene led forth to Iewryward of you.
2 Corinthians 1:17 When I thus wyse was mynded: dyd I vse lyghtnes? Or thynke I carnallye those thinges, which I thinke? that with me should be yea yea, and nay nay?
2 Corinthians 1:18 God is faithfull. For oure preaching vnto you, was not yea & nay.
2 Corinthians 1:19 For Gods sonne Iesus Christe, whiche was preached amonge you by vs (that is to saye, by me and Siluanus and Timotheus) was not yea and naye, but in him it was yea:
2 Corinthians 1:20 For all the promyses of God, in him are yea, and are in him Amen, vnto the lande of God thorow vs.
2 Corinthians 1:21 For it is God, whiche stablisheth you and vs in Christ, and hath annointed vs,
2 Corinthians 1:22 which hath also sealed vs, and hath geuen the earnest of the spyryte into oure hertes.
2 Corinthians 1:23 I call God for a recorde vnto my soule that for to fauer you withall I came not anye more to Corinthum.
2 Corinthians 1:24 Not that we be lordes ouer youre fayth but helpers of youce ioye. For by fayth ye stand.

CHAPTER: 2

2 Corinthians 2:1 But I determyned thys in my selfe, that I wold not come agayne to you in heauynes.
2 Corinthians 2:2 For yf I make you sorye, who is it that shoulde make me glad, but the same which is made sorye by me?
2 Corinthians 2:3 And I wrote thys same Epistle vnto you, leste yf I came, I shoulde take heauines of them, of whome I ought to reioyce. Certaynely thys confidence haue I in you al, that my ioye is the ioye of you al.
2 Corinthians 2:4 For in great affliction and anguyshe of herte I wrote vnto you with many teares: not to make you sory, but that ye myght perceyue the loue which I haue most specially vnto you.
2 Corinthians 2:5 Yf anye man haue caused sorowe the same hath not made me sory, but partelye: leaste I shoulde greue you all.
2 Corinthians 2:6 It is suffycyente vnto the same man, that he was rebuked of many.
2 Corinthians 2:7 So that nowe contrarywyse ye ought to forgeue hym, and comforte hym: leaste that same persone shoulde be swalowed vp, with ouer muche heauynes.
2 Corinthians 2:8 Wherfore I exhorte you, that loue maye haue strengthe ouer hym.
2 Corinthians 2:9 For this cause verely dyd I wryte, that I might know the profe of you, whether ye shoulde be obedyent in all thynges.
2 Corinthians 2:10 To whom ye forgeue any thynge, I forgeue also. And verelye yf I forgeue anye thynge, to whome I forgaue it, for your sakes forgaue I it in the roume of Christe,
2 Corinthians 2:11 leaste Sathan shoulde preuente vs. For thys thoughtes are not vnknowen vnto vs.
2 Corinthians 2:12 When I was come to Troada for Christes gospels sake (and a greate dore was opened vnto me of the Lorde)
2 Corinthians 2:13 I had no rest in my spyryte, because I founde not Titus my brother: but toke my leaue of them, and wente awaye vnto Macedonia.
2 Corinthians 2:14 Thankes be vnto God whiche alwayes geueth vs the victorye in Christ, and openeth the sauour of hys knowledge by vs in euerye place.
2 Corinthians 2:15 For we are vnto God the swete sauoure of Christe, bothe amonge them that are saued, and also among them whiche peryshe.
2 Corinthians 2:16 To the one part are we the sauoure of death vnto death. And vnto the other parte are we the lauoure of lyfe vnto lyfe. And who is mete vnto these thynges?
2 Corinthians 2:17 For we are not as many are which choppe & chaunge with the worde of god: but euen out of purenes, and by the power of God, and in the syghte of God, so speake we in Christe.

CHAPTER: 3

2 Corinthians 3:1 We begynne to prayse oure selues agayne. Nede we as some other, of Epistles, of recommendacion vnto you? or letters of recommendacyon from you?
2 Corinthians 3:2 Ye are oure Epistle wrytten in oure hertes, which is vnderstande and read of, all men,
2 Corinthians 3:3 in that ye are knowen, howe that ye are the Epistle of Christe, ministred by vs and writen, not wyth ynke, but wyth the spirite of the lyuyng God, not in tables of stone, but in fleshly tables of the herte.
2 Corinthians 3:4 Suche truste haue we throughe Christe to Godwarde
2 Corinthians 3:5 not that we are suffyciente of our selues to thynke any thynge as it were of our selues, but our ablenes cometh of God,
2 Corinthians 3:6 which hath made vs able to minister the new testament, not of the letter, but of the spirite. For the letter killeth, but the spirite geueth lyfe.
2 Corinthians 3:7 Yf the mynystracyon of death throughe the letters fygured in stones was gloryous, so that the chyldren of Israell coulde not behold the face of Moyses for the glory of hys countenaunce (whiche glory neuerthelesse is done awaye)
2 Corinthians 3:8 why shall not the ministracion of the spiryte be muche more gloryous?
2 Corinthians 3:9 For yf the ministrynge of condempnacyon be glorious, muche more doeth the ministracyon of ryghtuousnes excede in glorye.
2 Corinthians 3:10 For no doubte that which was there glorifyed is not once gloryfyed in respecte of thys excedynge glorye.
2 Corinthians 3:11 Then yf that whih is destroyed was gloryous muche more shall that whiche remayneth, be gloryous.
2 Corinthians 3:12 Seynge then that we haue suche trust, we vse great boldnes,
2 Corinthians 3:13 and do not as Moyses, whiche put a vayle ouer hys face that the children of Israell shoulde not se, for what purpose that serued whiche is put awaye.
2 Corinthians 3:14 But theyr myndes were blynded. For vntil thys daye remayneth the same couerynge vntaken awaye in the olde testament when they reade it, whiche in Christe is put awaye.
2 Corinthians 3:15 But euen vnto thys daye when Moyses is reade, the vayle hangeth before theyr hertes.
2 Corinthians 3:16 Neuerthelesse when they turne to the Lorde, the vayle shalbe taken awaye.
2 Corinthians 3:17 The Lorde no doubte is a spiryte. And where the spiryte of the Lorde is, there is libertye.
2 Corinthians 3:18 But we all beholde the glorye of the Lorde with hys face open, and chaunged vnto the same similitude, from glorye to glory, euen of the spirite of the Lorde.

CHAPTER: 4

2 Corinthians 4:1 Therfore seynge that we haue suche an offyce, euen as mercye is come on vs, we faynte not:
2 Corinthians 4:2 but haue caste from vs the clokes of vnhonestye, and walke not in craftynes, neyther corrupte we the word of God: but walke in open trueth, & reporte our selues to euerye mans conscience in the syght of God.
2 Corinthians 4:3 Yf oure Gospell be yet hyd, it is hyd among them that are loste,
2 Corinthians 4:4 in whome the God of thys worlde hath blynded the myndes of them which beleue not, leste the lyght of the gloryous gospell of Christe which is the ymage of God shoulde shyne vnto them.
2 Corinthians 4:5 For we preache not oure selues, but Christ Iesus to be the Lorde, and oure selues youre seuauntes for Iesus sake.
2 Corinthians 4:6 For it is God that commaunded the lighte to shyne out of darknes, whiche hath shyned in oure hertes, for to geue the lyghte of the knoweledge of the glorye of God, in the face of Iesus Christe.
2 Corinthians 4:7 But we haue thys treasure in earthen vessels that the excellent power of it myght appeare to be of God, and not of vs.
2 Corinthians 4:8 We are troubled on euerye syde, yet are we not withoute shyfte. We are in pouerte, but not vtterlye withoute some what.
2 Corinthians 4:9 We are persecuted, but are not forsaken. We are caste doune, neuerthelesse we peryshe not.
2 Corinthians 4:10 And we alwayes beare in oure bodyes the dyinge of the Lorde Iesus, that the lyfe of Iesus myght appeare in oure bodyes.
2 Corinthians 4:11 For we whiche lyue are alwayes delyuered vnto deathe for Iesus sake, that the lyfe also of Iesu myghte appeare in oure mortall fleshe.
2 Corinthians 4:12 So then death worketh in vs, and lyfe in you.
2 Corinthians 4:13 Seynge then we haue the same spirite of fayth, accordynge as it is writen: I beleued, & therfor haue I spoken. We also beleue, & therfore speake.
2 Corinthians 4:14 For we knowe that he which raysed vp the Lord Iesus, shal rayse vp vs also by the meanes of Iesus, & shall set vs wt you.
2 Corinthians 4:15 For all thynges do I for youre sakes, that the plentuous grace by thankes geuen of manye, maye redounde to the prayse of God.
2 Corinthians 4:16 Wherfor we are not weryed, but though oure outwarde man perysh: yet the inwarde man is renewed daye by daye.
2 Corinthians 4:17 For oure excedynge trybulation whiche is momentanye and lyghte, prepareth an excedynge and eternall wayghte of glory vnto vs,
2 Corinthians 4:18 whyle we loke not on the thinges whiche are sene, but on the thinges which are not sene. For thynges whiche are sene, are temporall, but thynges whiche are not sene, are eternall.

CHAPTER: 5

2 Corinthians 5:1 We knowe surelye yf oure earthy mansyon wherin we nowe dwell were destroyed, that we haue a buyldynge ordeyned of God an habitacyon not made with handes, but eternall in heauen.
2 Corinthians 5:2 And therfore syghe we, desyrynge to be clothed wyth oure mansyon which is from heauen
2 Corinthians 5:3 so yet yf that we be founde clothed, and not naked.
2 Corinthians 5:4 For as longe as we are in thys tabernacle, we syghe and are greued, for we woulde not be vnclothed, but woulde be clothed vpon, that mortalitye myghte be swalowed vp of lyfe.
2 Corinthians 5:5 He that ordeyned vs for thys thynge, is God whiche very same hath geuen vnto vs the earnest of the spiryte.
2 Corinthians 5:6 Therfore we are alwaye of good chere, & knowe well that as longe as we are at home in the bodye, we are absente from God.
2 Corinthians 5:7 For we walke in fayth, and se not.
2 Corinthians 5:8 Neuerthelesse we are of good comforte, and had leuer be absente from the bodye, and to be presente with the Lorde.
2 Corinthians 5:9 Wherfore whether we be at home or from home, we endeuoure oure selues to please hym.
2 Corinthians 5:10 For we muste all appeare before the iudgement seate of Christ, that euery man maye receyue the workes of hys bodye accordyng to that he hath done, whether it be good or badde?
2 Corinthians 5:11 Seynge then that we know, how the Lorde is to be feared, we fare fayre with men. For we are knowen well ynoughe vnto God. I truste also that we are knowen in your consciences.
2 Corinthians 5:12 We prayse not oure selues agayne vnto you, but geue you an occasyon to reioyce of vs that ye maye haue somewhat agaynst them whiche reioyce in the face, and not in the hert,
2 Corinthians 5:13 For yf we be to feruente, to God we are to feruente. Yf we kepe measure, for youre cause kepe we measure.
2 Corinthians 5:14 For the loue of Christ constrayneth vs, because we thus iudge, yf one be dead, for all that then are all dead,
2 Corinthians 5:15 and that he dyed for all, that they which lyue, shoulde not hence forth lyue vnto them selues, but vnto hym, whiche dyed for them, and rose agayne.
2 Corinthians 5:16 Wherfore hence forthe knowe we no man after the fleshe. In so muche though we haue knowen Christe after the fleshe, nowe hence forth knowe we hym so no more.
2 Corinthians 5:17 Therfore yf anye man be in Christe, he is a newe creature. Olde thynges are passed awaye, beholde all thynges are become newe.
2 Corinthians 5:18 Neuerthelesse all thynges are of God, whiche hath reconcyled vs vnto hym selfe by Iesus Christe, and hath geuen vnto vs the offyce to preache the attonement.
2 Corinthians 5:19 For God was in Christe, and made agrement betwene the worlde and hym selfe, and imputed not theyr synnes vnto them, & hathe committed to vs the preachynge of the atonnement.
2 Corinthians 5:20 Nowe then are we messengers in the roume of Christ: euen as thoughe God dyd beseche you thorowe vs: So praye we you in Christes stede, that ye be atone with God,
2 Corinthians 5:21 for he hath made hym to be synne for vs, whiche knewe no synne, that we by hys meanes should be that ryghtuousnes whiche before God is allowed.

CHAPTER: 6

2 Corinthians 6:1 We as healpers therfore exhorte you, that ye receyue not the grace of God in vayne.
2 Corinthians 6:2 For he sayeth: I haue hearde the in a tyme accepted: and in the day of saluacyon. haue I succoured the. Beholde nowe is that well accepted tyme: behold now is that daye of saluacyon.
2 Corinthians 6:3 Let vs geue no man occasyon of euyll, that in our offyce be founde no faulte,
2 Corinthians 6:4 but in al thynges let vs behaue our selues as the ministers of God. In muche pacience, in afflictions, in necessitie, in anguishe,
2 Corinthians 6:5 in strypes, in prysonnement in stryfe, in laboure, in watchynge, in fasting
2 Corinthians 6:6 in purenes, in knoweledge, in longe suffering in kyndnes, in the holye ghoste, in loue vnfayned,
2 Corinthians 6:7 in the wordes of trueth, in the power of God, in the armour of ryghtuousnes on the ryght hande, and on the lyfte,
2 Corinthians 6:8 in honoure and dishonour, in euyll reporte, & good reporte: as disceyuers & yet true:
2 Corinthians 6:9 as vnknowen, & yet knowen: as dying, & beholde we yet liue: as chastened and not kylled:
2 Corinthians 6:10 as sorowyng, & yet alway mery: as poore, and yet make many ryche: as hauynge nothynge, and yet possessynge all thynges.
2 Corinthians 6:11 O ye Corinthyans, oure mouth is open vnto you. Oure hertes made large:
2 Corinthians 6:12 ye are in no strayte in vs, but are in a strayte in youre owne bowelles:
2 Corinthians 6:13 I promyse you lyke rewarde with me, as to my chyldren.
2 Corinthians 6:14 Sette your selues therfore at large, and beare not a straungers yoke with the vnbeleuers. For what feloweshyppe hath ryghtuousnes with vnryghtuousnes? What companye hath lyght with darkenes?
2 Corinthians 6:15 What concorde hath Christe with Belyall? Eyther what parte hath he that beleueth with an infydele?
2 Corinthians 6:16 Howe agreeth the temple of God with Images. And ye are the temple of that lyuynge God, as sayed God. I wyll dwell amonge them, and walke among them, and wyll be theyr God, and they shall be my people.
2 Corinthians 6:17 Wherfore come out from among them, and separate youre selues (sayeth the Lorde) and touche none vncleane thynge: so wyll I receyue you,
2 Corinthians 6:18 and wyll be a father vnto you, and ye shall be vnto me sonnes and doughters, sayth the Lorde almyghtye.

CHAPTER: 7

2 Corinthians 7:1 Seynge that we haue such promyses dearely beloued, let vs cleanse oure selues from al fylthynesse of the fleshe & spyrite, and grow vp to full holynesse in the feare of God.
2 Corinthians 7:2 Vnderstande vs. We haue hurte no man: we haue corrupt no man: we haue defrauded no man.
2 Corinthians 7:3 I speake not thys to condempne you: for I haue shewed you before, that ye are in oure hertes to dye, and lyue wyth you.
2 Corinthians 7:4 I am very bolde ouer you, and reioyce gentelye in you. I am fylled with comforte, and am excedynge ioyouse in all oure trybulatyons.
2 Corinthians 7:5 For when we were come into Macedonia, our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on euerye syde. Outwarde was fyghtynge, inwarde was feare.
2 Corinthians 7:6 Neuerthelesse GOD that comforteth the abiect, comforteth vs at the comming of Tytus.
2 Corinthians 7:7 And not with hys commynge onelye: but also wyth the consolacyon wherewith he was comforted of you. For he tolde vs youre desyre, youre mournyng, youre feruent mynde to me warde, so that I now reioyce the more.
2 Corinthians 7:8 Wherfore thoughe I made you sory with a letter, I repent not, though I dyd repent. For I perceyue that, that same Epistle made you sory, thoughe it were but for a season.
2 Corinthians 7:9 But I nowe reioyce, not that ye were sory, but that ye so sorowed, that ye repented. For ye sorowed Godlye, so that in nothyng ye were hurt by vs.
2 Corinthians 7:10 For Godly sorowe causeth repentaunce vnto saluacyon, not to be repented of: when worldlye sorowe causeth death.
2 Corinthians 7:11 Beholde, what diligence thys Godlye sorowe that ye toke, hath wroughte in you: yea it caused you to cleare your selues. It caused indignacyon, it caused feare, it caused desyre, it caused a feruent mynde, it caused punyshement. For in all thynges ye haue shewed your selues that ye are cleare in that matter.
2 Corinthians 7:12 Wherfore thoughe I wrote vnto you: I dyd it not for hys cause that dyd hurte, neyther for hys cause that was hurt: but that our good mynd whiche we haue towarde you in the syght of God, myght appeare vnto you.
2 Corinthians 7:13 Therfore we are comforted, because ye are comforted: yea and excedynglye the more ioyed we, for the ioye that Titus had, because his spyryte was refreshed of you all.
2 Corinthians 7:14 I am therfore, not nowe ashamed, though I bosted my selfe to hym of you. For as all thynges which I preached vnto you are true, euen so is oure bostyng, that I bosted my selfe to Titus with all, founde true.
2 Corinthians 7:15 And nowe is his inwarde affection more aboundante towarde you, when he remembreth the obedience of euerye one of you, howe with feare and tremblynge ye receyued hym,
2 Corinthians 7:16 I reioyce that. I maye be bolde ouer you in all thynges.

CHAPTER: 8

2 Corinthians 8:1 I do you to wyt brethren, of the grace of God, which is geuen in the congregacyons of Macedonia,
2 Corinthians 8:2 howe that the aboundaunce of theyr reioysynge is, that they are tryed with muche trybulacyon. And therto thoughe they were excedynge poore, yet haue they geuen excedynge richelye, and that in synglenesse.
2 Corinthians 8:3 For to theyr powers (I beare recorde) ye and beyonde theyr power, they were wyllynge of theyr owne accorde,
2 Corinthians 8:4 & prayed vs with great instaunce that we would receyue theyr benefyte, and suffer them to be partakers with other in mynystrynge to the saynctes.
2 Corinthians 8:5 And thys they dyd, not as we loked for: but gaue theyr owne selues fyrste to the Lorde, and after vnto vs by the wyl of God:
2 Corinthians 8:6 so that we coulde not but desyre Titus to accomplyshe the same beneuolence amonge you also, euen as he had begonne.
2 Corinthians 8:7 Nowe therfore, as ye are ryche in al partties in fayth, in worde, in knoweledge, in all feruentnes, and in loue, which ye haue to vs: euen so se that ye be plenteous in thys beneuolence.
2 Corinthians 8:8 Thys saye I not as commaundyng: but because other are so feruente, therfore proue I youre loue, whether it be perfecte or no.
2 Corinthians 8:9 Ye knowe the lyberalytie of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, whiche though he were ryche, yet for youre sakes became pore that ye thorowe hys pouertye myght be made ryche.
2 Corinthians 8:10 And I geue counsell hereto. For thys is expediente for you, whiche beganne, not to do onelye, but also to wyll, a yeare a go.
2 Corinthians 8:11 Nowe therfore performe the dede: that as there was in you a redynes to wyll, euen so ye may performe the dede of that whiche ye haue.
2 Corinthians 8:12 For yf there be fyrste a wyllynge mynde, it is accepted accordyng to that a man hath, and not accordynge to that he hath not.
2 Corinthians 8:13 It is not my mynde that other be set at ease, and ye broughte into combraunce:
2 Corinthians 8:14 but that there be equalnes nowe at thys tyme, that youre aboundaunce succoure theyr lacke: that theyr aboundaunce maye supplye youre lacke:
2 Corinthians 8:15 that there may be equalitie, agreyng to that which is wryten. He that gathered muche, had neuer the more aboundaunce, and he that gathered lyttell had neuerthelesse.
2 Corinthians 8:16 Thankes be vnto God, which put in the hert of Titus the same good mynde towarde you.
2 Corinthians 8:17 For he accepted the requeste, yea rather he was so well willyng that of hys owne accorde he came vnto you.
2 Corinthians 8:18 We haue sente with him that brother whose lande is the Gospell thorowe out all the congregacyons,
2 Corinthians 8:19 and not so onely, but is also chosen of the congregacyons to be a felowe with vs in oure iorneye concernynge thys beneuolence that is ministred by vs vnto the prayse of the Lorde, and to stere vp youre prompte mynde.
2 Corinthians 8:20 For this we eschue, that anye man shoulde rebuke vs in thys plentuous distribucyon, that is ministred by vs,
2 Corinthians 8:21 and therfore make prouision for honest thynges, not in the syghte of God onelye, but also in the syght of men.
2 Corinthians 8:22 We haue sent with them a brother of ours whome we haue oftentimes proued diligente in many thinges, but now much more diligent.
2 Corinthians 8:23 The greate confydence whiche I haue in you hath caused me thus to do, partely for Tytus sake, whiche is my felowe and helper as concernynge you, partely because of other which are oure brethren, and the messengers of the congregacyons, and the glorye of Christe.
2 Corinthians 8:24 Wherfore shewe vnto them the profe of your loue, and of the reioysynge that we haue of you, that the congregacyons maye se it.

CHAPTER: 9

2 Corinthians 9:1 Of the ministrynge to the saynctes, it is but superfluous for me to wryte vnto you:
2 Corinthians 9:2 for I knowe your redynes of mynde whereof I boste my selfe vnto them of Macedonia, and saye that Achaia was prepared a yeare a go, and youre feruentnes hath prouoked manye.
2 Corinthians 9:3 Neuerthelesse yet haue I sent these brethren, lest oure reioysynge ouer you shoulde be in vayne in thys behalfe, and that ye (as I haue sayed) prepare your selues,
2 Corinthians 9:4 lest parauenture yf they of Macedonia come with me, and fynde you vnprepared, the bost that I made in thys matter, shoulde be a shame to vs. I saye not vnto you.
2 Corinthians 9:5 Wherfore I thought it necessarye to exhorte the brethren, to come before hande vnto you, for to prepare your good blessyng promysed afore, that it myght be redye, so that it be a blessynge, and not a defraudynge.
2 Corinthians 9:6 Thys yet remember, howe that he whiche soweth lyttell, shal reape lyttell, & he that soweth plentuously, shall reape plentuously.
2 Corinthians 9:7 And let euery man do accordyng as he hath purposed in hys hert, not groundgingly, or of necessitie. For God loueth a chearefull geuer.
2 Corinthians 9:8 God is able to make you ryche in al grace that ye in al thynges hauyng suffycyent vnto the vttermoste, maye be ryche vnto all maner good workes,
2 Corinthians 9:9 as it is wrytten. He that sparsed abroade, and hath geuen to the pore, hys ryghtuousnes, remayneth for euer.
2 Corinthians 9:10 He that fyndeth the sower seed, shall minister breade for fode, and shall multyplye your seede and increace the frutes of youre ryghtuousnes that on all partyes,
2 Corinthians 9:11 ye maye be made riche in all synglenes, whiche causeth thorowe vs, thankes geuynge vnto God.
2 Corinthians 9:12 For the offyce of thys ministracyon, not onelye supplyeth the neede of the saynctes: but also is aboundaunte herein, that for thys laudable mynystrynge, thankes myghte be geuen to God of many,
2 Corinthians 9:13 whiche prayse God for the obedience of youre professyng the Gospell of Christe, and for youre synglenes in distrybutynge to them and to all men,
2 Corinthians 9:14 and in theyr prayers to God for you, long after you, for the aboundaunce grace of God geuen vnto you.
2 Corinthians 9:15 Thankes be vnto God for hys vnspakeable gyfte.

CHAPTER: 10

2 Corinthians 10:1 I Paule my selfe beseche you by the mekenesse and softenes of Christe, whiche when I am present amonge you, am of no reputacion, but am bolde toward you beynge absent,
2 Corinthians 10:2 I beseche you, that I nede not to be bolde, when I am present (with that same confydence, wherewith I am supposed to be bolde) agaynste some whiche repute vs as though we walked carnally.
2 Corinthians 10:3 Neuerthelesse thoughe we walke compassed wt the fleshe, yet we ware not fleshly.
2 Corinthians 10:4 For the weapens of oure warre are not carnal thynges, but thynges myghtye in God to caste doune stronge holdes,
2 Corinthians 10:5 wherewith we ouerthrowe Imaginations and euerye hye thynge that exalteth it selfe agaynste the knoweledge of God, and brynge into captiuite all vnderstandynge to the obedience of Christe,
2 Corinthians 10:6 and are redye to take vengeaunce on all disobedience, when youre obedience is fulfylled.
2 Corinthians 10:7 Loke ye on thynges after the vtter apparence? Yf any man truste in hym selfe that he is Christes, let the same also consydre of him self that as he is Christes, euen so are we Christes
2 Corinthians 10:8 and thoughe I shoulde boste my selfe some what more of oure authoritie which the Lord hath geuen vs to edifye, and not to destroye you, it shoulde not be to my shame.
2 Corinthians 10:9 This say I, leste I shoulde seme, as thoughe I went about to make you afrayde with letters.
2 Corinthians 10:10 For the Epystles (sayeth he) are sore and stronge, but hys bodely presence is weake, and hys speach rude.
2 Corinthians 10:11 Let hym that is suche, thynke on thys wyse, that as we are in wordes by letters when we are absent, such are we in dedes when we are present.
2 Corinthians 10:12 For we can not fynde in oure hertes to make oure selues of the numbre of them, or to compare oure selues to them, whiche laud them selues, neuerthelesse while they measure them selues wyth them selues, and compare them selues with them selues, they vnderstande nought.
2 Corinthians 10:13 But we wyll not reioyce aboue measure: but accordynge to the quantitye of the measure, whiche God hath distrybuted vnto vs, a measure that reacheth euen vnto you.
2 Corinthians 10:14 For we stretche not oure selues beyonde measure, as thoughe we had not reacheth vnto you. For euen vnto you haue we come with the Gospell of Christe,
2 Corinthians 10:15 and we boste not oure selues out of measure in other mens labours. Yea, and we hope, when your fayth is increased amonge you, to be magnifyed accordynge to oure measure more largelye,
2 Corinthians 10:16 and to preache the Gospell in those regyons, whiche are beyonde you: and not to reioyce of that whiche is by another mans measure prepared already.
2 Corinthians 10:17 Let hym that reioyceth, reioyce in the Lord.
2 Corinthians 10:18 For he that prayseth hym self, is not allowed: but he whom the Lorde prayseth.

CHAPTER: 11

2 Corinthians 11:1 Wolde to God ye coulde suffre me a lytell in my folyshenes: yea, and I praye you, forbeare me.
2 Corinthians 11:2 For I am gelous ouer you with godly gelousye. For I coupled you to one man, to make you a chaste virgyn to Christe.
2 Corinthians 11:3 But I feare leste as the serpente begyled Eue thorowe hys suttelty, euen so youre wyttes shoulde be corrupte from the synglenes that is in Christe.
2 Corinthians 11:4 For yf he that commeth, preache another Iesus then hym whom we preached: or yf ye receyue another spiryte then that whiche ye haue receyued: other another Gospell then that ye haue receyued, ye myght ryghte well haue bene content.
2 Corinthians 11:5 I impose that I was not behynde the chief Apostles.
2 Corinthians 11:6 Though I be rude in speakynge, yet I am not so in knoweledge. Howe be it amonge you: we are knowen to the vttermoste what we are in all thynges.
2 Corinthians 11:7 Dyd I therein synne, because I submytted my selfe, that ye myght be exalted, and because I preached to you the Gospell of God fre?
2 Corinthians 11:8 I robbed other congregacyons, and toke wages of them, to do you seruyce with al.
2 Corinthians 11:9 And when I was present with you, and had nede, I was greuous to no man, for that whiche was lackynge vnto me, the brethren whiche came from Macedonia, supplyed: and in all thynge I kept my selfe that I shoulde not be greuous to you, & so wyl I kepe my selfe.
2 Corinthians 11:10 Yf the trueth of Christe be in me, thys reioysynge shall not be taken from me in the regyons of Achaia.
2 Corinthians 11:11 Wherfore? Because I loue you not? God knoweth.
2 Corinthians 11:12 Neuerthelesse what I do, that wyll I do, to cut awaye occasyon from them which desyre occasyon, that they myght be founde lyke vnto vs in that wherein they reioyce.
2 Corinthians 11:13 For these false Apostles are disceytfull workers, and fashyon them selues lyke vnto the Apostles of Christe.
2 Corinthians 11:14 And no maruail for Satan hym selfe is chaunged into the fashyon of an angell of lyghte.
2 Corinthians 11:15 Therfore it is no greate thynge, thoughe hys mynysters fashyon them selues as thoughe they were the mynisters of rightuousnes, whose end shalbe accordynge to theyr dedes.
2 Corinthians 11:16 I saye agayne, lest anye man thynke that I am folyshe, or els euen nowe take me as a fole, that I maye boaste my selfe a lyttell.
2 Corinthians 11:17 That I speake, I speake it not after the wayes of the Lorde, but as it were folishly, while we are nowe come to bostynge.
2 Corinthians 11:18 Seyng that manye reioyce after the fleshe, I will reioyse also.
2 Corinthians 11:19 For ye suffer foles gladly, because that ye youre selues are wyse.
2 Corinthians 11:20 For ye suffre euen yf a man brynge you into bondage: yf a man deuoure, yf a man take yf a man exalte hym selfe, yf a man smite you on the face.
2 Corinthians 11:21 I speake as concernynge rebuke, as thoughe we had bene weake. Howe be it, wherein soeuer any man dare be bolde (I speake folyshly) I dare be bolde also.
2 Corinthians 11:22 They are Hebrues, so am I: They are Israelytes, euen so am I. They are the seede of Abraham, euen so am I.
2 Corinthians 11:23 They are the ministers of CHRISTE (I speake as a fole) I am more: In labours more aboundaunte: In strypes aboue measure: In pryson more plentuouslye: In death ofte.
2 Corinthians 11:24 Of the Iewes .v. tymes receyued I euerye tyme .xl. strypes saue one.
2 Corinthians 11:25 Thryse was I beaten with roddes. I was once stoned. I suffered thryse shipwracke. Nyght and daye haue I bene in the depe of the sea.
2 Corinthians 11:26 In iorneyeyng often: in parils of waters: in parylles of robbers: in ieoperdyes amonge the heathen. I haue bene in peryls in cytyes, in peryls in wyldernes, in peryls in the sea, in peryls among false brethren,
2 Corinthians 11:27 in laboure and trauayle, in watchyng often, in hunger, in thyrste, in fastynges often, in colde, and in nakednes.
2 Corinthians 11:28 And besyde the thynges whiche outwardelye happen vnto me, I am combered dayelye, and do care for all congregations.
2 Corinthians 11:29 Who is weake, and I am not weake? Who is hurte in the faythe, and my herte burneth not?
2 Corinthians 11:30 Yf I muste nedes reioyce, I wyll reioyce of myne infirmities.
2 Corinthians 11:31 The God and father of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, whiche is blessed for euermore, knoweth that I lye not
2 Corinthians 11:32 In the citie of Damascon the gouerner of the people vnder king Aretas, layd watche in the citie of the Damascens, and woulde haue caught me,
2 Corinthians 11:33 and at a wyndowe was I let doune in a basket thorow the wall, and so scaped hys handes.

CHAPTER: 12

2 Corinthians 12:1 It is not expedyent for me (no doubte) to reioyce. Neuerthelesse I wyll come to visions and reuelations of the Lorde.
2 Corinthians 12:2 I knowe a man in Christe aboue .xiiij. yeares agone (whether he were in the bodye I cannot tell, or whether he were oute of the bodye I cannot tell, God knoweth) whiche was taken vp into the third heauen.
2 Corinthians 12:3 And I knowe the same man (whether in the bodye, or oute of the bodye, I cannot tell, God knoweth)
2 Corinthians 12:4 howe that he was taken vp into paradyse, and hearde wordes not to be spoken, whiche no man can vtter.
2 Corinthians 12:5 Of thys man wyll I reioyce, of my selfe wyll I not reioyce, excepte it be of myne infyrmytyes.
2 Corinthians 12:6 And yet thoughe I woulde reioyce, I shoulde not be a fole: for I shoulde saye the trueth: Neuerthelesse I spare, lest anye man shoulde thynke of me aboue that he seeth me to be, or heareth of me.
2 Corinthians 12:7 And lest I shoulde be exalted out of measure thorowe the aboundaunce of reuelacions there was geuen vnto me vnquyetnes of the fleshe, the messenger of Satan to buffete me: because I shoulde no be exalted oute of measure.
2 Corinthians 12:8 For thys thynge besought I the Lorde thryse, that it myght departe from me.
2 Corinthians 12:9 And he sayde vnto me: my grace is suffycyent for the. For my strengthe is made perfecte thorowe weakenes. Very gladly therfor wil I reioyce of my weakenes, that the strength of Christe maye dwell in me
2 Corinthians 12:10 Therfore haue I delectacyon in infyrmities, in rebukes, in nede, in persecutions, in anguyshe, for Christes sake. For when I am weake, then am I stronge.
2 Corinthians 12:11 I am made a fole in bostynge my selfe. Ye haue compelled me: I ought to haue bene commended of you. For in nothynge was I inferyor vnto the chiefe Apostles. Thoughe I be nothynge
2 Corinthians 12:12 yet the tokens of an Apostle were wroughte amonge you with al pacience: with signes, and wonders and myghty dedes.
2 Corinthians 12:13 For what is it wherein ye were inferyours vnto other congregacyons except it be therein that I was not greuous vnto you. Forgeue me thys wrong done vnto you.
2 Corinthians 12:14 Behold the now thyrde time I am redy to come vnto you, and yet wyll I not be greuouse vnto you. For I seke not yours, but you. Also the chyldren ought not to lay vp for the fathers & mothers but the fathers a mothers for the chyldren.
2 Corinthians 12:15 I wyll very gladly bestowe, and wyll be bestowed for youre soules: thoughe the more I loue you, the lesse I am loued agayne.
2 Corinthians 12:16 But be it that I greued you not: neuerthelesse I was crafty and toke you with gyle.
2 Corinthians 12:17 Dyd I pyl you by any of them which I sent vnto you?
2 Corinthians 12:18 I desyred Titus, and with hym I sent a brother. Did Tytus defraude you of any thing? walked we not in one spyryte? walked we not in lyke steppes?
2 Corinthians 12:19 Agayne, thynke ye that we excuse oure selues. We speake in Christe in the syght of God. But we do all thynges dearelye beloued for youre edifiynge.
2 Corinthians 12:20 For I feare least it come to passe, that when I come, I shall not fynde you suche as I woulde, and I shalbe founde amonge you debate, enuiynge, wrath, stryfe, backbytynges, whisperynges, swellynges & discorde.
2 Corinthians 12:21 I feare leste when I come agayne, God brynge me lowe amonge you, and I be constrayned to bewayle many of them which haue synned already, and haue not repented of the vncleanes, fornicacyon, and wantonnes, whiche they haue commytted.

CHAPTER: 13

2 Corinthians 13:1 Nowe come I the thyrde time vnto you. In the mouthe of two or three wytnesses shall euery thing stande.
2 Corinthians 13:2 I tolde you before, & tell you before, and as I sayd when I was presente with you the seconde tyme, so wayte I now beynge absent to them which in tyme paste haue synned, and to all other, that yf I come agayne, I wyll not spare,
2 Corinthians 13:3 seyng that ye seke experience of Christe, whiche speaketh in me, which amonge you is not weake, but is myghty in you.
2 Corinthians 13:4 And verely thoughe it came of weakenes that he was crucyfyed, yet liueth he thorowe the power of GOD. And we no doubte are weake in hym: but we shall lyue with hym by the myght of God among you.
2 Corinthians 13:5 Proue youre selues whether you be in the fayth or not. Examen your owne selues: know ye not your owne selues, howe that Iesha Christe is in you, except ye be casteawayes?
2 Corinthians 13:6 I truste that ye shall knowe that we be not cast awayes.
2 Corinthians 13:7 I desyre before God that ye do none euyll, not that we shoulde seme commendale, but that ye shoulde do that which is honest: and let vs be counted as leude persons.
2 Corinthians 13:8 We can do nothynge agaynste the truth. But for the trueth,
2 Corinthians 13:9 we are glad when we are weake, & ye strong. Thys also we wyshe for, euen that ye were perfecte.
2 Corinthians 13:10 Therfore wryte I these thinges beynge absente, leste when I am presente I shoulde vse sharpenesse accordynge to the power whiche the Lorde hath geuen me, to edifye, and not to destroye.
2 Corinthians 13:11 Finally brethren fare ye well, be perfeccte, be of good comforte, be of one mynde, lyue in peace, and the God of loue, and peace, shal be with you.
2 Corinthians 13:12 Grete one another in an holy kysse.
2 Corinthians 13:13 All the saynctes salute you.
2 Corinthians 13:14 The grace of oure Lorde Iesus Christ, and the loue of God, and the feloweshyppe of the holye ghoste be with you all. Amen.

BOOK: Galatians

CHAPTER: 1

Galatians 1:1 Paul an Apostle, not of men, neyther by man, but by Iesus christ and by God the father, which raysed hym from death:
Galatians 1:2 and all the brethren whiche are with me. Vnto the congregacyons of Galacia.
Galatians 1:3 Grace be with you and peace from God the father, and from our Lorde Iesus Christ,
Galatians 1:4 whiche gaue hym selfe for oure synnes, to delyuer vs from thys present euyll worlde, thorow the wyll of God our father,
Galatians 1:5 to whom be prayse for euer and euer. Amen.
Galatians 1:6 I maruayle that ye are so sone turned from hym that called you in the grace of Christ, vnto an other Gospell:
Galatians 1:7 whiche is nothynge els, but that there be some which trouble you, and entende to peruert the Gospell of Christe.
Galatians 1:8 Neuerthelesse thoughe we oure selues, or an Angell from heauen, preache any other Gospell vnto you then that whiche we haue preached vnto you, holde hym as accurssed.
Galatians 1:9 As I haue sayed before, so saye I nowe agayne, yf anye man preache any other thynge vnto you, then that you haue receyued, holde hym accursed.
Galatians 1:10 Preache I mans doctryne or Goddes? Eyther go I aboute to please men? Yf I studyed to please men, I were not the seruauat of Christe.
Galatians 1:11 I certifye you brethren, that the Gospell which was preached of me, was, not after the maner of men,
Galatians 1:12 neyther receyued I it of man, neyther was I taughte it, but receyued it by the reuelacyon of Iesus Christ.
Galatians 1:13 For ye haue hearde of my conuersacyon in tyme paste, in the Iewes wayes, howe that beyonde measure I persecuted the congregacyon of God, & spoyled it,
Galatians 1:14 and preuayled in the Iewes lawe, aboue many of my companyons, which were of myne own nacyon, & was a much more feruent mayntayner of the tradicions of the elders.
Galatians 1:15 But when it pleased God (whiche separated me from my mothers wombe, and called me by hys grace,
Galatians 1:16 for to declare hys sonne by me) that I shoulde preache hym amonge the heathen immediatly I communed not of the matter with fleshe and bloude,
Galatians 1:17 neyther returned to Hierusalem to them whiche were Apostles before me, but went my wayes into Arabia, and came agayne to Damasco.
Galatians 1:18 Then after .iij. yere I returned to Ierusalem to se Peter and abode with hym .xv. dayes,
Galatians 1:19 no nother of the Apostles sawe I, saue Iames the Lordes brother.
Galatians 1:20 The thynges which I wryte beholde God knoweth I lye not.
Galatians 1:21 After that I went into the costes of Syria, and Cilicia,
Galatians 1:22 and was knowen as touchynge my person vnto the congregacyons of Iewry, whiche were in Christe,
Galatians 1:23 But they hearde onlye that he which persecuted vs in tyme past nowe preacheth the fayth which before he destroyed.
Galatians 1:24 And they gloryfyed God on my be halfe.

CHAPTER: 2

Galatians 2:1 Then .xiiij. yeares after that, I went vp agayne to Hierusalem with Barnabas, and toke with me Titus also.
Galatians 2:2 Yea and I wente vp by reuelacion, and communed with them of the Gospell which I preache amonge the gentyls: but a part with them which were counted chiefe, lest it shoulde haue bene thought, that I should runne or had runne in vayne.
Galatians 2:3 Also Tytus which was wt me, though he were a Greke, yet was not compelled to be circumcysed,
Galatians 2:4 and that because of incommers beynge false brethren which came in amonge other to spye out our lybertye which we haue in Christe Iesus, that they myghte brynge vs into bondage.
Galatians 2:5 To whom we gaue no roume, no not for the space of an houre, as concernynge to be brought into subieccion, & that because that the truth of the Gospel might contynue with you.
Galatians 2:6 Of them whiche seme to be great (what they were in time passed, it maketh no matter to me: God loketh on no mans person) neuerthelesse they which seme great, added nothing to me.
Galatians 2:7 But contrary wyse, when they sawe that the Gospel ouer that vncircumcysyon was committed vnto me, as the gospell ouer the circumcisyon was vnto Peter:
Galatians 2:8 for he that was mighty in Peter in the Apostleshyppe ouer the circumcisyon the same was myghty in me amonge the Gentyls,
Galatians 2:9 and therfore when they perceyued the grace that was geuen vnto me, then Iames, Cephas, and Iohn, whiche semed to be pyllars, gaue to me & Barnabas the ryght handes, & agreed with vs, that we should preach amonge the Heathen, and they amonge the Iewes,
Galatians 2:10 warnyng onely, that we should remembre the pore. Whiche thyng also I was dylygently to do.
Galatians 2:11 And when Peter was come to Antioche, I withstode hym in the face, for he was worthy to be blamed.
Galatians 2:12 For yer that certayne came from Iames, he eate with the Gentyls. But when they were come, he withdrue and separated hym selfe, fearyng them which were of the circumcysyon.
Galatians 2:13 And the other Iewes dissembled lykewyse, in so muche that Barnabas was brought into theyr simulacyon also.
Galatians 2:14 But when I sawe, that they went not the ryghte waye after the truth of the Gospell, I sayde vnto Peter before all men, yf thou beynge a Iew, lyuest after the maner of the Gentyls, and not as do the Iewes: why causeste thou the Gentyls to lyue as do the Iewes?
Galatians 2:15 We whiche are Iewes by nature, and not sinners of the Gentyls,
Galatians 2:16 knowe that a man is not iustifyed by the dedes of the lawe, but by the fayth of Iesus Christe. And therfore we haue beleued on Iesus Christe that we myghte be iustifyed by the fayth of Christe, and not by the dedes of the lawe, because that by the dedes of the lawe no fleshe can be iustifyed.
Galatians 2:17 Yf then whyle we seke to be made ryghtuousnes by Christe, we our selues are founde synners, is not then Christe the mynister of synne? God forbyd,
Galatians 2:18 For yf I buylde agayne that whiche I destroyed, then make I myself a treaspaser.
Galatians 2:19 But I thorowe the lawe, am dead to the law: that I myght lyue vnto God
Galatians 2:20 I am crucyfyed with Christ. I lyue verelye: yet now not I, but Christe lyueth in me. For the lyfe which I now lyue in the, flesh I lyue by the faythe of the sonne of God whiche loued me, and gaue hym selfe for me.
Galatians 2:21 I despyse not the grace of God. For yf ryghteousnes come of the lawe, then Christ dyed in vayne

CHAPTER: 3

Galatians 3:1 O folyshe Galathyans: who hath wytched you, that ye should not beleue the truthe? To whom Iesus Christ was descrybed before the eyes, and among you crucyfyed.
Galatians 3:2 Thys onelye woulde I learne of you, receyued ye the spyryte by the dedes of the law, or els by preachynge of the faith?
Galatians 3:3 Are ye so vnwyse that after ye haue begonne in the spyryte, ye woulde nowe ende in the fleshe?
Galatians 3:4 So many thinges then ye haue suffered in vaine, yf that be vayne.
Galatians 3:5 Which mynistred to you the spyryte, and worketh myracles among you, doth he it thorowe the dedes of that lawe or by preachynge of the fayth?
Galatians 3:6 Euer as Abraham beleued God, and it was ascrybed to hym for ryghtuousnes.
Galatians 3:7 Vnderstande therfore, that they whiche are of fayth, the same are the chyldren of Abraham.
Galatians 3:8 For the scripture sawe afore hand, that God woulde iustifye the heathen thorow fayth, & therfore shewed before hand glad tydynges vnto Abraham. In the shall all nacyons be blessed.
Galatians 3:9 So then they whiche be of faythe are blessed with faythful Abraham.
Galatians 3:10 For as many as are vnder the dedes of the lawe, are vnder malediccyon. For it is wrytten: cursed is euery man that contynueth not in all thynges, whiche are wrytten in the boke of the law, to fulfyll them.
Galatians 3:11 That no man is iustifyed by the lawe in the syght of God, is euydente. For the iuste shall lyue by fayth.
Galatians 3:12 The lawe is not of fayth: but the man that fulfylleth the thinges contayned in the lawe, shall lyue in them.
Galatians 3:13 But Christ hath delyuered vs from the curse of the lawe, and was made accursed for vs. For it is wrytten: cursed is euery one that hangeth on tre,
Galatians 3:14 that the blessyng of Abraham myghte come on the Gentyles thorowe Iesus Christ and that we myght receyue the promes of the spyryte thorow fayth.
Galatians 3:15 Brethren I wyll speake after the maner of men. Thoughe it be but a mans testamente, yet no man despyseth it, or addeth any thyng there to when it is once alowed.
Galatians 3:16 To Abraham and hys seede were the promyses made. He sayth not in the sedes as in manye: but in thy sede as in one, whiche is Christe.
Galatians 3:17 Thys I saye, that the lawe which beganne afterward beyonde: .iiij.C. and .xxx. yeares doth not disanull the testament, that was confyrmed afore of God vnto Christe warde, to make the promes of none effecte.
Galatians 3:18 For yf the inherytaunce come of the lawe, it commeth not of promes. But God gaue it vnto Abraham by promes
Galatians 3:19 Wherfore then serueth the lawe? The law was added because of transgressyon (tyll the sede came to whiche the promes was made) & it was ordeyned by angels in the hande of a mediator,
Galatians 3:20 he is not a mediator of one. But God is one.
Galatians 3:21 Is the lawe then agaynst the promes of God? God forbyd. Howbeit yf there had bene a lawe geuen whiche could haue geuen lyfe: then no doubt ryghteousnes should haue come by the lawe.
Galatians 3:22 But the scrypture concluded all thynges vnder synne that the promes by the fayth of Iesus Christe shoulde be geuen vnto them that beleue.
Galatians 3:23 Before that fayth came, we were kept and shut vp vnder the lawe, to the fayth which shuld afterward be declared.
Galatians 3:24 Wherfore the lawe was our scholemaster to the tyme of Christ, that we might be made ryghtuouse by fayth.
Galatians 3:25 But after that fayth is come, nowe are we no lenger vnder a scholemayster.
Galatians 3:26 For ye are al the sonnes of God, by the fayth whiche is in Christe Iesus.
Galatians 3:27 For al ye that are baptysed, haue put on Christ.
Galatians 3:28 Nowe is there no Iewe neyther gentyle, ther is neyther bonde nor free: there is neyther man nor woman, but ye are all one thyng in christ Iesu.
Galatians 3:29 Yf ye be Christes, then are ye Abrahams seede and heyres by promes.

CHAPTER: 4

Galatians 4:1 And I say that the heyre as longe as he is a chylde, differeth not from a seruaunt thoughe he be Lorde of all,
Galatians 4:2 but is vnder tutours and gouernours, vntyll the tyme appoynted of the father.
Galatians 4:3 Euen so we as longe as we were chyldren, were in bondage vnder the ordinaunces of the world.
Galatians 4:4 But when the tyme was full come, God sente hys sonne made of a woman, and made bonde vnto the lawe,
Galatians 4:5 to redeme them which were vnder the lawe: that we thorowe eleccyon myght receyue the enheritaunce that belongeth vnto the naturall sonnes.
Galatians 4:6 Because ye are sonnes, God hath sent the spyryte of hys sonne into our hertes, whiche cryeth Abba father.
Galatians 4:7 Wherfore now thou art not a seruaunt but a sonne. Yf thou be the sonne, thou arte also the heyre of God thorowe Christe.
Galatians 4:8 Notwithstandynge when ye knewe not God ye dyd seruyce vnto them, which by nature were no Goddes.
Galatians 4:9 But nowe seynge, ye knowe God (yea rather are knowen of God) how is it that ye turne agayne to the weake & beggerly ceremonies, wherevnto agayne ye desyre a freshe to be in bondage?
Galatians 4:10 Ye obserue dayes, and monethes, and tymes, and yeares.
Galatians 4:11 I am in feare of you lest I haue bestowed on you laboure in vayne.
Galatians 4:12 Brethren I beseche you, be ye as I am, for I am as ye are. Ye haue not hurte me at all.
Galatians 4:13 Ye knowe howe thorowe infyrmytye of the fleshe, I preached the Gospell vnto you at the fyrste.
Galatians 4:14 And my temptacion whiche I suffered by reason of my flesh, ye dispysed not, neyther abhorred, but receyued me as an Angell of God: yea as Christe Iesu.
Galatians 4:15 How happye were ye then? for I beare you recorde that yf it had bene possyble, ye woulde haue plucked oute youre owne eyes, and haue geuen them to me.
Galatians 4:16 Am I therfore become your enemye, because I tell you the truth?
Galatians 4:17 They are gelous ouer you amysse. Yea, they intende to exclude you, that ye should be feruent to them ward.
Galatians 4:18 It is good alwayes to be feruent, so it be in a good thinge, and not onelye when I am presente with you.
Galatians 4:19 My lytle chyldren (of whome I trauayle in byrth agayne vntyll Christe be fashyoned in you)
Galatians 4:20 I woulde I were with you now, and coulde chaunge my voyce, for I stande in a doubte of you.
Galatians 4:21 Tell me ye that desyre to be vnder the law haue ye not heard of the law?
Galatians 4:22 For it is writen, that Abraham had two sonnes, the one by a bonde mayd the other by a fre woman.
Galatians 4:23 Yea and he whiche was of the bond woman, was borne after the fleshe: but he whiche was of the fre woman, was borne by promes.
Galatians 4:24 Whiche thynges betoken misterye. For these women are two testamentes the one from the mounte Syna, whiche gendreth to bondage whiche is Agar.
Galatians 4:25 For mounte Syna is called Agar in Arabia, and bordreth vpon the citie, which is nowe Hierusalem, and is in bondage with her chyldren.
Galatians 4:26 But Hierusalem, whiche is aboue, is fre, whiche is the mother of vs all.
Galatians 4:27 For it is written: Reioyce thou baren, that bearest no chyldren: breake forth and crye, thou that trauaylest not. For the desolate hath many more children then she whiche hath an husband.
Galatians 4:28 Brethren we are after the maner of Isaac children of promes.
Galatians 4:29 But as then he that was borne carnally, persecuted him that was borne spirytuallye. Euen so is it nowe.
Galatians 4:30 Neuerthelesse what sayth the scripture: put awaye the bond woman and her sonne. For the sonne of the bond woman shall not be heyre with the sonne of the fre woman.
Galatians 4:31 So then brethren we are not chyldren of the bonde woman, but of the fre woman.

CHAPTER: 5

Galatians 5:1 Stande fast therfore in the lybertye wherewith Christ hath made vs free and wrappe not your selues againe in the yoke of bondage.
Galatians 5:2 Beholde I Paule saye vnto you, that yf ye be circumcysed Christe shall profyte you nothynge at all.
Galatians 5:3 I testifye agayne to euery man whiche is circumcysed that he is bounde to kepe the whole lawe.
Galatians 5:4 Ye are gone quyte from Christe as manye as are iustifyed by the law, and are fallen from grace.
Galatians 5:5 We loke for, and hope in the spiryte, to be iustifyed thorow fayth.
Galatians 5:6 For in Iesu Christ nether is circumcysion any thing worth, neyther yet vncircumcysyon, but fayth which by loue is myghtye in operacyon.
Galatians 5:7 Ye dyd runne wel: who was a let to you, that ye shoulde not obeye the trueth?
Galatians 5:8 Euen that counsell that is not of hym that called you.
Galatians 5:9 A lytell leuen doeth leuen the whole lumpe of dowe.
Galatians 5:10 I haue trust towarde you in the Lorde, that ye wyll be none otherwyse mynded. He that troubleth you, shall beare hys iudgemente, whatsoeuer he be.
Galatians 5:11 Brethren, yf I yet preache circumcysyon: why do I yet suffer persecutyon? For then had the offence whiche the crosse geueth, ceased.
Galatians 5:12 I woulde to God they were separated from you, whiche trouble you.
Galatians 5:13 Brethren ye were called into lybertye onelye let not youre lybertye be an occasyon vnto the fleshe, but in loue serue one another.
Galatians 5:14 For all the lawe is fulfylled in one worde: whiche is thys: thou shalte loue thyne neyghboure as thy selfe.
Galatians 5:15 Yf ye byte and deuour one another: take hede leaste ye be consumed one of another.
Galatians 5:16 I saye: walke in the spyryte, and fulfyl not the lustes of the fleshe.
Galatians 5:17 For the flesh lusteth contrarye to the spirite, and the spirite contrarye to the fleshe. These are contrarye one to the other, so that ye cannot do that which ye would.
Galatians 5:18 But and yf ye be led of the spyryte, then are ye not vnder the lawe.
Galatians 5:19 The dedes of the flesh are manyfeste, which are these aduoutrye, fornicacyon, vncleannes, wantonnes,
Galatians 5:20 Idolatrye wytchecrafte, hatred, varyaunce, zele, wrathe stryfe, sedityon, sectes,
Galatians 5:21 enuiynge, murther, drounkennes, glottonye, and suche lyke: of the whiche I tell you before, as I haue tolde you in tymes past, that they whiche commytte suche thynges shall not enheryte the kingdome of God.
Galatians 5:22 But the frute of the spiryte, is loue, ioye peace, longe sufferynge, gentylnes, goodnes, faithfulnes,
Galatians 5:23 mekenes, temperauncye. Against suche there is no lawe.
Galatians 5:24 They that are Christes haue crucyfyed the fleshe with the appetytes and lustes.
Galatians 5:25 If we lyue in the spyryte: let vs walke in the spyryte.
Galatians 5:26 Let vs not be vayne gloryouse, prouokynge one another, and enuyinge one another.

CHAPTER: 6

Galatians 6:1 Brethren, yf any man be fallen by chaunce into any faute: ye which are spyrytuall helpe to amende hym, in the spyryte of mekenes, consyderynge thy selfe leste thou also be tempted.
Galatians 6:2 Beare ye one anothers burthen, and so fulfyl the lawe of christ.
Galatians 6:3 Yf anye man seme to hym selfe, that he is somwhat, when in dede he is nothynge the same deceyueth hym selfe in hys ymaginacyon.
Galatians 6:4 Let euerye man proue hys owne worke, and then shall he haue reioysynge in hys owne selfe, & not in another.
Galatians 6:5 For euery man shal beare his owne burthen.
Galatians 6:6 Let hym that is taughte in the worde, mynyster vnto him that teacheth hym, in al good thynges.
Galatians 6:7 Be not deceyued, God is not mocked. For what soeuer a man soweth, that shal he reape.
Galatians 6:8 He that soweth in hys fleshe: shall of the fleshe reape corrupcion. But he that soweth in the spyryte, shall of the spyryte reape lyfe euerlastynge.
Galatians 6:9 Let vs not be werye, of wel doynge. For when the tyme is come, we shall reape withoute werynes.
Galatians 6:10 Whyle we haue therfore tyme, let vs do good vnto all men, and specially vnto them which are of the houshold of faythe.
Galatians 6:11 Beholde how large a letter I haue writen vnto you with myne owne hande.
Galatians 6:12 As manye as desyre with vtwarde apperaunce to please carnallye, they coustrayne you to be circumcysed, onelye because they woulde not suffer persecucyon with the crosse of Christe.
Galatians 6:13 For they them selues which are circumcysed kepe not the lawe: but desyre to haue you circumcysed that they myght reioyce in your fleshe.
Galatians 6:14 God forbyd that I shoulde reioyce but in the crosse of oure Lorde Iesu Christe, wherby the worlde is crucifyed as touchyng me, and I as concernynge the worlde.
Galatians 6:15 For in Christe Iesu neyther circumcisyon auayleth any thing at all, nor vncircumcysyon but a newe creature.
Galatians 6:16 And as many as walke accordynge to thys rule peace be on them, and mercye, and vpon Israel that pertayneth to God.
Galatians 6:17 From hence forthe let no man put me to busynes. For I bare in my bodye the markes of the Lord Iesu.
Galatians 6:18 Brethren the grace of oure Lorde Iesu Christe be with youre spyryte. Amen.

BOOK: Ephesians

CHAPTER: 1

Ephesians 1:1 Paule an Apostle of Iesu Christe by the wyll of God. To the Saynctes whiche are at Ephesus, & to them whiche beleue on Iesus Christe.
Ephesians 1:2 Grace be wyth you, and peace from God oure father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christe.
Ephesians 1:3 Blessed be God the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, which hath blessed vs wyth all maner of spyrytuall blessynges in heauenlye thynges by Christe,
Ephesians 1:4 accordynge as he had chosen vs in hym, before the foundacyon of the worlde was layde that we shoulde be Saynctes and wythoute blame before hym thorow loue.
Ephesians 1:5 And ordeyned vs before thorowe Iesus Christe to be heyres vnto hym selfe, according to the pleasure of hys wyll,
Ephesians 1:6 to the prayse of the glory of hys grace, wherewith he hath made vs accepted in the beloued.
Ephesians 1:7 By whome we haue redemption thorowe hys bloude, euen the forgeuenes of synnes accordyng to the ryches of hys grace
Ephesians 1:8 he shedde on vs aboundauntlye in all wysdome & perseueraunce.
Ephesians 1:9 And hath opened vnto vs the misterye of hys wyll accordyng to hys pleasure and purposed the same in hym selfe
Ephesians 1:10 to haue it declared, when the tyme were full come, that all thynges, bothe the thynges whiche are in heauen, & also thynges whiche are in earth shoulde be gathered together euen in Christ:
Ephesians 1:11 that is to saye in hym in whome we are made heyres, and were thereto predestinate accordynge to the purpose of hym which worketh all thynges after the purpose of hys owne wyll,
Ephesians 1:12 that we whiche before beleued in Christ shoulde be vnto the prayse of hys glorye.
Ephesians 1:13 In whome also ye (after that ye hearde the worde of trueth. I meane the Gospel of your saluacyon, wherein ye beleued) were sealed with the holye spiryte of promes,
Ephesians 1:14 whiche is the ernest of oure inheritaunce, to redeme the purchased possessyon, and that vnto the lande of hys glorye.
Ephesians 1:15 Wherfore euen I (after that I hearde of the faythe whiche ye haue in the Lorde Iesu, and loue vnto all the saynctes)
Ephesians 1:16 cease not to geue thankes for you: makyng mencyon of you in my prayers,
Ephesians 1:17 that the God of oure Lord Iesus Christ, and the father of glorye myghte geue vnto you the spyryte of wysdome, and open to you the knoweledge of hym selfe,
Ephesians 1:18 and lyghten the eyes of youre myndes that ye myght knowe what that hope is, where vnto he hath called you, and what the ryches of hys gloryous inheritaunce is vpon the saynctes,
Ephesians 1:19 and what is the excedynge greatnes of hys power to vs warde, whiche beleue accordynge to the workynge of that hys myghtye power,
Ephesians 1:20 whiche he wrought in Christe, when he raysed hym from the dead, and set hym on hys ryght hande in heauenly thynges,
Ephesians 1:21 aboue all rule, power, and myghte, and domynyon, and aboue all names that are named, not in thys worlde onely, but also in the worlde to come,
Ephesians 1:22 and hath put all thynges, vnder hys fete, and hath made hym aboue all thynges the heade of the congregacyon,
Ephesians 1:23 which is hys bodye, and the fulnes of hym that fylleth all in all thynges.

CHAPTER: 2

Ephesians 2:1 And you hath he quickened also that were deade in treaspas & synne,
Ephesians 2:2 in the whiche in time passed, yet walked accordynge to the course of thys worlde, & after the gouerner that ruleth in the ayer, the spyrite that nowe worketh in the chyldren of vnbelefe,
Ephesians 2:3 amonge whiche we also had our conuersation in tyme paste, in the lustes of oure fleshe, and fulfylled the wyll of the fleshe and of the mynde, and were naturallye the chyldren of wrath, euen as well as other.
Ephesians 2:4 But God whiche is ryche in mercye thorow his great loue wherewith he loued vs,
Ephesians 2:5 euen when we were dead by synne, hath quickened vs together in Christ (for by grace are ye saued)
Ephesians 2:6 and hath rayseth vs vp together, & made vs sitte together in heauenly thynges thorowe Christ Iesu,
Ephesians 2:7 for to shewe in tymes to come the excedinge riches of hys grace in kyndnes to vswarde in Christe Iesus.
Ephesians 2:8 For by grace are ye made safe thorowe fayth, and that not of youre selues. For it is the gyfte of God,
Ephesians 2:9 and commeth not of workes, leste anye man should bost him selfe.
Ephesians 2:10 For we are his worckmanshyp created in Christe Iesus to good workes, vnto the, whyche God ordeined vs before, that we should walke in them.
Ephesians 2:11 Wherfore remember that ye, beynge in tyme passed Gentyles in fleshe, and were called vncircumcision to them whiche are called circumcision in the fleshe, whiche circumcision is made by handes:
Ephesians 2:12 Remember I saye, that ye were at that tyme without Christe, and were reputed aliantes from the commen welth of Israel, and were straungers from the testamentes of promes, and had no hope and were wythout God in thys worlde.
Ephesians 2:13 But nowe in Christ Iesu, ye whych a whyle ago were farre of are made nygh by the bloud of Christe.
Ephesians 2:14 For he is our peace, whiche had made of both one, and hath broken doune the wall that was a stop betwene vs,
Ephesians 2:15 and hath also put awaye thorowe hys fleshe the cause of hatred (that is to saye, the lawe of commaundementes contayned in the lawe written) for to make of twayne one newe man in hym selfe, so makinge peace:
Ephesians 2:16 and to reconcile both vnto God in one body thorowe his crosse, and slew hatered therby:
Ephesians 2:17 and came and preached peace to you, whiche were a farre of, and to them that were nygh.
Ephesians 2:18 For thorowe hym we both haue an open waye in, in one spyrite vnto the father.
Ephesians 2:19 Nowe therfore ye are no more straungers and foreners, but citizyns with the sainctes, and of the houshold of God:
Ephesians 2:20 and are buylt vpon the foundation of the Apostles & Prophetes, Iesus Christe beynge the head corner stone,
Ephesians 2:21 in whom euerye buyldinge coupled together, groweth vnto an holye temple in the Lorde,
Ephesians 2:22 in whom ye also are buylde together, and made an habitacion for god in the spyryte.

CHAPTER: 3

Ephesians 3:1 For this cause I Paule am in the bondes of Iesu Christ for your sakes, whiche are heathen.
Ephesians 3:2 Yf ye haue hearde of the ministration of the grace of God, whiche is geuen me to youward.
Ephesians 3:3 For by reuelation shewed he this misterie to me as I wrote aboue in fewe wordes,
Ephesians 3:4 wherby when ye reade, ye maye knowe myne vnderstandinge in the misterye of Christe.
Ephesians 3:5 Which mysterye in tymes passed was not opened to the sonnes of men, as it is now declared vnto his holye Apostles and Prophetes by the spyrite
Ephesians 3:6 that the Gentyles shoulde be inheritours also, and of the same bodye, and partakers of hys promes that is in Christe, by the meanes of the Gospell,
Ephesians 3:7 wherof I am made a mynyster, by the gyfte of the grace of God geuen vnto me thorowe the workynge of hys power.
Ephesians 3:8 Vnto me the leaste of all sainctes is this grace geuen, that I shoulde preache amonge the Gentyls the vnsearcheable ryches of Christe,
Ephesians 3:9 and to make all men se what the fellowshyp of the mysterye is, whiche from the beginninge of the worlde hath bene hyde in God, whiche made all thinges thorowe Iesus Christ,
Ephesians 3:10 to the entente, that nowe vnto the rulers & powers in heauen myght be knowen (by the congregation) the manifolde wysedome of God,
Ephesians 3:11 accordinge to the eternal purpose, whiche he purposed in Christe Iesu our Lorde,
Ephesians 3:12 by whom we are bold to drawe nighe in that truste, whyche we haue by fayth on on him.
Ephesians 3:13 Wherfore I desyre that ye faynte not because of my tribulations for your sakes, whiche is your prayse.
Ephesians 3:14 For this cause I bowe my knees vnto the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christ,
Ephesians 3:15 whiche is father ouer all that is called father, in heauen and in earth,
Ephesians 3:16 that he woulde graunt you accordinge to the ryches of his glorie, that ye maye be strengthed wyth mighte by his spirite in the inner man,
Ephesians 3:17 that Christ may dwell in your hertes by fayth, that ye beinge roted and grounded in loue,
Ephesians 3:18 might be able to comprehende wyth all sainctes, what is the bread and length, deapt and height:
Ephesians 3:19 and to knowe, what is the loue of Christe, whyche loue passeth knowledge, that ye myghte be fulfylled wyth all maner of fulnes, whiche cometh of God.
Ephesians 3:20 Vnto hym that is able to do excedinge aboundantly aboue all that we are or thinke, accordinge to the power that worketh in vs,
Ephesians 3:21 be prayse in the congregation by Iesus Christe, thorowout al generacions, from time to time. Amen.

CHAPTER: 4

Ephesians 4:1 I therfore whiche am in boundes for the Lordes sake, exhorte you, that ye walke worthy of the vocation wherwyth ye are called,
Ephesians 4:2 in all humblenes of mynde, and mekenes, and longe sufferynge, forbearinge one another thorowe loue,
Ephesians 4:3 and that ye be diligente to kepe the vnitie of the spirite in the bounde of peace,
Ephesians 4:4 beynge one bodye, & one spirite, euen as ye are called in one hope of your callinge.
Ephesians 4:5 Let there be but one Lorde, one fayth, one baptysme,
Ephesians 4:6 one God and father of all, whiche is aboue al thorowe all and in you all.
Ephesians 4:7 Vnto euery one of vs is geuen grace accordinge to the measure of the gyfte of Christ.
Ephesians 4:8 Wherfore he sayth: He is gone vp on hye, and had led captiuitie captiue, and hath geuen gyftes vnto men.
Ephesians 4:9 That he ascended, what meaneth it, but that he also descended fyrste into the loweste parties of the earth?
Ephesians 4:10 He that descended, is euen the same also that ascended vp euen aboue all heauens, to fulfyll al thinges.
Ephesians 4:11 And the very same made some Apostles, some Prophetes, some Euangelistes, some sheperdes, some teachers,
Ephesians 4:12 that the saynctes myghte haue all thinges necessarye to worke and ministre wythal, to the edifiynge of the bodye of Christ,
Ephesians 4:13 tyl we euerie one (in the vnitie of fayth, and knowledge of the sonne of God) growe vp into a perfecte man, after the measure of age of the fulnes of Christ.
Ephesians 4:14 That we henceforth be no more chyldren, waueringe and caryed wyth euerye wynde of doctryne, by the wylynes of men and craftynes, wherby they laye awayte for vs to deceyue vs.
Ephesians 4:15 But let vs folowe the truethe in loue, and in al thinges growe in him which is the head, that is to saye, Christe,
Ephesians 4:16 in whom all the body is coupled and knyt together in euerye ioynt, wherwyth one ministreth to another (accordynge to the operation, as euerye parte hath hys measure) and encreaseth the bodye, vnto the edifiynge of it selfe in loue.
Ephesians 4:17 Thys I saye therfore and testifye in the Lorde, that ye henceforth walke not as other Gentyles walke, in vanitie of theyr mynde,
Ephesians 4:18 blynded in theyr vnderstandynge, beynge straungers from the lyfe whiche is in God thorowe the ignoraunce that is in them, because of the blyndnes of theyr hertes:
Ephesians 4:19 whiche beyng paste repentaunce, haue geuen them selues vnto wantonnes, to worke al maner of vncleanes, euen wyth gredines.
Ephesians 4:20 But ye haue not so learned Christ,
Ephesians 4:21 yf so be ye haue heard of hym, and are taughte of hym, euen as the trueth is in Iesu.
Ephesians 4:22 So then as concernyng the conuersacyon in tyme past, laye from you that olde man, whyche is corrupte thorowe the deceyueable lustes
Ephesians 4:23 and be ye renued in the spyrite of your mindes,
Ephesians 4:24 and put on that newe man, whyche after the Image of God is shapen in ryghteousnes & true holynes.
Ephesians 4:25 Wherfore put awaye lyinge, and speake euerye man trueth vnto hys neyghboure, for as muche as we are membres one of another.
Ephesians 4:26 Be angrye, but synne not, let not the sunne go doune vpon your wrath,
Ephesians 4:27 neyther geue place vnto the backebyter.
Ephesians 4:28 Let hym that stole, steale no more, but let hym rather laboure wyth his handes some good thynge, that he maye haue to geue vnto hym that nedeth.
Ephesians 4:29 Let no fylthy communication procede out of your mouthes: but that whiche is good to edefye wyth all, when nede is: that it maye haue fauoure with the hearers.
Ephesians 4:30 And greue not the holye spirite of God, by whom ye are sealed vnto the daye of redemption.
Ephesians 4:31 Let all bitternes, fearsnes and wrath, roring and cursed speakinge, be put awaye from you, wyth all maliciousnes.
Ephesians 4:32 Be ye courteouse one to another and mercyfull, forgeuynge one another, euen as God for Christes sake forgaue you.

CHAPTER: 5

Ephesians 5:1 Be ye folowers of God as deare children,
Ephesians 5:2 and walke in loue euen as Christe loued vs, and gaue hym selfe for vs, an offeringe, and a sacrifice of a swete sauoure to God.
Ephesians 5:3 So that fornicacion and vncleanes, or couetousnes be not ones named amonge you, as it becommeth sainctes:
Ephesians 5:4 neyther fylthynes, neyther folyshe talkinge, neither gestinge whiche are not comely: but rather geuinge of thankes.
Ephesians 5:5 For this ye knowe, that no whormonger, other vncleane persone, or couetous person, whyche is the worshypper of Images, hath anye inheritaunce in the kyngdome of Christe and of God.
Ephesians 5:6 Let no man deceiue you with vayne wordes. For thorowe suche thinges commeth the wrath of God vpon the children of vnbelefe.
Ephesians 5:7 Be not therfore companions wyth them.
Ephesians 5:8 Ye were ones darckenes, but are nowe lyghte in the Lorde. Walke as chyldren of lyghte.
Ephesians 5:9 For the fruite of the spirite is in all goodnes, ryghtuousnes and trueth.
Ephesians 5:10 Accepte that whiche is pleasinge to the Lorde:
Ephesians 5:11 and haue no fellowshyp wyth the vnfruitfull workes of darckenes: but rather rebuke them.
Ephesians 5:12 For it is shame euen to name those thinges, whiche are done of them in secrete:
Ephesians 5:13 but all thinges, when they are rebuked of the lyghte are manifeste. For what soeuer is manifeste, that same is lyght.
Ephesians 5:14 Wherfore he sayth: awake thou that slepest, and stand vp from death, and Christ shall geue the lyght.
Ephesians 5:15 Take hede therfore that ye walke circumspectlye: not as foles, but as wyse
Ephesians 5:16 redeminge the time, for the dayes are iuel.
Ephesians 5:17 Wherfore be ye not vnwise, but vnderstande what the wyll of the Lorde is,
Ephesians 5:18 and be not drounke wt wyne. wherin is excesse, but be fulfylled wyth the spirite,
Ephesians 5:19 speakinge vnto your selues in Psalmes, and Hymnes, and spiritual sounges, singing and makinge melodye to the Lorde in your hertes,
Ephesians 5:20 geuinge thankes alwayes for al thinges vnto God the father, in the name of oure Lorde Iesu Christe,
Ephesians 5:21 submittinge your selues one to another in the feare of God.
Ephesians 5:22 Women submitte youre selues vnto your owne husbandes, as vnto the Lorde.
Ephesians 5:23 For the husbande is the wyues head, euen as Christe is the heade of the congregation, and the same is the sauiour of the body.
Ephesians 5:24 Therfore as the congregation is in subieccion to Christe, lykewyse let the wyues be in subieccion to theyr husbandes in all thynges.
Ephesians 5:25 Husbandes loue youre wyues, euen as Christe loued the congregation, and gaue him selfe for it,
Ephesians 5:26 to sanctifye it, and cleansed it in the fountayne of water thorowe the worde
Ephesians 5:27 to make it vnto hym selfe a glorious congregation wythout spotte or wrinckle, or anye suche thinge: but that it shoulde be holy and wythout blame.
Ephesians 5:28 So ought men to loue theyr wyues, as their owne bodies. He that loueth hys wyfe, loueth him selfe.
Ephesians 5:29 For no man euer yet hated hys owne fleshe, but norisheth and cherisseth it euen as the Lorde doeth the congregation.
Ephesians 5:30 For we are members of his bodie, of his fleshe, and of hys bones.
Ephesians 5:31 For this cause shall a man leaue father and mother, and shall continue wyth hys wyfe, and two shalbe made one fleshe.
Ephesians 5:32 Thys is a greate secrete, but I speake betwene Christe and the congregation.
Ephesians 5:33 Neuerthelesse do ye so that euerye one of you loue his wyfe truely euen as hym selfe: And let the wyfe se that she feare her husbande.

CHAPTER: 6

Ephesians 6:1 Chyldren obeye youre fathers and mothers in the Lorde: for so is it ryght.
Ephesians 6:2 Honoure thy father and mother, that is the fyrst commaundemente that hath anye promes,
Ephesians 6:3 that thou mayeste be in good estate, and liue longe on the earth.
Ephesians 6:4 And ye fathers, moue not youre children to wrath, but bringe them vp with the norter and information of the Lorde.
Ephesians 6:5 Seruauntes be obedient vnto youre carnall maisters, wyth feare and tremblinge, in singlenes of youre hertes, as vnto Christe,
Ephesians 6:6 not wyth seruice in the eye sight, as men pleasers, but as the seruauntes of Christe, doynge the wyll of God frome the herte
Ephesians 6:7 wyth good wyll seruynge the Lorde, & not men.
Ephesians 6:8 And remembre that, whatsoeuer good thinge any man doeth, that shall he receiue agayne of the Lorde, whether he be bounde or fre.
Ephesians 6:9 And ye maisters, do euen the same thinges vnto them puttinge awaye threateninges: and remembre that euen your maister also is in heauen, neither is ther anye respect of person wyth hym.
Ephesians 6:10 Finally my brethren, be stronge in the Lord and in the power of his myghte.
Ephesians 6:11 Put on the armoure of God, that ye maye stande stedfaste agaynste the crafty assautes of the deuyll.
Ephesians 6:12 For we wrestle not againste fleshe and bloude: but against rule, agaynst power, and againste worldlye rulers of the darckenes of thys worlde, againste spyrytuall wickednes, for heauenly thynges.
Ephesians 6:13 For thys cause take vnto you the armoure of God, that ye maye be able to resiste in the euyl daye, and stande perfect in al thinges.
Ephesians 6:14 Stande therfore, and your loynes gyrde about wyth veritie, hauinge on the breste plate of rightuousnes,
Ephesians 6:15 and shoed with shoes prepared by the Gospel of peace.
Ephesians 6:16 Aboue all take to you the shelde of fayth, wherwith ye maye quench all the fyrie dartes of the wycked.
Ephesians 6:17 And take the helmet of saluacion and the swerd of the spyrite, which is the word of God.
Ephesians 6:18 And praye all wayes wyth all maner prayer and supplicacion: and that in the spirite, and watch therunto with all instaunce and supplication for all sainctes,
Ephesians 6:19 and for me, that vtteraunce maye be geuen vnto me, that I maye open my mouth bloudly, to vtter the secretes of the Gospel,
Ephesians 6:20 wherof I am a messenger in boundes that therin I may speake frely, as it becommeth me to speake.
Ephesians 6:21 But that ye maye also knowe what condicion I am in and what I do. Tichicus my deare brother and faythfull mynyster in the Lorde, shal shewe you of all thinges,
Ephesians 6:22 whom I sent vnto you for the same purpose, that ye myght knowe what case I stand in, and that he myght comforte your hertes.
Ephesians 6:23 Peace be with the brethren, and loue with fayth from God the father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christe.
Ephesians 6:24 Grace be with al them whiche loue oure Lorde Iesus Christe in purenes. Amen.

BOOK: Philippians

CHAPTER: 1

Philippians 1:1 Paule and Tymotheus the seruauntes of Iesu Christe. To all the sainctes in Christe Iesu, which are at Philippos, wyth the Bishops and Deacons.
Philippians 1:2 Grace be wyth you and peace from God oure father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christe.
Philippians 1:3 I thanke my God wyth all remembraunce of you,
Philippians 1:4 all wayes in al my prayers for you, and praye wyth gladnes,
Philippians 1:5 because of the fellowshyppe, whyche ye haue in the Gospell from the fyrste daye vnto nowe:
Philippians 1:6 and am surelye certifyed of this, that he whyche began a good worke in you, shall go forth wyth it vntyll the daye of Iesus Christe,
Philippians 1:7 as it becommeth me so to iudge of you al, because I haue you in my herte, and haue you also euerye one companions of grace wyth me, euen in my boundes as I defende and stablishe the Gospel.
Philippians 1:8 For God beareth me recorde howe greatlye I longe after you all from the very herte rote in Iesus Christe.
Philippians 1:9 And this I praye, that youre loue maye increase more and more in knowledge, and in al fealinge,
Philippians 1:10 that ye myght accepte thinges moste excellent, that ye might be pure and such as should hurte no mannes conscience, vntyll the daye of Christe,
Philippians 1:11 fylled with the fruites of rightuousnes, which fruites come by Iesus Christ vnto the glory and laude of God.
Philippians 1:12 I woulde ye vnderstode brethren that my busines is happened vnto the greater furtheringe of the Gospel.
Philippians 1:13 So that my boundes in Christe are manifeste thorowe out al the iudgement hal and in al other places:
Philippians 1:14 In so much that many of the brethren in the Lorde are boldened thorowe my boundes, & dare more largely speake the worde without feare.
Philippians 1:15 Some there are whiche preache Christ of enuie and stryfe, and some of good wyll.
Philippians 1:16 The one parte preacheth Christe of strife and not purelye supposinge to adde more aduersitye to my boundes.
Philippians 1:17 The other parte of loue, because they se that I am set to defende the Gospell.
Philippians 1:18 What then? So, that Christe be preached al maner wayes, whether it be by occasion, or of true meaninge, I therin ioye: ye & will ioye.
Philippians 1:19 For I knowe that this shall chaunce to my saluacion, thorowe your prayer and mynystringe of the spyryte of Iesu Christe,
Philippians 1:20 as I hertely loke for and hope that in nothinge I shalbe ashamed, but that wyth all confydence as alwayes in tymes paste, euen so nowe Christe shall be magnyfyed in my bodye, whether it be thorowe lyfe, or else death.
Philippians 1:21 For Christe is to me lyfe, and death is to me auauntage.
Philippians 1:22 Yf it chaunce me to lyue in the fleshe, that is to me frutefull for to worke, and what to chose
Philippians 1:23 I wote not. I am constrayned of two thinges: I desire to be lowsed and to be wyth Christe, whiche thinge is best of all.
Philippians 1:24 Neuerthelesse to abyde in the fleshe is more nedeful for you.
Philippians 1:25 And thys am I sure of that I shall abyde, and wyth you all continue for the furtheraunce and ioye of your faith,
Philippians 1:26 that ye may more aboundantly reioyce in Iesus Christe thorowe me, by my comminge to you again.
Philippians 1:27 Onlye let your conuersation be as it becommeth the Gospell of Christ, that whether I come and se you, or els be absent, I maye yet heare of you, that ye continue in one spyrite, and in one soule, labouring as we do, to mayntayne the fayth of the Gospell,
Philippians 1:28 and in nothing fearing your aduersaries: whiche is to them a token of perdicion, and to you of saluation, and that of God.
Philippians 1:29 For vnto you it is geuen, that not onely ye should beleue on Christ, but also suffre for his sake,
Philippians 1:30 and haue euen the same fyght, whiche ye sawe me haue and now heare of me.

CHAPTER: 2

Philippians 2:1 If there be amonge you anye consolation in Christ, yf there be anye comfortable loue, yf there be anye feloweshyp of spirite, yf there be any compassion or mercye,
Philippians 2:2 fulfyll my ioye that ye drawe one waye hauinge one loue, being of one accorde, and of one minde,
Philippians 2:3 that nothing be done thorowe stryfe or vaine glorye, but that in mekenes of mynde euerye man esteme other better then him selfe,
Philippians 2:4 & that no man considere his owne, but what is meate for other.
Philippians 2:5 Let the same mynde be in you that was in Christ Iesu:
Philippians 2:6 Whiche beinge in the shap of God, and thought it not robbery to be equal wt God.
Philippians 2:7 Neuerthelesse he made hym selfe of no reputation, & toke on him the shap of a seruaunt, and became lyke vnto men,
Philippians 2:8 and was founde in hys aparell as a man. He humbled hym selfe, and became obediente vnto the death euen the death of the crosse.
Philippians 2:9 Wherfore God hath exalted hym, and geuen hym a name aboue al names,
Philippians 2:10 that in the name of Iesus should euerye knee bowe, both of thinges in heauen and thinges in earth, and thinges vnder the earth,
Philippians 2:11 and that al tounges should confesse that Iesus Christ is the Lorde vnto the prayse of God the father.
Philippians 2:12 Wherfore my dearlye beloued, as ye haue alwayes obeyed, not when I was presente onelye, but nowe much more in myne absence euen so worke out your owne saluacion wt feare and trembling.
Philippians 2:13 For it is God, whyche worketh in you, both the wyll and also the dede, euen of good wyl.
Philippians 2:14 Do al thinge wythout murmuringe and disputynge,
Philippians 2:15 that ye maye be fauteles & pure, the sonnes of God wythout rebuke, in the middes of a croked and a peruerse nacyon, amonge whiche se that ye shine as lightes in the worlde,
Philippians 2:16 holding fast the worde of life, vnto my reioysing in the daye of Christe, that I haue not runne in vayne, neyther haue laboured in vaine.
Philippians 2:17 Yea, and though I be offered vp vpon the offeringe and sacrifyce of youre fayth: I reioyce, and reioyce wyth you al.
Philippians 2:18 For the same cause also, reioyce ye, and reioyce ye wyth me.
Philippians 2:19 I truste in the Lord Iesus for to sende Timotheus shortely vnto you, that I also maye be of good comforte, when I knowe what case ye stand in.
Philippians 2:20 For I haue noman that is so lyke mynded to me, whiche with so pure affeccion careth for youre matters.
Philippians 2:21 For al other seke theyr owne, and not that whiche is Iesus Christes.
Philippians 2:22 Ye knowe the profe of hym, howe that as a sonne with the father, so with me bestowed he his laboure vpon the Gospel
Philippians 2:23 Hym I hope to send assone as I knowe, howe it wyl go with me.
Philippians 2:24 I truste in the Lord I also my selfe shal come shortly.
Philippians 2:25 I supposed it necessarye to sende brother Epaphroditus vnto you, my companion in laboure and felow souldier, youre Apostle & my minister at my nedes.
Philippians 2:26 For he lounged after you, and was full of heauines, because that ye had hearde saye, that he shoulde be sycke.
Philippians 2:27 And no dout he was sicke, and that nye vnto death. But God had mercye on hym not on hym onely, but on me also, lest I should haue had sorowe vpon sorowe.
Philippians 2:28 I sent him therfore the diligentliar, that when ye shoulde se hym, ye might reioyce againe, and I myght be the lesse sorowfull.
Philippians 2:29 Receiue him therfore in the Lorde wyth al gladnes, and make muche of suche:
Philippians 2:30 because that for the worke of Christ he went so farre, that he was nye vnto death, and regarded not hys lyfe, to fulfyll that seruice, whiche was lackinge on your part towarde me.

CHAPTER: 3

Philippians 3:1 Moreouer my brethren, reioyce in the Lorde. It greueth me not to write one thinge often to you. For to you it is a sure thynge.
Philippians 3:2 Beware of dogges, beware of euyll workes. Beware of dyssencyon.
Philippians 3:3 For we are cyrcumcysion, whyche worship God in the spirite, and reioyce in Christe Iesu, and haue no confidence in the fleshe,
Philippians 3:4 though I haue wherof I might reioice in the fleshe. If any other man thinke that he hath wherof he mighte truste in the fleshe, much more I,
Philippians 3:5 circumcised the eighte daye, of the kynred of Israel, of the tribe of Beniamin, an Hebrue borne of the Hebrues: as concerninge the lawe, a pharisey,
Philippians 3:6 and as concerning feruentnes, I persecuted the congregation, & as touching the ryghtuousnes, whiche is in the lawe, I was vnrebukeable.
Philippians 3:7 But the thinges that were vauntage vnto me. I counted losse for Christes sake.
Philippians 3:8 Yea I thinke al thinges but losse for that excellent knowledge sake of Christ Iesu my Lord. For whom I haue counted al thinges losse, and do iudge them but dounge, that I myght wynne Christe,
Philippians 3:9 and might be founde in hym, not hauinge mine owne rightuousnes, which is of the lawe, but that whyche spryngeth of the fayth, is in CHRISTE. I meane the rightuousnes, whiche commeth of God thorowe fait
Philippians 3:10 in knowinge him and the vertue of his resurreccion, & the fellowshippe of hys passyons, that I myghte be conformable vnto his death,
Philippians 3:11 yf by anye meanes I myght atteyne vnto the resurreccyon from death.
Philippians 3:12 Not as though I had alreadie atteined to it, either were already perfecte: but I folowe yf that I maye comprehende that, wherin I am comprehended of Christ Iesu.
Philippians 3:13 Brethren I count not my selfe that I haue gotten it: but one thinge I say. I forget that, whiche is behinde, & stretche my selfe vnto that whiche is before,
Philippians 3:14 and prease vnto the marke appointed, to obteine the reward of the high callinge of God in Christe Iesu.
Philippians 3:15 Let vs therfore as many, as be perfect be thus wyse minded, & yf ye be other wise minded, I pray God open euen this vnto you.
Philippians 3:16 Neuertheles in the, whervnto we are come, let vs procede by one rule, that we may be of one accord.
Philippians 3:17 Brethren be folowers of me, and loke on them which walke euen so, as ye haue vs for an ensample.
Philippians 3:18 For many walke (of whom I haue tolde you often, and nowe tel you weping) that they are the enemies of the crosse of Christ,
Philippians 3:19 whose ende is dampnation, whose God is theyr belye, and whose glorye is to theyr shame, whiche are worldlye minded.
Philippians 3:20 But oure conuersation is in heauen, from whence we loke for a sauiour, euen the Lorde Iesus Christ,
Philippians 3:21 whiche shal chaunge oure vyle bodies, that they maie be fashioned like vnto his glorious bodie, accordinge to the working, wherby he is able to subdue all thinges vnto him selfe.

CHAPTER: 4

Philippians 4:1 Therfore my brethren dearlye beloued & lounged for my ioye & crowne, so continue in the Lord, ye beloued.
Philippians 4:2 I praye Euodias, & beseche Sintiches that they be of one accorde in the Lorde.
Philippians 4:3 Yea, and I beseche the faythfull yockefelowe, helpe the women, whiche laboured wyth me in the Gospell, and with Clemente also, and with other my labour felowes, whose names are in the boke of my lyfe.
Philippians 4:4 Reioyce in the Lorde alway, and agayne I say reioyce.
Philippians 4:5 Lette your softnes be knowen to all men. The Lorde is euen at hande.
Philippians 4:6 Be not carefull: but in all thinges shewe your petition vnto God in prayer and supplication, wyth geuinge of thankes.
Philippians 4:7 And the peace of God, whiche passeth al vnderstandynge, kepe your hertes and myndes in Chryste Iesu.
Philippians 4:8 Furthermore brethren, whatsoeuer thynges are true, whatsoeuer thinges are honest, whatsoeuer thinges are iuste, whatsoeuer thinges are pure, whatsoeuer thinges pertaine to loue, whatsoeuer thinges are of honeste report: yf there be anie vertuous thinge yf there be anye laudable thinge,
Philippians 4:9 those same haue ye in your minde, whiche ye haue both learned and receiued, hearde, and also sene in me: those thinges do, and the God of peace shall be wyth you.
Philippians 4:10 I reioyce in the Lorde greatly, that nowe at the last ye are reuiued agayne to care for me, in that wherin ye were also carefull, but ye lacked opportunitie.
Philippians 4:11 I speake not because of necessitie. For I haue learned in whatsoeuer estate I am therwyth to be content.
Philippians 4:12 I can both cast doune my selfe. I can also excede. Euery where, and in all thinges I am instructed, both to be ful, and to be houngrie, to haue plentie, and to suffre nede.
Philippians 4:13 I can do al thinges thorowe the helpe of Christe whiche strengtheth me.
Philippians 4:14 Notwithstandinge ye haue well done, that ye beare parte with me in my tribulation.
Philippians 4:15 Ye of Philippos knowe that in the beginninge of the Gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no congregacion beare parte wyth me, as concerning, geuinge, and receiuinge, but ye onely.
Philippians 4:16 For when I was in Thessalonica, ye sente ones, and afterwarde agayne vnto my nedes:
Philippians 4:17 not that I desire gyftes, but I desire aboundaunte frute on youre part.
Philippians 4:18 I receiued al, and haue plentie. I was euen fylled after that I had receyued of Epaphroditus, that which came from you, & odour that smelleth swete, a sacrifyce accepted and pleasaunt to God.
Philippians 4:19 My God fulfill youre nedes thorowe hys gloriouse ryches in Iesus Christ.
Philippians 4:20 Vnto God and oure father be prayse for euermore. Amen.
Philippians 4:21 Salute all the sainctes in Christ Iesus. The brethren which are with me grete you.
Philippians 4:22 All the sainctes salute you, and most of all they, which are of the Emperours houshholde.
Philippians 4:23 The grace of our Lord Iesus Christe be wyth you all. Amen.

BOOK: Colossians

CHAPTER: 1

Colossians 1:1 Paule an Apostle of Iesu Christe by the wyll of God, and brother Tymotheus.
Colossians 1:2 To the sainctes, whiche are at Colossa, and brethren that beleue in Christe. Grace be wyth you and peace from God oure father, and from the Lorde IESVS Christe.
Colossians 1:3 We geue thankes to God the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, alwaies prayinge for you,
Colossians 1:4 sence we hearde of your fayth, which ye haue in Christ Iesu, and of the loue, which ye beare to all saynctes,
Colossians 1:5 for the hopes sakes, whiche is layde vp in store for you in heauen of whiche hope ye haue heard before by the true worde of the Gospe
Colossians 1:6 which is come vnto you, euen as it is into all the world, and is frutefull, as it is amonge you, from the fyrste daye in the, whiche ye hearde of it, and had experience in the grace of God in the trueth,
Colossians 1:7 as ye learned of Epaphra oure deare felowe seruaunte, whiche is for you a faythfull minister of Christe,
Colossians 1:8 whiche also declared vnto vs your loue, whiche ye haue in the spirite.
Colossians 1:9 For this cause we also, sence the daye we heard of it, haue not ceased prayeng for you, and desiring that ye myght be fulfilled with the knowledge of his will, in all wysdome, and spiritual vnderstandinge,
Colossians 1:10 that ye mighte walke worthy of the Lorde in all thinges, that please him beyng frutefull in all good workes, and encreasing in the knowledge of God
Colossians 1:11 strengthed wyth all myghte thorowe his glorious power, vnto al pacience & longe suffering with ioyfulnes,
Colossians 1:12 geuing thankes vnto the father, which hath made vs mete to be partakers of the inheritaunce of sainctes in lyght.
Colossians 1:13 Which hath deliuered vs from the power of darcknes and hath translated vs into the kyngdome of his deare sonne,
Colossians 1:14 in whom we haue redempcion thorowe his bloude, that is to saye: the forgeuenes of synnes,
Colossians 1:15 whyche is the ymage of the inuisible God, fyrste begotten of creatures.
Colossians 1:16 For by hym were all thynges created, thinges that are in heauen, and thinges that are in earth: thinges visible and thinges inuisible, whether they be maiestye or Lordeshyp, eyther rule or power. Al thynges are created by hym and in hym,
Colossians 1:17 and he is before all thinges, and in hym all thinges haue theyr beynge.
Colossians 1:18 And he is the head of the body, that is to wyt of the congregation: he is the beginning and fyrst begotten of the dead, that in all thinges he might haue the preeminence.
Colossians 1:19 For it pleased the father that in him shoulde all fulnes dwel,
Colossians 1:20 and by hym to reconcile all thinge vnto him selfe, and to set at peace by him thorowe the bloude of his crosse, both thinges in heauen, and thinges in earth.
Colossians 1:21 And you (which were in tymes past straungers and enemyes, because your myndes were set in euyl workes) hath he now reconciled
Colossians 1:22 in the body of his fleshe thorowe death, to make you holye vnblamable and without faut in his owne syght,
Colossians 1:23 yf ye continue grounded and stablyshed in the fayth, and be not moued away from the hope of the Gospell, where of ye haue hearde, how that it is preached amonge al creatures which are vnder heauen, wherof I Paule am made a minister.
Colossians 1:24 Nowe ioye I in my sufferinges which I suffer for you, and fulfyll that whiche is behinde of the passions of Christe in my fleshe for his bodies sake, which is the congregacion,
Colossians 1:25 wherof I am made a minister accordinge to the ordinaunce of God, whiche ordinaunce was geuen me vnto you warde, to fulfyll the worde of God,
Colossians 1:26 that mistery hyd sence the world beganne, and sence the begynnynge of generacyons: but now is opened to hys sainctes
Colossians 1:27 to whom God woulde make knowen the glorious riches of this misterye amonge the Gentyls, whiche ryches is Christ, in you the hope of glorye,
Colossians 1:28 whome we preache, warning all men and teachinge all men in all wisdom, to make all men perfect in Christ Iesu.
Colossians 1:29 Wherin I also labour and stryue euen as farforth as his workinge worketh in me mightely.

CHAPTER: 2

Colossians 2:1 I woulde ye knewe what fightinge I haue for your sakes, & for them of Laodicia, and for as many as haue not sene my person in the fleshe,
Colossians 2:2 that their hertes mighte be comforted and knit together in loue, and in all riches of full vnderstandinge for to knowe the mystery of God the father and of Christe,
Colossians 2:3 in whom are hyd al the treasures of wysdom and knowledge.
Colossians 2:4 This I saye leaste anye man shoulde begyle you with entisyng wordes.
Colossians 2:5 For though I be absent in fleshe: yet am I present with you in the spirite ioyenge and beholdinge the order that ye kepe, and your stedfast faith in Christ.
Colossians 2:6 As ye haue therfore receiued Christe Iesus the Lorde, euen so walke,
Colossians 2:7 roted and builte in him and stedfaste in the fayth as ye haue learned, and therin be plentuous in geuing thankes.
Colossians 2:8 Beware least anye man come and spoyle you thorowe philosophie and disceitful vanitie, thorowe the tradicions of men, and ordinaunces after the world, and not after Christ.
Colossians 2:9 For in him dwelleth al the fulnes of the Godhead bodely,
Colossians 2:10 and ye are complete in hym, whiche is the head of al rule and power,
Colossians 2:11 in whom also ye are circumcysed with circumcision made withoute handes, by puttinge of the synful body of the fleshe thorow the circumcision, that is in Christ,
Colossians 2:12 in that ye are buried, wt him thorow baptisme in whom ye are also risen again thorow fayth, that is wroughte by the operacion of God, which raysed hym from death.
Colossians 2:13 And ye which were dead in sinne thorow the vncircumcision of youre fleshe, hath he quyckened with him, and hath forgeuen vs al oure treaspases.
Colossians 2:14 And hath put out the hande wryttinge that was againste vs, contayned in the lawe wrytten, and that hath he taken out of the waye, and hath fastened it to his crosse,
Colossians 2:15 and hath spoiled rule and power and hath made a shewe of them openlye, and hath tryumphed ouer them in hys owne persone.
Colossians 2:16 Let no man therfore trouble youre consciences aboute meate and drincke, or for a peace of an holye daye, as the holy daye of the new mone, or of the Saboth dayes,
Colossians 2:17 whyche are nothinge, but shaddowes of thinges to come, but the bodye is in Christe.
Colossians 2:18 Let no man make you shoute at a wronge marke which after his owne ymaginacion walketh in the humblenes and holynes of aungels, thynges which he neuer sawe: causelesse puft vp with his fleshely minde,
Colossians 2:19 and holdeth not the head, wherof all the bodye by ioyntes and couples receyueth nouryshment, & is knyt together, & encreaseth wyth the increasynge that cometh of God.
Colossians 2:20 Wherfore yf ye be deade wyth Christe from the ordinaunces of the world, why as though ye yet liued in the worlde, are ye ledde wyth tradicions of them that saye?
Colossians 2:21 Touche not, tast not, handel not,
Colossians 2:22 whiche all perishe wyth the vsynge of them, and are after the commaundementes and doctrines of men,
Colossians 2:23 which thinges haue the symilitude of wysdome in chosen holines and humblenes, and in that they spare not the bodye, and do the fleshe no worship vnto his nede.

CHAPTER: 3

Colossians 3:1 If ye be then rysen agayn with Christ seke those thinges which are aboue where Christe sitteth on the right hand of God.
Colossians 3:2 Set youre affeccion on thinges that are aboue, and not on thinges, which are on the earth.
Colossians 3:3 For ye are dead and youre lyfe is hid with Christ in God.
Colossians 3:4 When Christ which is our life, shal shew him selfe then shal ye also appere wyth him in glorye.
Colossians 3:5 Mortifie therfore, youre members whiche are on the earth, fornicacion, vnclenes, vnnatural, lust euil concupiscence, and couetousnesse, which is worshippinge of Idolles,
Colossians 3:6 for which thynges sakes the wrathe of God commeth on the chyldren of vnbeliefe.
Colossians 3:7 In whyche thinges ye walked ones, when ye liued in them.
Colossians 3:8 But now put ye also awaye from you all thinges, wrath, fearnes, maliciousnes, cursed speaking fylthy speaking out of your mouthes.
Colossians 3:9 Lye not one to another, that the olde man wyth hys workes be put of,
Colossians 3:10 and the newe put on, whiche is renued in knowledge after the ymage of hym, that made hym
Colossians 3:11 where is neyther Gentile nor Iew, circumcysion nor vncircumcision, Barbarous or Sythian, bond or fre: but Christ is all in al thinges.
Colossians 3:12 Nowe therfore as electe of God, holy and beloued, put on tender mercye, kyndnes, humblenes of mindes, meaknes, longe sufferynge,
Colossians 3:13 forbearing one another, and forgeuing one another, yf anye man haue a quarel to another, euen as Christe forgaue you, euen so do ye.
Colossians 3:14 Aboue all these thynges put on loue, which is the bond of perfectnes.
Colossians 3:15 And the peace of God rule in your hertes, to the which peace ye are called in one bodye. And se that ye be thankfull.
Colossians 3:16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteouslye in all wysdome. Teache and exhorte youre owne selues, in psalmes, and hymnes, and spirituall songes, whiche haue fauoure with them, singinge in your hertes to the Lorde.
Colossians 3:17 And all thinges (whatsoeuer ye do in word or dede) do it in the name of the Lorde Iesu geuinge thankes to God the father by hym.
Colossians 3:18 Wyues submitte youre selues vnto youre owne husbandes, as it is comly in the Lorde.
Colossians 3:19 Husbandes loue your wyues, and be not bitter vnto them.
Colossians 3:20 Chyldren obey your fathers & mothers in all thinges, for that is wel pleasynge vnto the Lorde.
Colossians 3:21 Fathers, rate not your children, leaste they be of a desperate mynde.
Colossians 3:22 Seruauntes, be obediente vnto your bodelye maisters in al thinges, not wyth eye seruice as men pleasers, but in synglenes of herte fearinge God.
Colossians 3:23 And what soeuer ye do, do it hertelye as though ye dyd it to the Lord, and not vnto men
Colossians 3:24 for as muche as ye know that of the Lorde ye shall receiue the reward of inheritaunce, for ye serue the Lorde Christ.
Colossians 3:25 But he that doeth anye wronge, shall receiue for the wronge that he hath done, for there is no respect of persons wyth God.

CHAPTER: 4

Colossians 4:1 Ye maisters do vnto your seruauntes, that which is iuste and equall, sayng: ye know that ye also haue a maister in heauen.
Colossians 4:2 Contynue in prayer & watch in the same wyth thankes geuynge,
Colossians 4:3 prayeng also for vs that God open vnto vs the dore of vtteraunce, that we maye speake the misterye of Christe (wherfore I am also in bondes)
Colossians 4:4 that I maye vtter it, as it becometh me to speake.
Colossians 4:5 Walke wiselye to them that are wythout and redeme the tyme.
Colossians 4:6 Let youre speache be alwayes well sauoured and poudred with salte, that ye maye knowe, howe to answere euery man.
Colossians 4:7 The deare brother Tichicus shal tell you of al my busines, whiche is a faithfull minyster, and felow seruaunt in the Lorde,
Colossians 4:8 whom I haue sent vnto you for the same purpose, that he mighte knowe howe ye do, & myght comforte your hertes,
Colossians 4:9 wyth one Onesimus, a faythfull and a beloued brother, whiche is one of you. They shall shewe you of al thinges, whiche are adoing here.
Colossians 4:10 Aristarchus my pryson felowe saluteth you and Marcus, Barnabas sisters sonne: touching whom ye receiued commaundementes. Yf he come vnto you, receiue him,
Colossians 4:11 and Iesus which is called Iustus, which are of the circumcision. These onely are my worke felowes vnto the kyngdome of God, whiche were vnto my consolacion.
Colossians 4:12 Epaphras the seruaunte of Christe, which is one of you, saluteth you, and alwaies laboureth feruentlye for you in prayers, that ye maye stande perfecte and full in all that is the wyll of God.
Colossians 4:13 I beare hym recorde, that he hath a feruent minde towarde you and towarde them of Laodicia and them of Hierapolis.
Colossians 4:14 Deare Lucas the Phisician greteth you, and Demas.
Colossians 4:15 Salute the brethren whiche are of Laodicia, and salute Nimphas, and the congregacion, which is in hys house.
Colossians 4:16 And when the Epistle is read of you, make that it be read in the congregacion of the Laodicians also and that ye lykewyse read the Epistle of Laodycya.
Colossians 4:17 And saye to Archippus: take hede to the offyce that thou hast receyued in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.
Colossians 4:18 The salutation by the hande of me Paule. Remembre my bondes. Grace be with you Amen.

BOOK: 1 Thessalonians

CHAPTER: 1

1 Thessalonians 1:1 Paule, Siluanus, and Tymotheus. Vnto the congregation of the Thessalonyans in God the father, and in the lord Iesus Christ. Grace be with you, & peace from God our father, & from the Lord Iesus Christ.
1 Thessalonians 1:2 We geue God thankes alwayes for you all, makinge mention of you in oure prayers
1 Thessalonians 1:3 wythoute ceasinge, and cal to remembraunce your worke the fayth, and laboure in loue & perseueraunce in the hope of our Lord Iesus Christ, in the syght of God oure father,
1 Thessalonians 1:4 because we know brethren beloued of God, how that ye are electe.
1 Thessalonians 1:5 For oure Gospell came not to you in worde onelye, but also in power, and in the holye Ghoste, and in muche certaintie, as ye know after what maner we behaued our selues among you, for your sakes.
1 Thessalonians 1:6 And ye became folowers of vs and of the Lord, and receyued the worde with much affliccion, with ioye of the holye ghoste:
1 Thessalonians 1:7 so that ye were an ensample to al that beleue in Macedonia and Achaia.
1 Thessalonians 1:8 For from you sounded out the worde of the Lord, not in Macedonia & in Achaia onelye: but your fayth also which ye haue vnto God, sprede her selfe abrode in all quarters, so greatlye that it neadeth not vs to speake any thynge at all.
1 Thessalonians 1:9 For they them selues shewe of you, what maner of entering in we had vnto you, and howe ye turned vnto God from Images, for to serue the liuing and true God,
1 Thessalonians 1:10 and for to loke for hys sonne from heauen, whom he raised from death. I meane Iesus which deliuered vs from wrath to come.

CHAPTER: 2

1 Thessalonians 2:1 For ye youre selues knowe brethren of oure entraunce in vnto you, how that it was not in vaine:
1 Thessalonians 2:2 but euen after that we had suffred before, and were shamefullye entreated at Philippos (as ye wel know) then were we bolde in our God to speake vnto you the Gospel of God wyth muche stryuynge.
1 Thessalonians 2:3 Oure exhortacyon was not to bringe you to erroure, nor yet to vnclennes, neyther was it wyth gile,
1 Thessalonians 2:4 but as we were allowed of God, that the Gospel shoulde be committed vnto vs, euen so we spake, not as though we entended to please men, but God whyche tryeth oure hertes.
1 Thessalonians 2:5 Neither was our conuersacyon at anye tyme wyth flatterynge wordes, as ye well knowe neyther in cloked couetousnes, god is record:
1 Thessalonians 2:6 neyther sought we prayse of men neyther of you, nor yet of anye other, when we mighte haue bene chargeable, as the Apostles of Christe,
1 Thessalonians 2:7 but we were tender amonge you, euen as a noursse cheryshed his children,
1 Thessalonians 2:8 so was our affeccion toward you, oure good wil was to haue dealte to you, not the Gospel of God onely, but also our owne soules because ye were deare to vs.
1 Thessalonians 2:9 Ye remember brethren our labour and trauayle. For we laboured day and night, because we would not be greuous vnto any of you, and preached vnto you the Gospel of God.
1 Thessalonians 2:10 Ye are wytnesses, and so is God, howe holily and iustlye and vnblameably we behaued our selues among you that beleue
1 Thessalonians 2:11 as ye know howe that we exhorted and comforted, and besoughte euerye one of you, as a father hys chyldren,
1 Thessalonians 2:12 that ye woulde walke worthye of God, whiche hath called you vnto his kingdome & glory.
1 Thessalonians 2:13 For thys cause thanke we God wythout ceasyng, because that when ye receiued of vs the word, wher with God was preached, ye receiued it not as the worde of man: but euen as it was in dede, the worde of God: whiche worketh in you that beleue.
1 Thessalonians 2:14 For ye brethren became folowers of the congregacions of God, which in Iewrye are in Christ Iesu, for ye haue suffred lyke thinges of your kinsmen, as we our selues haue suffred of the Iewes.
1 Thessalonians 2:15 Which as they kylled the Lorde Iesus and theyr owne prophetes, euen so haue they persecuted vs, and God they please not, and are contrarye to all men,
1 Thessalonians 2:16 and forbid vs to preache vnto the Gentyls, that they might be saued to fulfyll theyr synnes alwaye. For the wrathe of God is come on them, euen to the vtmost.
1 Thessalonians 2:17 For as muche brethren as we are kepte from you for a season as concernynge the bodely presence, but not in the herte we enforsed the more to se you personallye wyth greate desyre.
1 Thessalonians 2:18 And therfore we woulde haue come vnto you I Paule ones and agayne: but Sathan withstode vs.
1 Thessalonians 2:19 For what is oure hope or ioye, or crowne of reioysynge: are not ye it in the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ at hys coming?
1 Thessalonians 2:20 yes ye are our glory and ioye.

CHAPTER: 3

1 Thessalonians 3:1 Wherfore sence we could no longer forbeare, it pleased vs to remayne at Athens alone,
1 Thessalonians 3:2 & sente Timotheus our brother and minister of God, and our laboure felowe in the Gospel of Christe, to stablishe you and to comforte you ouer youre fayth,
1 Thessalonians 3:3 that no man should be moued in these afflicons. For ye your selues knowe that we are euen appointed there vnto.
1 Thessalonians 3:4 For verelye when I was wyth you, I tolde you before that we shoulde suffer tribulacion, euen as it came to passe, and as ye know.
1 Thessalonians 3:5 For this cause when I coulde no longer forbeare, I sente, that I might haue knowledge of your fayth, least haplye the tempter had tempted you, and that oure labour had bene bestowed in vayne.
1 Thessalonians 3:6 But nowe lately when Timotheus came from you vnto vs, and declared to vs youre fayth & your loue, & howe that ye haue good remembraunce of vs alwayes, desyring to se vs as we desyre to se you.
1 Thessalonians 3:7 Therfore brethren we had consolacion in you and in all our aduersyte and necessitie, thorow your fayth.
1 Thessalonians 3:8 For nowe are we alyue, yf ye stande stedfast in the Lorde.
1 Thessalonians 3:9 For what thankes can we recompence to God again for you, ouer al the ioy that we ioy for your sakes before oure God
1 Thessalonians 3:10 whyl we nighte and daye praye excedinglye that we mighte se you presently, and might fulfill that which is lackynge in youre fayth.
1 Thessalonians 3:11 God him selfe our father, and our Lord Iesus Christ guide oure iorney to you:
1 Thessalonians 3:12 and the Lorde increase you and make you flow ouer in loue one towarde another and toward all men euen as we do toward you,
1 Thessalonians 3:13 to make your hertes stable & vnblameable in holynesse before God oure father, at the comminge of our Lorde Iesus wyth al hys sainctes.

CHAPTER: 4

1 Thessalonians 4:1 Fvrther more we beseche you brethren and exhorte you in the Lord Iesus, that ye increase more and more, euen as ye haue receiued of vs, howe ye oughte to walke and to please God.
1 Thessalonians 4:2 Ye remember what commaundementes we gaue you in oure Lorde Iesu Christ.
1 Thessalonians 4:3 For this is the will of God, euen that ye shoulde be holy, and that ye shoulde abstayne from fornicacion,
1 Thessalonians 4:4 that euerye one of you should know, howe to kepe his vessell in holynes and honoure,
1 Thessalonians 4:5 and not in the luste of concupiscence, as do the heathen, which know not God,
1 Thessalonians 4:6 that no man go to far and defraude his brother in bargaining: because the Lorde is a reuenger of al suche thinges as we tolde you before tyme and testified.
1 Thessalonians 4:7 For God hath not called vs to vncleanes, but vnto holines.
1 Thessalonians 4:8 He therfore that despiseth, despiseth not man, but God, whiche hath sente his holye spirite amonge you.
1 Thessalonians 4:9 But as touchinge brotherly loue, ye nede not that I write vnto you. For ye are taught of God to loue one another.
1 Thessalonians 4:10 Yea and that thing verelye ye do vnto all the brethren, which are thorowout all Macedonia. We beseche you brethren, that ye encrease more and more,
1 Thessalonians 4:11 and that ye studye to be quyete, and to medle with youre owne busines, and to worke wyth youre owne handes, as we commaunded you:
1 Thessalonians 4:12 that ye may behaue your selues honestly towardes them that are wythout, and that nothinge be lackinge vnto you.
1 Thessalonians 4:13 I woulde not brethren haue you ignoraunt concerninge them whiche are fallen a sleepe, that ye sorowe not as other do which haue no hope.
1 Thessalonians 4:14 For yf we beleue that Iesus Christe dyed and rose agayne euen so them also, whyche slepe by Iesus, wyl God brynge agayn with hym.
1 Thessalonians 4:15 And thys saye we vnto you in the worde of the Lorde, that we whyche lyue and are remaynynge in the commynge of the Lorde, shal not come yerre they which slepe.
1 Thessalonians 4:16 For the Lord hym selfe shall descende from heauen with a shoute, and the voice of the Archangell and trompe of God. And the deade in Christ shall arise fyrste:
1 Thessalonians 4:17 then shal we which lyue and remayne, be caught vp with them also in the cloudes, to meate the Lorde in the ayer. And so shall we euer be with the Lord.
1 Thessalonians 4:18 Wherfore comforte youre selues one another with these wordes.

CHAPTER: 5

1 Thessalonians 5:1 Of the tymes and seasons brethren ye haue no nede, that I wryte vnto you:
1 Thessalonians 5:2 for ye youre selues knowe perfectly that the daie of the Lorde shall come euen as a thefe in the nyght.
1 Thessalonians 5:3 When they shal say peace and no daunger, then commeth on them soden destruccion, as the trauaylynge of a woman wyth chyld, and they shal not escape.
1 Thessalonians 5:4 But ye brethren are not in darckenes, that that daye shoulde come on you as it were a thefe.
1 Thessalonians 5:5 Ye are all the chyldren of lyght and the chyldren of the daye. We are not of the nyghte neither of darckenes.
1 Thessalonians 5:6 Therfore let vs not slepe as do other: but let vs watche & be sober.
1 Thessalonians 5:7 For they that slepe, slepe in the nyght: and they that be droncken, are droncken in the nyght.
1 Thessalonians 5:8 But let vs whiche are of the daye, be sober, armed wyth the breste plate of fayth and loue, and wyth hope of saluacyon as an helmet.
1 Thessalonians 5:9 For God hath not annoynted vs vnto wrath: but to obtayne saluacyon by the meanes of oure Lord Iesu Christ
1 Thessalonians 5:10 whyche dyed for vs: that whether we wake or slepe, we shoulde liue together wyth hym.
1 Thessalonians 5:11 Wherfore comforte your selues together, and edifye one another, euen as ye do.
1 Thessalonians 5:12 We beseche you brethren, that ye knowe them, whiche laboure amonge you, and haue the ouersight of you in the Lord
1 Thessalonians 5:13 and geue you exhortacyon, that ye haue them the more in loue for theyr workes sake, and be at peace wyth them.
1 Thessalonians 5:14 We desyre you brethren, warne them that are vnruly, comforte the feble minded, forbeare the weake, haue contynuall pacience towarde all men.
1 Thessalonians 5:15 Se that none recompence euyll for euyll vnto any man: but euer folowe that which is good, both among your selues, and to all men.
1 Thessalonians 5:16 Reioyse euer.
1 Thessalonians 5:17 Praye contynuallye.
1 Thessalonians 5:18 In all thinges geue thankes. For thys is the wyll of God in Christe Iesu towarde you.
1 Thessalonians 5:19 Quenche not the spyryte.
1 Thessalonians 5:20 Despyse not prophesyenge.
1 Thessalonians 5:21 Examen all thinges, and kepe that which is good.
1 Thessalonians 5:22 Absteyne from all suspicious thinges.
1 Thessalonians 5:23 The very God of peace sanctifye you thorowout. And I praye God that your whole spyryte, soule and bodye, be kept faultles vnto the comming of oure Lorde Iesus Christe.
1 Thessalonians 5:24 Faythfull is he whiche called you: which wyl also do it.
1 Thessalonians 5:25 Brethren, praye for vs.
1 Thessalonians 5:26 Grete all the brethren wyth an holy kysse.
1 Thessalonians 5:27 I charge you in the Lorde, that thys Epistle be read vnto all the holy brethren.
1 Thessalonians 5:28 The grace of the Lord Iesus Christ be wyth you. Amen.

BOOK: 2 Thessalonians

CHAPTER: 1

2 Thessalonians 1:1 Paule, Syluanus & Timotheus. Vnto the congregacyon of the Thessalonians, whiche are in God oure father, and in the Lorde Iesus Christe.
2 Thessalonians 1:2 Grace be with you and peace from God oure father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christe.
2 Thessalonians 1:3 We are bounde to thanke God alwayes for you brethren, as it mete, because that your fayth groweth excedingly, and euerye one of you swimmeth in loue towarde another betwene youre selues,
2 Thessalonians 1:4 so that we oure selues reioyse of you in the congregacions of GOD ouer youre pacience and fayth in al youre persecucyons and trybulacyons that ye suffer,
2 Thessalonians 1:5 whiche is a token of the ryghtuouse iudgement of God that ye are counted worthye of the kyngdome of God, for whiche ye also suffer.
2 Thessalonians 1:6 It is verely a ryghteous thing with God to recompence trybulacyon to them that trouble you:
2 Thessalonians 1:7 and to you whiche are troubled, reste wyth vs, when the Lorde Iesus shall shewe hym selfe from heauen wyth hys myghtye Aungels,
2 Thessalonians 1:8 in flammynge fyre, rendrynge vengeaunce vnto them that knowe not God, and to them that obeye not vnto the Gospel of our Lorde Iesus Christ,
2 Thessalonians 1:9 which shall be punyshed wyth euerlastyng dampnacyon from the presence of the Lorde, and from the glory of hys power,
2 Thessalonians 1:10 when he shall come to be gloryfyed in hys saynctes, and to be made marueylous in all them that beleue: because oure testimonye that we had vnto you, was beleued euen the same daye that we preached it.
2 Thessalonians 1:11 Wherfore we praye alwayes for you that oure God make you worthye of the callynge and fulfyll al delectacyon of goodnes and the worke of fayth, wyth power
2 Thessalonians 1:12 that the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christe maye be glorifyed in you, and ye in hym, thorowe the grace of oure God, and of the Lorde Iesus Christe:

CHAPTER: 2

2 Thessalonians 2:1 We beseche you brethren by the commynge of oure Lorde Iesu Christe, and in that we shal assemble vnto hym,
2 Thessalonians 2:2 that ye be not sodenly moued fome your mynd, and be not troubled, neyther by spirite neyther by wordes, nor yet by letter whiche shoulde seme to come from vs, as thoughe the daye of Christe were at hande.
2 Thessalonians 2:3 Let no man deceyue you by any meanes, for the Lord commeth not, except there come a departyng first, and that, that sinful man be opened, the sonne of perdicyon
2 Thessalonians 2:4 whiche is an aduersarye, and is exalted aboue all that is called God, or that is worshypped: so that he shall sytte as God in the temple of God, and shewe hym selfe as God.
2 Thessalonians 2:5 Remember ye not, that when I was yet with you, I tolde you these thynges?
2 Thessalonians 2:6 And nowe ye knowe what withholdeth: euen that he myght be vttered at his tyme.
2 Thessalonians 2:7 For the mysterye of that iniquitie doeth he al ready work whiche onelye loketh vntyll it be taken out of the waye.
2 Thessalonians 2:8 And then shall that wicked be vttered, whome the Lorde shall consume with the spirite of hys mouth, and shall destroye wt the aperaunce of hys commynge.
2 Thessalonians 2:9 euen hym whose commynge is by the workynge of Sathan, with all liynge power, signes and wonders:
2 Thessalonians 2:10 and in all deceyuablenes of vnryghtuousnes, amonge them that peryshe: because they receyued not the loue of the truethe, that they myght haue bene sayed.
2 Thessalonians 2:11 And therfore God shall sende them stronge delusyon, that they shoulde beleue lyes:
2 Thessalonians 2:12 that all they myghte be damned which beleued not the trueth but had pleasure in vnryghtuousnes.
2 Thessalonians 2:13 But we are bounde to geue thankes alwaye to God for you brethren beloued of the Lorde, because that God hath from the beginnynge chosen you to saluacyon, thorow sanctifiynge of the spyryte, and thorowe beleuing the truet
2 Thessalonians 2:14 whereunto he called you by oure Gospell, to obtayne the glorye that commeth of oure Lorde Iesu Christe.
2 Thessalonians 2:15 Therfore brethren stande fast and kepe the ordinaunces which ye haue learned: whether it were by oure preachynge or by epistle.
2 Thessalonians 2:16 Our Lorde Iesu Christe hym selfe, and God oure father whiche hath loued vs and hath geuen vs euerlastynge consolatyon and good hope thorow grace,
2 Thessalonians 2:17 comforte youre hertes, and stablyshe you in all doctryne and good doynge.

CHAPTER: 3

2 Thessalonians 3:1 Fvrthermore brethren praye for vs, that the worde of God maye haue free passage and be glorifyed, as it is with you:
2 Thessalonians 3:2 and that we maye be delyuered from vnreasonable and euyll men. For all men haue not fayth:
2 Thessalonians 3:3 but the Lorde is faythfull, whiche shall stablyshe you, and kepe you from euyll.
2 Thessalonians 3:4 We haue confydence thorowe the Lorde to you warde, that ye both do, and wyll do that whiche we commaunde you.
2 Thessalonians 3:5 And the Lorde guide your hertes to the loue of God and pacience of Christe.
2 Thessalonians 3:6 We requyre you brethren in the name of oure Lorde Iesu Christ, that ye wythdrawe your selues from euerye brother that walketh inordinatelye and not after the institucyon whiche ye receyued of vs.
2 Thessalonians 3:7 Ye youre selues knowe howe ye oughte to folowe vs. For we behaued not oure selues inordinately among you.
2 Thessalonians 3:8 Neyther toke we bread of anye man for nought: but wroughte wyth laboure and trauayle nyght and daye, because we would not be greuous to anye of you:
2 Thessalonians 3:9 not but that we had authorytye: but to make oure selues as ensample vnto you, to folowe vs.
2 Thessalonians 3:10 For when we were with you thys we warned you of, that yf there were any whiche woulde not worke, that the same shoulde not eate.
2 Thessalonians 3:11 We haue hearde say no doubte that there are some whiche walke amonge you inordinately and worke not at all, but are besye bodyes.
2 Thessalonians 3:12 Them that are suche we commaunde and exhorte by oure Lorde Iesu Christe, that they worke wyth quietnes, and eate theyr owne breade.
2 Thessalonians 3:13 Brethren be not werye in well doyng.
2 Thessalonians 3:14 Yf any man obeye not oure sayinges send vs worde of hym by a letter: and haue no companye wyth hym that he maye be ashamed.
2 Thessalonians 3:15 And counte hym not as an enemy, but warne hym as a brother.
2 Thessalonians 3:16 The verye Lorde of peace geue you peace alwayes, by all meanes. The Lorde be wyth you all.
2 Thessalonians 3:17 The salutacyon of me Paule wyth myne owne hande. Thys is the token in al Epistles. So I wryte.
2 Thessalonians 3:18 The grace of oure Lorde Iesus Christe be with you all. AMEN.

BOOK: 1 Timothy

CHAPTER: 1

1 Timothy 1:1 Paule an Apostle of Iesus Christe, by the commaundemente of God our sauyour, and Lord Iesus christ whiche is oure hope.
1 Timothy 1:2 Vnto Timothe hys naturall sonne in the fayth. Grace, mercye, and peace from God oure father and Lorde Iesus Christe oure Lorde.
1 Timothy 1:3 And I besought the to abyde styl in Ephesus, when I departed into Macedonia, euen so do, that thou commaunde some, that they teache no nother wyse:
1 Timothy 1:4 neyther geue hede to fables and genealogyes whiche are endelesse, & brede doubtes more then Godlye edifiynge whiche is by fayth:
1 Timothy 1:5 for the ende of the commaundement is loue that commeth of a pure hert, & of a good conscience, and of fayth vnfayned:
1 Timothy 1:6 from the which thinges some haue erred & haue turned vnto vayne iangelyng,
1 Timothy 1:7 because they woulde be doctours in the scrypture, and yet vnderstand not what they speake, nether wherof they affyrme.
1 Timothy 1:8 We knowe that the lawe is good, yf a man vse it lawfullye,
1 Timothy 1:9 vnderstandynge thys, howe that the lawe is not geuen vnto a ryghtuous man but vnto the vnryghtuous and disobedient, to the vngodly and to synners, to vnholy and vncleane, to murtherers of fathers, and murtherers of mothers to manstears
1 Timothy 1:10 & whor mongers: to them that defyle them selues wyth mankynde: to menstealers, to lyars & to periured, and so forth yf there be any other thynge that is contrarye to holsome doctrine
1 Timothy 1:11 accordynge to the Gospell of the glorye of the blessed God, whiche Gospell is committed vnto me.
1 Timothy 1:12 And I thanke Christe Iesus oure Lorde which hath made me stronge: for he counted me true, and put me in offyce,
1 Timothy 1:13 when before I was a blasphemer and persecuter, and a tyraunte. But I obtayned mercye, because I dyd it ignorauntly thorowe vnbelefe.
1 Timothy 1:14 Neuerthelater the grace of oure Lorde was more aboundaunt wyth fayth and loue whiche is in Christ Iesu.
1 Timothy 1:15 Thys is a true saiynge and by all meanes worthy to be receyued, that Christ Iesus came into the worlde to saue synners, of whom I am chiefe.
1 Timothy 1:16 Not wythstandyng for this cause was mercye geuen vnto me that Iesus christ shoulde fyrste shewe on me all longe pacience vnto the ensample of them whiche shal in tyme to come beleue on hym vnto eternall lyfe.
1 Timothy 1:17 So then vnto God, kyng euerlastyng, immortall, inuysyble, and wyse onely, be honoure & prayse for euer and euer. Amen.
1 Timothy 1:18 Thys commaundement committe I vnto the sonne Timotheus, accordyng to the Prophesyes whiche in tyme paste were Prophesyed of the that thou in them shouldest fyght a good fyghte
1 Timothy 1:19 hauynge fayth and a good conscience whiche some haue put awaye from them and as concernyuge faythe, haue made shypwracke.
1 Timothy 1:20 Of whose numbre is Himeneus and Alexander whome I haue delyuered vnto Sathan that he myghte be taught not to blaspheme.

CHAPTER: 2

1 Timothy 2:1 I exhorte therfore, that aboue al thynges, prayers, supplicacyons intercessyons, and geuynge of thankes be had for all men:
1 Timothy 2:2 for kynges, and for all that are in authorytye, that we maye lyue a quyete and a peasable lyfe, in all godlynes and honestye.
1 Timothy 2:3 For that is good and accepted in the syghte of God oure sauyoure,
1 Timothy 2:4 whiche wyll haue all men saued, and to come vnto the knoweledge of the trueth.
1 Timothy 2:5 For there is one God, and one Meadiatoure betwene God and man, which is the man Christ Iesus
1 Timothy 2:6 which gaue hym self a raunsome for al men, that it shoulde be testifyed at hys tyme,
1 Timothy 2:7 where vnto I am ordeyned a preacher and an Apostle: I tell the trueth in Christe and lye not, beynge the teacher of the gentyles in fayth and verytye.
1 Timothy 2:8 I wyll therfore that the men praye euerye where lyfting vp pure handes wythout wrath or doubtyng.
1 Timothy 2:9 Lykewyse also the women that they araye them selues in comlye apparell wyth shamefastnes and discrete behauyoure not wyth broyded heare other golde, or pearles, or costlye araye:
1 Timothy 2:10 but wyth suche as becommeth women that professe the worshyppyng of God thorowe good workes.
1 Timothy 2:11 Let the woman learne in silence with all subieccyon.
1 Timothy 2:12 I suffer not a woman to teache, neyther to haue authoritie ouer a man: but for to be in silence.
1 Timothy 2:13 For Adam was fyrste formed, and then Eue.
1 Timothy 2:14 Also Adam was not deceyued, but the woman was deceyued, and was in a transgressyon.
1 Timothy 2:15 Notwythstandyng thorow bearyng of chyldren they shalbe saued, so they continue in faythe, loue & holynes with discrecion.

CHAPTER: 3

1 Timothy 3:1 Thys is a true saiyng. If a man couete the offyce of a byshop, he desyreth a good worke.
1 Timothy 3:2 Yea and a bishop muste be fautlesse the husband of one wyfe, sober discrete, hone style apparelled, harberous, apt to teache,
1 Timothy 3:3 not dronken, no fyghter, not geuen to fylthy lucre: but gentle, abhorrynge fyghtyng, abhorrynge couetousnes,
1 Timothy 3:4 and one that ruleth hys owne house honestlye, hauing children vnder obedience, wyth all honestye.
1 Timothy 3:5 For yf a man can not rule hys owne house, howe shall he care for the congregacion of God.
1 Timothy 3:6 He maye not be a yong scholer, lest he swell and fall into the iudgement of the euyll speaker.
1 Timothy 3:7 He muste also be well reported of amonge them whiche are wythout forth, lest he fall into rebuke and snare of the euyll speaker.
1 Timothy 3:8 Lykewyse muste the Deacons be honest, not double tonged, not geuen vnto much drinkynge, neyther vnto fylthy lucre:
1 Timothy 3:9 but hauing the mystery of the fayth in a pure conscience.
1 Timothy 3:10 And let them fyrste be proued, and then lette them mynyster, yf they be founde fautlesse.
1 Timothy 3:11 Euen so muste theyr wyues be honeste, not euyll speakers, but sober and faythfull in all thynges.
1 Timothy 3:12 Let the deacons be the husbandes of one wyfe, and suche as rule theyr chyldren well, and theyr owne housholdes.
1 Timothy 3:13 For they that mynyster wel, get them selues good degree and greate lybertye in the faythe whiche is in Christ Iesu.
1 Timothy 3:14 These thynges wryte I vnto the, trusting to come shortely vnto the:
1 Timothy 3:15 but and yf I tarye longe, that then thou mayeste yet haue knowledge howe thou oughtest to behaue thy selfe in the housse of God, whiche is the congregacyon of the lyuynge God, the pyllar & ground of trueth.
1 Timothy 3:16 And wythout naye greate is that mysterye of godlynes: God was shewed in the fleshe, was iustified in the spirite, was sene of aungels, was preached vnto the gentils, was beleued on in earth and receyued vp in glory.

CHAPTER: 4

1 Timothy 4:1 The spyryte speaketh euydentlye that in the later tymes some shal departe from the fayth, & shall geue heed vnto spyrytes of erroure, and deuelysh doctryne of them
1 Timothy 4:2 which speake false thorowe hypocrisye, and haue theyr consciences marked with an hote Iron,
1 Timothy 4:3 forbyddyng to marye, and commaundynge to abstayne from meates which God hath created to be receyued wyth geuyng thankes, of them which beleue and know the trueth.
1 Timothy 4:4 For all the creatures of God are good & nothynge to be refused, yf it be receyued with thankes geuynge.
1 Timothy 4:5 For it is sanctifyed by the worde of God and prayer.
1 Timothy 4:6 Yf thou shalt put the brethren in remembraunce of these thynges: thou shalt be a good mynyster of Iesu Christe, whiche hast bene noryshed vp in the wordes of the fayth and good doctryne, which doctryne thou haste contynuallye folowed.
1 Timothy 4:7 But cast awaye vnghostly and olde wyues fables. Exercyse thy selfe vnto Godlynes.
1 Timothy 4:8 For bodely exercyse profyteth lytell: But godlynes is good vnto all thynges, as a thynge whiche hath promyses of the lyfe that is now, and of the lyfe to come.
1 Timothy 4:9 Thys is a sure saiyng and of all partyes worthy to be receyued.
1 Timothy 4:10 For therfore we laboure and suffer rebuke, because we beleue in the lyuyng God, whiche is the sauyoure of all men: but specyally of those that beleue.
1 Timothy 4:11 Suche thynges commaunde and teache.
1 Timothy 4:12 Let no man despyse thy youthe: but be vnto them that beleue, an ensample, in worde in conuersacyon, in loue, in spyryte, in fayth & in purenes.
1 Timothy 4:13 Tyll I come, geue attendaunce to reading to exhortacyon and to doctryne.
1 Timothy 4:14 Despyse not the gyfte that is in the, whiche was geuen the thorow Prophesye, and wyth layinge on of the handes of an elder.
1 Timothy 4:15 These thynges exercyse, and geue thy selfe vnto them, that it maye be sene howe thou profytest in all thynges.
1 Timothy 4:16 Take hede vnto thy selfe and vnto learnyng, and contynue therein. For yf thou shalte so do, thou shalte saue thy selfe and them that heare the.

CHAPTER: 5

1 Timothy 5:1 Rebuke not an elder: but exhorte hym as a father, and the yonger men as brethren
1 Timothy 5:2 the elder women as mothers, the yonger as systers, with all purenes.
1 Timothy 5:3 Honour wyddowes, whiche are true wyddowes.
1 Timothy 5:4 Yf any wyddowe haue chyldren or neues, let them learne fyrst to rule theyr owne houses godlye and to recompence theyr elders. For that is good and acceptable before God.
1 Timothy 5:5 She that is a verye wydowe and fryndelesse, putteth her trust in God & contynueth in supplicacyon & prayer nyghte and daye.
1 Timothy 5:6 But she that lyueth in pleasure, is dead euen yet alyue.
1 Timothy 5:7 And these thynges commaunde, that they may be wythout faute.
1 Timothy 5:8 Yf there be anye that prouideth not for hys owne, & namely for them of hys housholde the same denyeth the fayth, & is worsse then an infydele.
1 Timothy 5:9 Let no wydowe be chosen vnder thre score yere olde, and suche a one as was the wyfe of one man,
1 Timothy 5:10 and well reported of in good workes: yf she haue nouryshed chyldren, yf she haue bene lyberall to straungers, yf she haue washed the saynctes fete, yf she haue mynystred vnto them whiche were in aduersitie, yf she were contynually geuen vnto all maner good workes.
1 Timothy 5:11 The yonger wydowes refuse. For when they haue begonne to waxe wanton to the dyshonoure of Christe, then wyll they marye,
1 Timothy 5:12 hauynge damnacion because they haue broken theyr fyrst fayth.
1 Timothy 5:13 And also they learne to go from house to house ydle, ye not ydle onelye, but also tryflynge and busybodyes speakynge thynges whiche are not comely.
1 Timothy 5:14 I wyll therfore that the yonger women marye and beare children, and guyde the house and geue none occasyon to the aduersarye to speake euyll.
1 Timothy 5:15 For many of them are alreadye turned backe and are gone after Sathan.
1 Timothy 5:16 And yf any man or woman that beleueth haue wydowes, let them mynyster vnto them, & lette not the congregacion be charged: that it maye haue suffycyent for them that are wyddowes in dede.
1 Timothy 5:17 The elders that rule well, are worthye of double honoure, most specyally they whiche laboure in the worde and in teachynge.
1 Timothy 5:18 For the scrypture sayeth: Thou shalt not mousell the mouthe of the oxe that treadeth out the corne. And the labourer is worthye of hys rewarde.
1 Timothy 5:19 Agaynste an elder receyue none accusacyon: but vnder two or thre wytnesses.
1 Timothy 5:20 Them that synne, rebuke openly, that other maye feare.
1 Timothy 5:21 I testyfye before God & the Lorde Iesus Christ, and the electe aungels, that thou obserue these thynges wythout hasty iudgement and do nothynge parcyally.
1 Timothy 5:22 Laye handes sodenly on no man, neyther be partakers of other mennes synnes: kepe thy self pure.
1 Timothy 5:23 Drink no lenger water, but vse a lytle wyne for thy stomakes sake, and thyne often dyseases.
1 Timothy 5:24 Some mennes sinnes are open before hand and go before vnto iudgemente: some mennes synnes folowe after.
1 Timothy 5:25 Lykewyse also good workes are manyfest before hande, and they that are otherwyse can not be hyd.

CHAPTER: 6

1 Timothy 6:1 Let as manye seruauntes as are vnder the yoke, count theyr maysters worthy of all honoure that the name of God and hys doctryne be not euyll spoken of.
1 Timothy 6:2 Se that they whiche haue beleuynge maysters, despyse them not because they are brethren: but so muche the rather do seruyce, for asmuch as they are beleuynge and beloued and partakers of the benefyte.
1 Timothy 6:3 These thynges teache and exhorte. Yf any man teache otherwyse, and is not contente wt the holsome wordes of our Lord Iesus christ, and wyth the doctryne of Godlynes,
1 Timothy 6:4 he is puft vp, and knoweth nothyng: but wasteth hys braynes about questyons and stryfe of wordes, whereof sprynge enuye, stryfe, raylynges, euyll surmysynges
1 Timothy 6:5 and vayne disputacyons of men wyth corrupte myndes, and destytute of the trueth, whiche thynke that lucre is Godlines, from suche separate thy self.
1 Timothy 6:6 Godlynes is greate ryches, yf a man be content with that he hath.
1 Timothy 6:7 For we broughte nothynge into thys worlde & it is a playne case that we can carye nothyng out.
1 Timothy 6:8 When we haue fode and raymente, let vs therwyth be content.
1 Timothy 6:9 They that wyll be rych, fall into temptacyon and snares, and into many folysh and noysome lustes which drowne men in perdicyon and destruccyon.
1 Timothy 6:10 For couetousnes is the rote of all euyll, whiche whyle some lusted after, they erred from the faythe and tangled them selues wyth manye sorowes.
1 Timothy 6:11 But thou which arte the man of GOD, flye suche thynges. Folowe ryghtuousnes. Godlynes, loue, pacyence and mekenes.
1 Timothy 6:12 Fyghte the good fyght of fayth. Laye hande on eternall lyfe, wherevnto thou arte called and hast professed a good professyon before manye wytnesses.
1 Timothy 6:13 I geue the charge in the syght of GOD, whiche quickeneth all thynges, & before Iesu Christe whiche vnder Poncyus Pylate wytnessed a good wytnessynge,
1 Timothy 6:14 that thou kepe the commaundement, and be wythout spot and vnrebukeable, vntyll the appearynge of our Lorde Iesus,
1 Timothy 6:15 whiche appearynge (when the tyme is come) he shal shew that is blessed and myghtye onelye, kynge of kynges, & Lord of Lordes,
1 Timothy 6:16 whiche onelye hath immortalitie, and dwelleth in lyght that no man can attayne, whome neuer man sawe, neyther can se, to whom be honoure and rule euerlastynge. Amen.
1 Timothy 6:17 Charge them that are ryche in this worlde shal they be not exceadyng wyse, and that they truste not in the vncertayne ryches, but in the lyuyng God, which geueth vs aboundauntly al thynges to enioy them,
1 Timothy 6:18 and that they do good and be ryche in good workes, and readye to geue and to distrybute,
1 Timothy 6:19 layinge vp in store for them selues a good foundacyon agaynste the tyme to come that they maye obtayne eternal lyfe.
1 Timothy 6:20 O Timothe saue that whiche is geuen the to kepe, and auoyde vnghostlye vanytyes of voyces and opposicyons of science falslye so called,
1 Timothy 6:21 whiche science whyle some professed, they haue erred as concernyng the fayth. Grace be with the. AMEN.

BOOK: 2 Timothy

CHAPTER: 1

2 Timothy 1:1 Paule an Apostle of Iesu Christ by the wyll of God to preache the promes of life which lyfe is in Christe Iesu.
2 Timothy 1:2 To Tymothe his beloued sonne. Grace, mercy and peace from God the father, and from Christe Iesu oure Lorde.
2 Timothy 1:3 I thanke God, whom I serue from myne elders with pure conscience, that wythout ceasyng I make mencyon of the in my prayers nyghte and daye,
2 Timothy 1:4 desyrynge to se the, myndefull of thy teares: so that I be fylled with ioy,
2 Timothy 1:5 when I call to remembraunce the vnfayned fayth, that is in the, whiche dwelte fyrste in thy graundmother Loys, and in thy mother Eunica: and am assured that it dwelleth in the also.
2 Timothy 1:6 Wherfore I warne the that thou stere vp the gyfte of God whiche is in the, by the puttynge on of my handes.
2 Timothy 1:7 For God hath not geuen to vs the spiryte of feare, but of power and of loue, and of sobrenes of mynde.
2 Timothy 1:8 Be not ashamed to testifye oure Lorde, neyther be ashamed of me, whiche am bounde for hys sake: but suffre aduersitye also wyth the Gospell thorowe the power of God,
2 Timothy 1:9 whiche saued vs and called vs with an holye callynge, not accordynge to hys owne purpose & grace whiche grace was geuen vs thorowe Christe before the worlde was,
2 Timothy 1:10 but is nowe declared openlye by the appearynge of oure sauyoure Iesu Christ whiche hath put awaye deathe, & hath broughte lyfe and immortalitye to light thorow the Gospell,
2 Timothy 1:11 whereunto I am appointed, a preacher and an Apostle and a teacher of the Gentyls:
2 Timothy 1:12 for the whiche cause I also suffer these thinges. Neuerthelesse I am not ashamed. For I know whom I haue beleued, and am sure that he is able to kepe that whiche I haue commytted to hys kepyng, agaynst that daye.
2 Timothy 1:13 Se thou haue the ensample of the holsome wordes, whiche thou heardest of me in faythe and loue whiche is in Iesus Christe.
2 Timothy 1:14 That good thynge, whiche was commytted to thy kepynge, kepe in the holy ghoste which dwelleth in vs.
2 Timothy 1:15 Thys thou knowest howe that all they whiche are in Asia, be turned from me. Of whiche sorte are Phygelos and Hermogenes.
2 Timothy 1:16 The Lorde geue mercye vnto the house of Onesiphoras, for he ofte refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chayne:
2 Timothy 1:17 but when he was at Rome, he sought me oute very dylygently, and founde me.
2 Timothy 1:18 The Lorde graunte vnto hym that he maye fynde mercye with the Lorde at that daye. And in howe manye thinges he mynystred vnto me at Ephesus thou knowest very well.

CHAPTER: 2

2 Timothy 2:1 Thou therfor my sonne, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Iesus.
2 Timothy 2:2 And what thynges thou hast hearde of me, manye bearyng wytnes, the same delyuer to faythfull men, whiche are apte to teache other.
2 Timothy 2:3 Thou therfore suffer affliccyon as a good souldyer of Iesu Christe.
2 Timothy 2:4 No man that warreth entangleth hym selfe with worldye busynes, and that because he woulde please hym that hath chosen hym to be a souldyer.
2 Timothy 2:5 And though a man stryue for a masterye, yet is he not crouned, except he stryue lawfullye.
2 Timothy 2:6 The husbandman that laboureth must fyrste receyue of the frutes.
2 Timothy 2:7 Consyder what I saye. The Lorde geueth vnderstandynge in all thinges.
2 Timothy 2:8 Remember that Iesus Christe beynge of the sede of Dauid, rose agayne from death accordynge to my Gospell,
2 Timothy 2:9 wherein I suffer trouble as an euyll doar, euen vnto bondes. But the worde of God was not bounde.
2 Timothy 2:10 Here fore I suffre all thynges, for the electes sakes, that they myghte also obtayne the saluacyon, which is in Christe Iesus, with eternal glory.
2 Timothy 2:11 It is a true saiyng, yf we be deade wt hym we also shall lyue with hym.
2 Timothy 2:12 Yf we be pacyente, we shal also raygne with hym. Yf we denye hym, he also shall denye vs
2 Timothy 2:13 Yf we beleue not yet abydeth he faythfull. He can not deny hym selfe.
2 Timothy 2:14 Of these thynges put them in remembraunce, and testifye before the Lorde, that they stryue not aboute wordes: which is to no profyte, but to peruerte the hearers.
2 Timothy 2:15 Studye to shewe thy selfe laudable vnto God a workeman that nedeth not to be ashamed dyuydynge the worde of truste iustelye.
2 Timothy 2:16 Vnghostly and vayne voices passe ouer. For they shall encreace vnto greater vngodlynes,
2 Timothy 2:17 and theyr wordes shall frete euen as doeth a cancre: of whose number is Himeneos & Phyletos:
2 Timothy 2:18 which as concernyng the truethe haue erred, saiynge that the resurreccyon is past alredy, and do destroye the fayth of diuers persons.
2 Timothy 2:19 But the sure grounde of God remayneth, and hath thys seale: the Lord knoweth them that are his, & let euerye man that calleth on the name of Christe departe from iniquitie.
2 Timothy 2:20 Notwtstandyng in a greate house are not onelye vessels of golde and of syluer: but also of woode and of earthe, some for honoure, and some vnto dyshonoure.
2 Timothy 2:21 But yf a man purge hym self from suche felowes, he shalbe a vessell sanctyfyed vnto honoure, mete for the Lorde, & prepared vnto all good workes.
2 Timothy 2:22 Lustes of youth auoyde, and folow ryghtuousnes, fayth, loue, & peace, with them that call on the Lorde with pure herte.
2 Timothy 2:23 Folyshe & vnlearned questions put from the, remembring that they do, but gendre stryfe.
2 Timothy 2:24 But the seruaunt of the Lorde must not stryue, but must be peasable to all men, and apte to teache, and one that can suffre
2 Timothy 2:25 the euyll in meakenes, and can informe them that resiste: yf that God at any tyme wyll geue them repentaunce for to know the trueth,
2 Timothy 2:26 that they may come to them selues agayne out of the snare of the deuyll, whiche are nowe taken of hym at hys wyll.

CHAPTER: 3

2 Timothy 3:1 Thys vnderstand, that in the last dayes shall come perylous tymes.
2 Timothy 3:2 For the men shall be louers of theyr owne selues coueteous, bosters, proude, cursed speakers, dysobedyent to father and mother, vnthankefull, vnholye,
2 Timothy 3:3 vnkynde, truce breakers, stubborne false accusars, ryatours, fierce despysers of them whiche are good,
2 Timothy 3:4 traytours, headye, hye mynded, gredy vpon voluptuousnes more then the louers of God,
2 Timothy 3:5 hauynge a simylytude of Godly lyuynge, but haue denyed the power thereof: and suche abhorre.
2 Timothy 3:6 Of thys sorte are they which enter into houses, & bring into bondage women laden wyth synne which women are lede of dyuers lustes,
2 Timothy 3:7 euer learnynge, and neuer able to come vnto the knowledge of the trueth.
2 Timothy 3:8 As Iannes and Iambres withstode Moyses, euen so do these resiste the trueth, men they are of corrupte myndes, and lewde, as concernyng the fayth,
2 Timothy 3:9 but they shall preuayle no longer. For theyr madnes shalbe vttered vnto all men as theyrs was.
2 Timothy 3:10 But thou haste sene the experience of my doctryne, fashyon of lyuyng, purpose, fayth, long suffering, loue, pacience,
2 Timothy 3:11 persecucyons, and affliccyons which happened vnto me at Antioche, at Iconium and at Lystra: whiche persecucyons I suffered pacyently. And from them all, the Lorde delyuered me.
2 Timothy 3:12 Yea and all that wyll lyue Godlye in Christe Iesu, must suffer persecucyons.
2 Timothy 3:13 But the euyll man and disceyuers shal waxe worsse & worsse whyle they deceyue, and are deceyued them selues.
2 Timothy 3:14 But continue thou in the thynges whiche thou hast learned, which also were committed vnto the seyng thou knowest of whome thou hast learned them,
2 Timothy 3:15 and for as muche also as thou haste knowen holy scrypture of a chyld, whiche is able to make the wyse vnto saluacion thorowe the fayth which is in Christ Iesu.
2 Timothy 3:16 For al scripture geuen by inspyracion of God, is profytable to teache, to improue, to amende and to instruct in ryghtuousnes,
2 Timothy 3:17 that the man of God maye be perfecte and prepared vnto all good workes.

CHAPTER: 4

2 Timothy 4:1 I testifye therfore before God, & before the Lord Iesu Christe, which shall iudge quycke and deade in hys appearyng in his kyngedome,
2 Timothy 4:2 preache the word, be feruent, be it in season or out of season. Improue, rebuke, exhorte, wyth all long suffering and doctryne.
2 Timothy 4:3 For the tyme wyll come, when they wyll not suffer wholsome doctryne: but after theyr owne lustes shall they (whose eares ytch) get them an heape of teachers,
2 Timothy 4:4 & shal turne theyr eares from the trueth, and shalbe geuen vnto fables.
2 Timothy 4:5 But watche thou in all thynges, and suffre aduersitye and do the work of an Euangelist, fulfyll thyne offyce vnto the vtmost.
2 Timothy 4:6 For I am now ready to be offered, and the tyme of my departynge is at hande.
2 Timothy 4:7 I haue fought a good fyght, and haue fulfylled my course, and haue kepte the fayth.
2 Timothy 4:8 From henceforth is layde vp for me a croune of ryghtuousnes which the Lorde that is a ryghtuous iudge shall geue me at that daye: not to me only, but vnto all them that loue hys comynge.
2 Timothy 4:9 Make spede to come vnto me at once.
2 Timothy 4:10 For Demas hath left me & hath loued this present worlde, and is departed into Thessalonica. Crescens is gone to Galacia, & Titus vnto Dalmacea.
2 Timothy 4:11 Onelye Lucas is wyth me. Take Marke and brynge hym wyth the for he is necessarye vnto me, for to minister.
2 Timothy 4:12 And Tichicus haue I sent to Ephesus.
2 Timothy 4:13 The cloke that I lefte at Troada wyth Carpus, when thou comest, bryng wyth the, and the bokes but specially the partchement.
2 Timothy 4:14 Alexander the coppersmyth dyd me muche euyll, the Lorde rewarde him, according to hys dedes,
2 Timothy 4:15 of whom be thou ware also. For he wythstode our preachyng sore.
2 Timothy 4:16 At my fyrste aunsweryng, no man assisted me, but all forsoke me. I praye God that it maye not be layed to theyr charges:
2 Timothy 4:17 Notwithstandynge the Lord assisted me, & strenghthed me, that by me the preachynge shoulde be fulfylled to the vttermoste, and that al the Gentyles shoulde heare. And I was delyuered out of the mouth of the Lyon.
2 Timothy 4:18 And the Lord shall delyuer me from all euyll doynge, and shall kepe me to his heauenly kyngdome. To whom be prayse for euer and euer, Amen.
2 Timothy 4:19 Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the housholde of Onesiphorus.
2 Timothy 4:20 Erastus abode at Corinthum. Trophimos I lefte at Myletum sycke.
2 Timothy 4:21 Make spede to come before wynter. Eubolus greteth the, and Pudens, and Linus, & Claudia, and all the brethren.
2 Timothy 4:22 The Lorde Iesus Christ be with thy spyryte. Grace be with you. Amen.

BOOK: Titus

CHAPTER: 1

Titus 1:1 Paule the seruaunt of God and an Apostle of Iesu Christ, to preache the faythe, of Goddes elect, & the knowledge of that truethe, whiche is after Godlynes,
Titus 1:2 vpon the hope, of eternall lyfe, whiche lyfe God that can not lye, hath promysed before the worlde beganne:
Titus 1:3 but hath opened hys worde, at the tyme appoynted thorowe preachynge which preachynge is commytted vnto me by the commaundement of God oure sauyoure.
Titus 1:4 To Titus hys naturall sonne in the common fayth. Grace, mercy, and peace from God the father and from the Lorde Iesu Christe oure sauyoure.
Titus 1:5 For thys cause left I the in Crete, that thou shouldest performe that whiche was lackynge, and shouldest ordeyne elders in euery cytye as I appoynted the.
Titus 1:6 Yf any be fautelesse, the husbande of one wyfe hauyng faythfull chyldren, whiche are not sclaundred of ryote, neyther are dysobedyent.
Titus 1:7 For a byshoppe must be fautelesse, as it becommeth the mynister of God: not stubborne, not angrye, no dronkarde, no fyghter, not geuen to fylthy lucre:
Titus 1:8 but herberous one that loueth goodnes, sober mynded, ryghtuous, holy temperate,
Titus 1:9 and suche as cleaueth vnto the true worde of doctryne, that he maye be able to exhorte wyth wholesome learnynge, and to improue them, that saye agaynste it.
Titus 1:10 For there are many dysobedyent: & talkers of vanitye and disceyuers of myndes, namely they of the circumcision,
Titus 1:11 whose mouthes must be stopped: whiche peruerte whole houses teachynge thynges whiche they oughte not because of fylthy lucre.
Titus 1:12 One beyng of them selues, which was a poete of theyr owne, said: The Cretians are alwayes lyars, euil beastes and slowe belyes.
Titus 1:13 Thys wytnesse is true, wherfore rebuke them sharply that they may be sounde in the fayth,
Titus 1:14 and not takyng hede to Iewes fables and commaundementes of men that turne from the truethe.
Titus 1:15 Vnto the pure are all thynges pure, but vnto them that are defyled and vnbeleuynge, is nothynge pure: but euen the very myndes and consciences of them are defyled.
Titus 1:16 They confesse that they knowe God: but wyth the dedes they denye hym, and are abhomynable and dysobedient, and vnto all good workes discommendable.

CHAPTER: 2

Titus 2:1 Bvt speake thou that whiche becommeth wholsome learnyng.
Titus 2:2 That the elder men be sober, honest, discret, sounde in the fayth, in loue, and in pacience.
Titus 2:3 And the elder women lykewyse, that they be in such rayment as becommeth holynes, not false accusars, not geuen to muche drynkynge, but teachers of honest thinges
Titus 2:4 to make the yong women sobre mynded, to loue theyr husbandes, to loue their chyldren,
Titus 2:5 to be dyscret, chast, huswyfly, good & obedyent vnto theyr owne husbandes, that the word of God be not euyl spoken of.
Titus 2:6 Young men lykewyse exhort that they be sobre mynded.
Titus 2:7 Aboue all thynges shewe thy selfe an ensample of good workes wyth vncorrupt doctryne wyth honesty,
Titus 2:8 and wyth the wholesom worde, which cannot be rebuked, that he which wythstandeth, maye be ashamed, hauyng nothynge in you that he maye disprayse.
Titus 2:9 The seruauntes exhort to be obedient vnto theyr owne maysters, and to please in al thynges, not aunswerynge agayne,
Titus 2:10 neyther be pyckers, but that they shewe all good faythfulnes, that they maye do worshyp to the doctryne of oure sauyoure God in all thynges.
Titus 2:11 For the grace of God, that bringeth saluacion vnto al men, hath apered
Titus 2:12 & teacheth vs that we shoulde denye vngodlynes & worldly lustes, and that we shoulde lyue sobre mynded ryghtuouslye and Godly in this present worlde,
Titus 2:13 lokynge for that blessed hope and gloryous apperyng of the myghtye God, and of oure sauyoure Iesu Christe,
Titus 2:14 whiche gaue hym selfe for vs, to redeme vs from al vnryghtuousnes and to pourge vs a peculyar people vnto him selfe, feruently geuen vnto good workes.
Titus 2:15 These thynges speake, and exhorte, and rebuke, wyth all commaundyng. Se that no man despyse the.

CHAPTER: 3

Titus 3:1 Warne them that they submytte them selues to rule and power to obeye the offycers that they be ready vnto al good workes
Titus 3:2 that they speake euyll of noman that they be no fyghters, but softe, shewynge all meakenes vnto all men.
Titus 3:3 For we our selues also in tymes paste, vnwyse, dysobedient, deceyued, in daunger to lustes, and to dyuers maners of voluptuousnes, lyuyng in malycyousnes and enuye, ful of hate, hatyng one another.
Titus 3:4 But after that the kyndnes and loue of our sauyoure God to man warde appered,
Titus 3:5 not of the dedes of rightuousnes, which we wrought but of hys mercy he saued vs, by the fountayne of the newe byrth, & with the renuyng of the holye ghost,
Titus 3:6 which he shed on vs aboundauntly, thorowe Iesus Christe oure sauyoure,
Titus 3:7 that we ones iustifyed by hys grace, shoulde be heyres of eternall lyfe, thorow hope.
Titus 3:8 Thys is a true saiynge. Of these thynges I would thou shouldest certyfye, that they whiche beleue God, might be dylygent to go forwarde in good workes. These thynges are good and profytable vnto men.
Titus 3:9 Folysh questions and genealogyes, and braulynge and stryfe aboute the law auoyde: for they are vnprofytable and superfluous.
Titus 3:10 A man that is geuen to heresye, after the fyrst & the seconde admonicyon auoyde,
Titus 3:11 remembring that he that is suche, is peruerted, and synneth euen damned by hys owne iudgement.
Titus 3:12 When I shall sende Artemas vnto the or Tichicus, be diligente to come to me vnto Nichopolis. For I haue determyned there to wynter.
Titus 3:13 Brynge zenas the lawyar and Apollos on theyr iorneye dilygentlye, that nothing be lackyng vnto them.
Titus 3:14 And let oures also learne to excell in good workes as farforthe, as nede requyreth, that they be not vnfruteful.
Titus 3:15 All that are with me salute the. Grete them that loue vs in the faythe Grace be wt you all. AMEN.

BOOK: Philemon

CHAPTER: 1

Philemon 1:1 Paul the prysoner of Iesu Christe and brother Timotheus. Vnto Philemon the beloued, & oure healper,
Philemon 1:2 and to the beloued Appia, and to Archyppus our felowe souldyer, & to the congregacyon of thy house.
Philemon 1:3 Grace be wyth you and peace from God our father, and from the Lorde Iesus Christ.
Philemon 1:4 I thanke my God, makynge mention alwayes of the in my prayers,
Philemon 1:5 when I heare of thy loue and fayth, which thou hast towarde the Lorde Iesu, and towarde all saynctes:
Philemon 1:6 so that the fellowshyppe that thou haste in the fayth, is frutefull thorowe knowledge of all good thynges, whiche are in you by Iesus Christe.
Philemon 1:7 And we haue greate ioye, and consolation ouer thy loue: For by the (brother) the sainctes hertes are conforted.
Philemon 1:8 Wherfore though I be bolde in Christe to enioyne the, that whiche becommeth the:
Philemon 1:9 yet for loues sake I rather beseche the, thoughe I be as I am euen Paule aged, and now in bondes for Iesu Christes sake.
Philemon 1:10 I beseche the for my sonne Onesimus, whom I begat in my bondes,
Philemon 1:11 whiche in tyme passed was to the vnprofytable both to the, and also to me,
Philemon 1:12 whome I haue sente home agayne. Thou therfore receyue hym, that is to say, myne owne bowels
Philemon 1:13 whome I woulde fayne haue receyued with me, that in thy stede he myght haue ministred vnto me in the bondes of the Gospell.
Philemon 1:14 Neuer thelesse, wythout thy mynde, woulde I do nothynge, that the good whiche spryngeth of the shoulde not be as it were of necessytie, but wyllynglye.
Philemon 1:15 Happelye he therfore departed for a season that thou shouldest receyue hym for euer,
Philemon 1:16 not nowe as a seruaunte, but aboue a seruaunte I meane a brother beloued, specyally to me: but howe muche more vnto the, bothe in the fleshe and also in the Lorde?
Philemon 1:17 Yf thou count me a felowe, receyue hym as my selfe.
Philemon 1:18 Yf he haue hurte the, or oweth the oughte that laye to my charge.
Philemon 1:19 I Paule haue wryten it wt myne owne hande, I wyll recompence it. So that I do not saye, to the, howe that thou owest vnto me euen thyne owne selfe.
Philemon 1:20 Euen so brother, let me enioye the in the Lorde. Comforte my bowelles in the Lord.
Philemon 1:21 Trusting in thyne obedyence, I wrote vnto the, knowing, that thou wylt do more then I saye for.
Philemon 1:22 Moreouer prepare me lodgynge: for I truste thorowe the healpe of your prayers, I shall be geuen vnto you.
Philemon 1:23 There salute the Epaphras my felowe prysoner in christ Iesu.
Philemon 1:24 Marcus, Aristarchus Demas, Lucas, my helpers.
Philemon 1:25 The grace of our Lorde Iesu Christe be with youre spyrytes Amen.

BOOK: Hebrews

CHAPTER: 1

Hebrews 1:1 God in tyme paste diuerselye and manye wayes, spake vnto the fathers by Prophetes,
Hebrews 1:2 but in these laste dayes he hath spoken vnto vs by hys sonne, whom he hath made heyre of all thynges, by whom also he made the worlde.
Hebrews 1:3 Whyche sonne beyng the bryghtnes of hys glorye, and verye Image of his substaunce, bearinge vp al thinges wyth the worde of hys power, hath in his owne persone pourged our synnes, and is sitting on the right hand of the maiestie on hygh,
Hebrews 1:4 and is more excellente then the Angelles, in as muche as he hath by enheritaunce obteyned an excellenter name then haue they.
Hebrews 1:5 For vnto whyche of the Angelles sayed he anye tyme: Thou arte my sonne, thys day begat I the? And agayne: I wyll be hys father, and he shall be my sonne.
Hebrews 1:6 And agayne: when he bringeth in the fyrst begotten sonne into the worlde, he sayeth: And al the Angels of God shal worshyppe him.
Hebrews 1:7 And of the Angels he sayth: He maketh his Angels spyrytes, and hys mynysters flammes of fyre.
Hebrews 1:8 But vnto the sonne he sayeth: God thy seate shall be for euer and euer. The cepter of thy kyngdome is a ryghte ceptre.
Hebrews 1:9 Thou hast loued ryghtuousnes, and hated inyquytye. Wherfore God, whiche is thy GOD, hath anoynted the wyth the oyle of gladnes aboue thy felowes.
Hebrews 1:10 And thou Lorde in the beginninge hast layed the foundacion of the earth. And the heauens are the workes of thy handes.
Hebrews 1:11 They shal peryshe, but thou shalt endure. They all shal wexe olde as doth a garment,
Hebrews 1:12 and as a vesture shalt thou chaunge them, and they shalbe chaunged. But thou arte alwayes, and thy yeares shal not fayle.
Hebrews 1:13 Vnto which of the Angels sayed he at anye tyme? Sitte on my ryghte hande, tyll I make thyne enemies thy fote stole.
Hebrews 1:14 Are they not al ministringe spirites, sent to minister for their sakes, whiche shal be heyres of saluation?

CHAPTER: 2

Hebrews 2:1 Wherfor we ought to geue the more heede to the thynges which we haue heard, lest we perishe.
Hebrews 2:2 For yf the word which was spoken by Angels was stedfast, so that euery transgression and disobedience receyued a iuste recompence to rewarde,
Hebrews 2:3 howe shal we escape, yf we despise so great saluacyon, whyche at the fyrst began to be preached of the Lorde hym selfe, and afterward was confirmed to vswarde, by them that hearde it,
Hebrews 2:4 God bearynge wytnesse therto, both wyth signes and wonders also, and with diuers miracles, and giftes of the holy ghoste, according to his own will.
Hebrews 2:5 He hath not vnto the Angelles put in subieccion the world to come, wherof we speake.
Hebrews 2:6 But one in a certaine place wytnessed, saying. What is man, that thou arte mindfull of him?
Hebrews 2:7 After thou haddeste for a season made him lower then the Angelles: thou crownedst him with honoure and glorye, and hast set him aboue the workes of thy handes.
Hebrews 2:8 Thou hast put all thinges in subieccion vnder hys fete. In that he put al thinges vnder hym, he lefte nothinge that is not put vnder him.
Hebrews 2:9 Neuertheles we yet se not all thinges subdued, but him that was made lesse then the Angelles, we se that it was Iesus, whiche is crowned with glory and honoure for the suffering of death, that he by the grace of God, should taste of death for al men.
Hebrews 2:10 For it became him, for whom are al thynges and by whom are al thinges, after that he had brought many sonnes vnto glory, that he should make the Lorde of their saluacyon perfect thorowe sufferinge.
Hebrews 2:11 For he that sanctifieth, and they which are sanctified, are all of one: For whiche causes sake, he is not ashamed to cal them brethren
Hebrews 2:12 sayinge: I wyll declare thy name vnto my brethren and in the middes of the congregacion wil I praise the.
Hebrews 2:13 And again: I wil put my truste in him. And agayne: beholde here am I and the chyldren, which God hath geuen me.
Hebrews 2:14 For as muche then as the children were partetakers of fleshe and bloude, he also him selfe lyke wyse toke part wyth them, for to put doune thorowe death, that is to saye the deuyll,
Hebrews 2:15 and that he mighte delyuer them, which thorowe feare of death weare all theyr lyfe tyme in daunger of boundage.
Hebrews 2:16 For he in no place taketh on him the angels, but the seade of Abraham taketh he on hym.
Hebrews 2:17 Wherfore in al thinges it became him to be made like vnto his brethren, that he myghte be mercyfull and a faythful hye prieste in thinges concerninge God, for to pourge the people synnes.
Hebrews 2:18 For in that he hym selfe suffered and was tempted, he is able to sucker them that are tempted.

CHAPTER: 3

Hebrews 3:1 Therfore holye brethren, partakers of the celestiall callinges, consider the ambassatoure and hye prieste of oure professyon, Christe Iesus
Hebrews 3:2 which was faithfull to him that made him euen as was Moises in al his house.
Hebrews 3:3 And yet was this man counted worthy of more glorye then Moyses: In as muche as he which hath prepared the house hath most honoure in the house.
Hebrews 3:4 Euery house is prepared of some man. But he that ordeyned al thinges is God.
Hebrews 3:5 And Moyses verelye was faythfull in al hys house as a minyster, to beare wytnes of those thynges, whyche shoulde be spoken afterwarde.
Hebrews 3:6 But Chryste as a sonne hath rule ouer the house, whose house are we, so that we holde faste the confidence and the reioysynge of that hope, vnto the ende.
Hebrews 3:7 Wherfore as the holy ghoste sayeth, to daye yf ye shal heare his voice,
Hebrews 3:8 harden not youre hertes, after the rebellion in the day of temptacion in the wyldernes,
Hebrews 3:9 where youre fathers tempted me, proued me, and sawe my workes .xl. yeares longe.
Hebrews 3:10 Wherfore I was greued wyth that generacion and sayde. They erre euer in their hertes, they verely haue not knowen my wayes,
Hebrews 3:11 so that I sware in my wrath, that they should not enter into my reste.
Hebrews 3:12 Take hede brethren, that there be in none of you an euyll herte in vnbeleue, that he shoulde departe from the lyuinge God:
Hebrews 3:13 but exhorte one another dayly, whyle it is called to daye, leste anye of you wexe harde herted thorowe the deceythfulnesse of synne.
Hebrews 3:14 We are partakers of Christe, yf we kepe sure vnto the ende the fyrste substaunce,
Hebrews 3:15 so longe as it is sayde, to daye yf ye heare hys voyce, harden not youre hartes, as when ye rebelled.
Hebrews 3:16 For some, when they hearde, rebelled, how be it not al that came out of Egypte vnder Moyses.
Hebrews 3:17 But wyth whome was he depleased .xl. yeares? Was he not displeased wyth them that synned, whose carkases were ouerthrowen in the deserte?
Hebrews 3:18 To whom sware he, that they should not enter into hys reste, but vnto them that beleued not?
Hebrews 3:19 And we se that they could not enter in because of vnbeleue.

CHAPTER: 4

Hebrews 4:1 Let vs feare therfore leste anye of vs forsakinge the promes of entringe into his reste, shoulde seme to come behinde.
Hebrews 4:2 For vnto vs was it declared, as well as vnto them. But it profiteth not them that they hearde the worde, because they which hearde it, coupled it not wyth fayth.
Hebrews 4:3 But we whiche haue beleued, do enter into his reste, as contrarywyse he sayde to the other: I haue sworne in my wrath, they shal not enter into my rest. And that spake he verely longe after that the workes were made, and the foundacion of the worlde layde.
Hebrews 4:4 For he spake in a certaine place of the seuenth day, on this wyse: And God dyd reste the seuenth daye from all his workes.
Hebrews 4:5 And in this place againe: They shall not come into my reste.
Hebrews 4:6 Seynge therfore it foloweth that some must inter therinto, and they to whom it was fyrst preached, intred not therin for vnbeleues sake:
Hebrews 4:7 Againe he appointeth in Dauid a certaine present day after so longe a tyme, saiynge as it is rehearsed, this daye yf ye heare his voice, be not harde herted.
Hebrews 4:8 For yf Iosue had geuen them reste, then woulde he not afterwarde haue spoken of another day.
Hebrews 4:9 There remayneth therfore yet a rest to the people of God.
Hebrews 4:10 For he that is entred into his reste doth cease from his owne workes, as God dyd from his.
Hebrews 4:11 Let vs study therfore to enter into the reste, leste anye man falle after the same ensample, into vnbelefe.
Hebrews 4:12 For the word of God is quicke and myghty in operacion, and sharper then anye two edged swerde, and entreth through, euen vnto the diuiding a sonder of the soule and the spirite, and of the ioyntes and the marie, and iudgeth the thoughtes and the ententes of the herte:
Hebrews 4:13 neyther is there anye creature inuisible in the syght of him. For all thinges are naked and bare vnto the eyes of him, of whom we speake.
Hebrews 4:14 Seyng then that we haue a great hye prieste, which is entred into heauen (I meane Iesus the sonne of God) let vs holde our profession.
Hebrews 4:15 For we haue not an hye prieste, whiche can not haue compassion on our infirmities, but was in all pointes tempted, lyke as we are, but yet without sinne.
Hebrews 4:16 Let vs therfore go boldely vnto the seate of grace, that we may receiue mercye, and fynde grace to healpe in time of nede.

CHAPTER: 5

Hebrews 5:1 For euerye hye prieste that is taken from amonge men, is ordeined for men, in thinges perteininge to God, to offer gyftes & sacrifices for synne:
Hebrews 5:2 whiche can haue compassion on the ignoraunt, and on them that are out of the waye, because that he him selfe also is compassed with infirmitie:
Hebrews 5:3 For the which infirmities sake, he is bounde to offer for synnes, as well for his own part, as for the peoples.
Hebrews 5:4 And no man taketh honoure vnto him selfe, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.
Hebrews 5:5 Euen so lykewyse, Christe glorified not himselfe, to be made the hye prieste, but he that sayde vnto him, thou art my sonne, this daye begat I the, glorified him.
Hebrews 5:6 As he also in another place speaketh: Thou arte a prieste for euer after the order of Melchisedech.
Hebrews 5:7 Which in the daies of his flesh did offer vp praiers and supplications, wyth strong criynge and teares, vnto him that was able to saue hym from death, and was also hearde because of his Godlines.
Hebrews 5:8 And though he were Goddes sonne, yet learned he obedience, by those thinges which he suffred,
Hebrews 5:9 and was made perfect, and the cause of eternall saluacyon vnto all them that obey him,
Hebrews 5:10 and is called of God an hyghe prieste, after the order of Melchisedech.
Hebrews 5:11 Wherof we haue manye thinges to saye whiche are harde to be vttered, because ye are dull of hearinge.
Hebrews 5:12 For when as concerneinge the tyme, ye oughte to be teachers, yet haue ye nede agayne, that we teache you the fyrst prynciples of the word of God, and are become such as haue nede of milk and not of stronge meate:
Hebrews 5:13 For euerye man that is fed wyth mylke, is inexperte in the word of rightuousnes. For he is but a babe.
Hebrews 5:14 But stronge meate belongeth to them that are perfecte, which thorow custome haue theyr wittes exercised to iudge both good and euil also.

CHAPTER: 6

Hebrews 6:1 Wherfore let vs loue the doctrine pertaininge to the beginninge of a Christen man, & let vs go vnto perfeccion, & nowe no more lay the foundacion of repentaunce from deade workes, and of faythe towarde God,
Hebrews 6:2 of baptyme, of doctryne, and of layinge on of handes, and of resurreccion from death, and of eternal iudgemente.
Hebrews 6:3 And so wil we do, yf God permytte.
Hebrews 6:4 For it is not possible that they whiche were ones lyghted, and haue tasted of the heauenly gyft, and were become partakers of the holy ghoste,
Hebrews 6:5 and haue tasted of the good worde of God, and of the worlde to come:
Hebrews 6:6 yf they fall, shoulde be renued agayne vnto repentaunce: for as muche as they haue (as concernynge them selues) crucifyed the sonne of God a freshe makynge a mocke of hym.
Hebrews 6:7 For that earthe whiche drincketh in the rayne whiche commeth ofte vpon it, and bryngeth forth herbes mete for them that dresse it, receyueth blessynge of God.
Hebrews 6:8 But that ground which beareth thornes and bryars, is reproued, and is nye vnto curssynge: whose ende is to be burned.
Hebrews 6:9 Neuerthelesse deare frindes, we truste to se better of you, and thynges whiche accompanye saluacyon, though we thus speake.
Hebrews 6:10 For God is not vnryghtuous that he should forget your worke and laboure that procedeth of loue, which loue you shewed in hys name, whiche haue mynystred vnto the saynctes, & yet mynyster.
Hebrews 6:11 Yea, and we desyre that euerye one of you shew the same dylygence, to the stablyshynge of hope euen vnto the ende:
Hebrews 6:12 that ye faynt not, but folowe them, whiche thorowe fayth & pacience inheret the promyses.
Hebrews 6:13 For when God made promes to Abraham, because he had no greater thynge to sweare by, he sweare by hym selfe,
Hebrews 6:14 saiynge: Surelye I wyl blesse the, and multyplye the in deede.
Hebrews 6:15 And so after that he had taryed a longe tyme, he enioyed the promes.
Hebrews 6:16 Men verelye sweare by hym that is greater then them selues, & an othe to confyrme the thynge, is amonge them an ende of all stryfe.
Hebrews 6:17 So God wyllynge verye aboundauntlye to shewe vnto the heyres of promes, the stablenes of hys counsayle, he added an othe,
Hebrews 6:18 that by two immutable thynges (in which it was vnpossyble that GOD shaulde lye) we myghte haue perfecte consolacyon, whiche haue fled, for to holde faste the hope that is set before vs,
Hebrews 6:19 whiche hope we haue an ancre of the soule both sure and stedfast. Whiche hope also entreth in, into those thynges that are wythin the vayle,
Hebrews 6:20 whether the fore runner is for vs entred in I meane Iesus that is made an hye prieste for euer, after the order of Melchysedech.

CHAPTER: 7

Hebrews 7:1 Thys Melchysedech, kynge of Salem (whiche beynge prieste of the moost hye God met Abraham, as he returned agayne from the slaughter of the kynges, & blessed him:
Hebrews 7:2 to whom also Abraham gaue tythes of all thynges) fyrste is by interpretacyon kynge of ryghtuousnes: after that he is kynge of Salem that is to saye, kynge of peace,
Hebrews 7:3 wythoute father, wythout mother, wythout kynne, & hath neyther begynnyng of hys tyme, neyther yet ende of hys lyfe: but is lykened vnto the sonne of God, and contynueth a prieste for euer.
Hebrews 7:4 Consyder what a man this was, vnto whom the patriarke Abraham gaue tythes of the spoyles.
Hebrews 7:5 And verely those chyldren of Leuy, which receyue the offyce of the priestes, haue a commaundemente to take accordynge to the lawe, tythes of the people, that is to say of theyr brethren, yea thoughe they spronge oute of the loynes of Abraham.
Hebrews 7:6 But he whose kynred is not counted amonge them, receyued tythes of Abraham, and blessed hym that had the promises.
Hebrews 7:7 And no man denyeth but that whiche is lesse, receyueth blessyng of that which is greater.
Hebrews 7:8 And here men that dye, receyue tythes. But there he receyueth tythes of whome it is wytnessed, that he lyueth.
Hebrews 7:9 And to say the trueth. Leuy hym selfe also whiche receyueth tythes, payed tythes in Abraham.
Hebrews 7:10 For he was yet in the loynes of hys father Abraham when Melchysedech mete hym.
Hebrews 7:11 Yf nowe therfore perfeccyon came by the priesthode of the Leuytes (for vnder that presthode the people receyueth the lawe) what nedeth furthermore that another prieste shoulde aryse after the ordre of Melchisedech, and not after the ordre of Aaron?
Hebrews 7:12 Nowe no doubte, yf the priesthode be translated, then of necessitye must the lawe be translated also.
Hebrews 7:13 For of whome these thynges are spoken pertayneth vnto another trybe, of whiche neuer man serued at the aulter.
Hebrews 7:14 For it is euident, that oure Lorde sprong of the trybe of Iuda, of whiche trybe spake Moyses nothyng concernynge priesthode.
Hebrews 7:15 And it is yet a more euydent thynge, yf after the similitude, of Melchisedech, there arise an other prieste:
Hebrews 7:16 which is not made after the lawe of the carnall commaundement: but after the power of the endelesse lyfe.
Hebrews 7:17 (For he testifyeth thou arte a prieste for euer, after the ordre of Melchysedech).
Hebrews 7:18 Then the commaundement that wente before, is dysanulled, because of her weakenes and vnprofytablenes.
Hebrews 7:19 For the lawe made nothynge perfecte: but was an introduccion of a better hope, by which hope we drawe nye vnto God.
Hebrews 7:20 And for thys cause it is a better hope, that it was not promysed without an oth
Hebrews 7:21 (those pryestes were made wythout an othe, but thys prieste wyth an othe, by hym that layed vnto hym. The Lorde sware, and wyl not repente: Thou arte a prieste for euer after the order of Melchisedech)
Hebrews 7:22 And for the cause was Iesus a stablisher of a better testament.
Hebrews 7:23 And amonge them many were made priestes, because they were not suffered to endure by the reason of death.
Hebrews 7:24 But thys man, because he endureth euer hath an euerlastyng priestehode.
Hebrews 7:25 Wherfor he is able also euer to saue them that come vnto God by hym, seyng he euer lyueth, to make intercessyon for vs.
Hebrews 7:26 Suche an hye Prieste it became vs to haue which is holy, harmlesse, vndefyled, separate from synners, and made hyer then heauen.
Hebrews 7:27 Whiche nedeth not dayelye (as yonder hye priestes) to offer vp sacrifyce, fyrste for hys own synnes, and then for the peoples synnes. For that dyd he at once for all, when he offered vp hym selfe.
Hebrews 7:28 For the lawe maketh men priestes, which haue infyrmytye: but the worde of the othe that came sence the lawe, maketh the sonne pryeste, whiche is perfecte for euermore.

CHAPTER: 8

Hebrews 8:1 Of the thynges which we haue spoken this is the pythe: that we haue suche an hye prieste that is sytten on the ryght hande of the seate of maiestye in heauen,
Hebrews 8:2 and is a mynyster of holye thynges, and of the verye tabernacle whiche God pyghte, & not man.
Hebrews 8:3 For euerye hye prieste is ordeyned to offer gyftes and sacryfyces: wherfore it is of necessitye that thys man haue some what also to offer,
Hebrews 8:4 for he were not a prieste, yf he were on the earth, where are priestes that according to the lawe offer gyftes,
Hebrews 8:5 whiche priestes serue vnto the ensample and shadowe of heauenly thynges: euen as the aunswer of God was geuen vnto Moses when he was aboute to fynyshe the tabernacle. Take hede (sayde he) that thou make all thynges accordynge to the patrone shewed to the in the mounte.
Hebrews 8:6 Nowe hath he obtayned a more excellente offyce, in as muche as he is the medyator of a better testamente, whiche was made for better promyses.
Hebrews 8:7 For yf that fyrste testamente had bene faultlesse then shoulde no place haue bene soughte for the seconde.
Hebrews 8:8 For in rebukyng them he sayth: beholde the dayes wyll come (sayeth the Lorde) and I wyll fynyshe vpon the house of Israel, and vpon the house of Iuda,
Hebrews 8:9 a newe testamente: not lyke the testament that I made wyth theyr fathers at that tyme when I toke them by the handes, to leade them oute of the lande of Egypte, for they continued not in my testamente, and I regarded them not sayth the Lorde.
Hebrews 8:10 For thys is the testament that I will make wyth the house of Israel: After those dayes sayth the Lorde: I wyl put my lawes in their myndes, and in theyr hertes I wyl wryte them and I wyll be theyr God, and they shall be my people.
Hebrews 8:11 And they shall not teache euerye man hys neyghboure, and euerye man hys brother, saiynge: knowe the Lorde: For they shall knowe me, from the leste to the most of them:
Hebrews 8:12 For I wyll be mercyfull ouer theyr vnryghtuousnes, and on theyr synnes & on theyr iniquities.
Hebrews 8:13 In that he sayth a newe testament he hath abrogate the olde. Now that which is dysanulled and waxed olde, is readye to vanyshe awaye.

CHAPTER: 9

Hebrews 9:1 That fyrste tabernacle verelye had ordinaunces, and seruinges of God, and worldly holynes.
Hebrews 9:2 For there was a fore tabernacle made, wherein was the candelstycke and the table, & the shewe bread which is called holye.
Hebrews 9:3 But wythin the second vayle was there a tabernacle, whiche is called holyeste of all
Hebrews 9:4 whiche had the golden senser, and the arcke of the testament ouerlayde roundabout wyth gold, wherein was the golden pot with manna, and Aarons rodde that sprong, and the tables of the testament.
Hebrews 9:5 Ouer the arcke were the cherubes of glorye shadowynge the seate of grace. Of whiche thynges we wyll not nowe speake perticularlye.
Hebrews 9:6 When these thynges were thus ordeyned the priestes wente alwayes into the tabernacle and executed the seruyce of God.
Hebrews 9:7 But into the seconde wente the hye priest alone, once euerye yeare, and not wythout bloude, whiche he offered for hym selfe, and for the ignoraunce of the people.
Hebrews 9:8 Wherewith the holy ghost this signifyinge, that the waye of holy thynges, was not yet oppened, whyle as yet the fyrst tabernacle was standynge.
Hebrews 9:9 Whyche was a simylytude for the tyme then present, and in whyche were offered gyftes and sacrifices that coulde not make the mynyster perfecte, as pertaynynge to the conscience,
Hebrews 9:10 wyth onelye meates and drynkes and dyuers washynges and iustifiynges of the fleshe, whyche were ordeyned vntyll the tyme of reformacyon.
Hebrews 9:11 But Christe beynge an hye prieste of good thynges to come, came by a greater & a more perfecte tabernacle, not made wyth handes: that is to saye, not of thys maner buyldynge,
Hebrews 9:12 neyther by the bloude of gotes and calues, but by hys owne bloude he entred once for al into the holye place, and founde eternal redempcyon.
Hebrews 9:13 For yf the bloude of oxen and of gotes and the ashes of an heyfer, when it was sprinkled, puryfyed the vncleane, as touchyng the puryfiynge of the fleshe:
Hebrews 9:14 Howe muche more shall the bloude of Christe (which thorow the eternall spyryte offred hym selfe without spot to God) pourge youre conscyences from dead workes, for to serue the lyuyng God?
Hebrews 9:15 And for thys cause is: he the medyatour of the new testament, that thorowe death whiche chaunsed for the redempcyon of those transgressyons that were in the fyrst testament, they whiche were called myght receyue the promes of eternall inherytaunce.
Hebrews 9:16 For wheresoeuer is a testamente, there muste also be the death of hym that maketh the testament.
Hebrews 9:17 For the testament taketh authoritie when men are dead. For it is of no value as longe as he that made it, is alyue.
Hebrews 9:18 For whiche cause also, neyther that fyrst testament was ordeyned without bloude.
Hebrews 9:19 For when al the commaundementes were reade of Moyses to all the people, he toke the bloude of calues and of gotes, whiche water and purple woul and ysope, and sprynkled both the boke and all the peopl
Hebrews 9:20 saiynge: thys is the bloud of the Testamente, with GOD hath appoynted vnto you.
Hebrews 9:21 More ouer he sprinkled the tabernacle wyth bloude also, and all the mynystrynge vessels.
Hebrews 9:22 And also all moost all thynges, are by the lawe pourged wyth bloude, and wythout sheddynge of bloude is no remyssyon.
Hebrews 9:23 It is then nede that the simylytudes of heauenly thinges be puryfyed wyth such thinges but the heauenly thynges them selues are puryfyed with better sacryfyces then are those.
Hebrews 9:24 For Christe is not entred into the holye places that are made wyth handes, whiche are but simylytudes of true thynges: but is entred into verye heauen, for to appere nowe in the syghte of God for vs:
Hebrews 9:25 not to offer hym selfe, often as the hye prieste entreth into the holye place euerye yeare wt straunge bloud
Hebrews 9:26 for then must he haue often suffered sence the worlde beganne. But nowe in the ende of the worlde hath he appered ones to put synne to flyghte by the offerynge vp of hym self.
Hebrews 9:27 And as it is appoynted vnto men that they shall ones dye, and then commeth the iudgemente,
Hebrews 9:28 euen so Christ was ones offered to take away the synnes of many, and vnto them that loke for hym, shall he appere agayne wythoute synne vnto saluacyon.

CHAPTER: 10

Hebrews 10:1 For the lawe whyche hath but the shadowe of good thinges to come, and not the thynges in theyr owne fashyon can neuer wyth the sacrifyces whych they offer yere by yere continuallly, make the commers thereunto perfect.
Hebrews 10:2 For woulde not then those sacryfyces haue ceased to haue bene offered, because that the offerers once pourged shoulde haue had no more consciences of synnes?
Hebrews 10:3 Neuertheles in those sacryfyces is ther mencyon made of synnes euery yeare.
Hebrews 10:4 For it is vnpossyble that the bloude of oxen and of gotes shoulde take awaye synnes.
Hebrews 10:5 Wherfore, when he commeth into the world he sayth: Sacrifyce and offerynge thou wouldest not haue: but a body hast thou ordeyned me.
Hebrews 10:6 In sacryfyces and synne offerynges thou hast not luste.
Hebrews 10:7 Then I saide: Lo I come, in the cheyfest in the boke it is wrytten of me, that I should do thy wil, o God.
Hebrews 10:8 Aboue when he had sayd sacryfyce and offerynge, and burnte sacrifices and synne offerynges thou wouldest not haue, neither hast alowed (whyche yet are offered by the lawe)
Hebrews 10:9 and then sayd, Lo I come to do thy wyll, O God: he taketh awaye the fyrste to stablysshe the latter.
Hebrews 10:10 By the whiche wyll we are sanctyfyed, by the offerynge of the bodye of Ieu Christ once for all.
Hebrews 10:11 And euery priest is redy daylie mynistring and ofte tymes offereth one maner of offerynge whyche can neuer take awaye synnes.
Hebrews 10:12 But thys man after he had offered one sacryfyce for synnes, satte hym downe for euer on the right hande of God,
Hebrews 10:13 and from henceforth taryeth tyl hys foes be made hys fote stole.
Hebrews 10:14 For wyth one offeryng hath he made perfecte for euer, them that are sanctyfyed.
Hebrews 10:15 And the holy ghost also beareth vs record of thys, euen when he told before:
Hebrews 10:16 Thys is the testamente that I wyl make to them: after those dayes sayth the Lorde. I wyll put my lawes in theyr hertes and in theyr mynde I wyll wryte them
Hebrews 10:17 and theyr synnes and iniquities wyll I remember no more.
Hebrews 10:18 And where remyssyon of these thynges is, there is no more offerynge for synne.
Hebrews 10:19 Seynge brethren that, by the meanes of the bloude of Iesu, we may be bold to enter into that holy place,
Hebrews 10:20 by the newe and lyuynge waye, whych he hath prepared for vs, thorow the vayle, that is to say hys flesh.
Hebrews 10:21 And seynge also that we haue an hye pryest which is ruler ouer the house of God
Hebrews 10:22 let vs draw nye wyth a true herte in a full fayth, sprynkeled in our hertes from an euyl conscyence, and washed in our bodyes wyth pure water,
Hebrews 10:23 and let vs kepe the professyon of our hope, wythout wauerynge (for he is faithful that promysed)
Hebrews 10:24 and let vs consyder one another to prouoke vnto loue, and to good workes:
Hebrews 10:25 and let vs not forsake the feloshyppe that we haue among our selues, as the maner of some is: but let vs exhort one another and that so muche the more, because ye se that the day draweth nye.
Hebrews 10:26 For yf we synne wyllyngly after that we haue receyued the knowledge of the trueth, ther remayneth no more sacryfyce for synnes,
Hebrews 10:27 but a fearful lokynge for iudgement, and vyolente fyre, whyche shal deuoure the aduersaryes.
Hebrews 10:28 He that despyseth Moyses lawe, dyeth wythout mercye vnder two or thre wytnesses
Hebrews 10:29 Of howe muche sorer punyshement suppose ye shal he be counted worthy, whych treadeth vnder fote the sonne of God: and counted the bloud of the testament as an vnholy thynge wherwyth he was sanctyfyed, and doth dishonour to the spyryte of grace.
Hebrews 10:30 For we knowe hym that hath sayde: vengeaunce belongeth vnto me. I wyll recompence sayth the lorde. And agayne: the lord shall iudge hys people.
Hebrews 10:31 It is a fearfull thynge to falle into the handes of the lyuynge God.
Hebrews 10:32 Cal to remembraunce the dayes that are passed in the whyche after ye had receyued lyght ye endured a great fyght in aduersities
Hebrews 10:33 partely whyle all men wondred and gased at you for the shame and trybulacyon that was done vnto you, and partly, whyle ye became companyons of them whyche so passed theyr tyme.
Hebrews 10:34 For ye suffered also wyth my bondes, and toke in worth the spoyllyng of your gootes, & that wyth gladnes, knowynge in youre selues howe that ye had in heauen a better & an endurynge substaunce.
Hebrews 10:35 Caste not awaye therfore youre confidence whiche hath great reward to recompence.
Hebrews 10:36 For ye haue nede of pacyence, that after ye haue done the wyll of God, ye myght receyue the promes.
Hebrews 10:37 For yet a very lyttel whyle, and he that shall come wyll come, and wyll not tarye.
Hebrews 10:38 But the iuste shall lyue by fayth. And yf he wythdrawe hym selfe my soule shal haue no pleasure in him.
Hebrews 10:39 We are not whych wythdrawe our selues vnto dampnacyon, but partayne to faith, to the winnynge of the soule.

CHAPTER: 11

Hebrews 11:1 Fayth is a sure confydence of thynges which are hoped for, & a certayntye of thynges which are not sene.
Hebrews 11:2 By it the elders were wel reported of.
Hebrews 11:3 Thorow faythe we vnderstande that the worlde was ordeyned by the worde of God: and that thinges whiche are sene, were made of thynges whiche are not sene.
Hebrews 11:4 By fayth Abel offred vnto God a more plentuous sacrifyce then Cayn: by whiche he obtayned wytnes that he was ryghtuous, God testifiynge of his gyftes: by which also he beynge dead, yet speaketh.
Hebrews 11:5 By fayth was Enoch translated that he shoulde not se death, neyther was he founde: for God had taken hym away. Before he was taken awaye, he was reported, of, that he had pleased God:
Hebrews 11:6 but wythout fayth it is vnpossybleto please hym. For he that cometh to God muste beleue that God is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seke hym.
Hebrews 11:7 By faythe Noe honoured God, after that he was warned of thynges whiche were not sene, and prepared the arcke to the sauynge of hys housholde, thorow the whiche arcke, he condemned the worlde, and became heyre of the rightuousnes that commeth by faythe.
Hebrews 11:8 By fayth Abraham, when he was called obeyed, to go out into a place, which he shoulde afterward receyue to inherytaunce, and he wente oute not knowynge whyther he should go.
Hebrews 11:9 By fayth he remoued into the lande that was promysed hym, as into a straunge countreye, and dwelte in tabernacles: and so dyd Isaac and Iacob, heyres wyth hym of the same promes.
Hebrews 11:10 For he loked for a cytie hauing a foundacyon, whose buylder and maker is God.
Hebrews 11:11 Thorow fayth Sara also receyued strength to be with chyld, and was delyuered of a child when she was past age, because she iudged hym faythfull which had promysed.
Hebrews 11:12 And therfore spronge thereof one (& of one whiche was as good as deade) so manye in multitude, as the starres of the skye, and as the sande of the sea shore whiche is innumerable.
Hebrews 11:13 And they all dyed in fayth, and receyued not the promyses: but sawe them a farre of, & beleued them; and saluted them: and confessed that they were straungers and pylgrems on the earthe.
Hebrews 11:14 They that saye suche thynges, declare that they seke a countreye.
Hebrews 11:15 Also yf they had bene myndefull of that countreye from whence they came oute, they had leasure to haue returned agayne.
Hebrews 11:16 But nowe they desyre a better, that is to saye an heauenlye. Wherfor God is not ashamed of them euen to be called theyr God: for he hath prepared for them a cytye.
Hebrews 11:17 In fayth Abraham offered vp Isaac, when he was tempted, and he offered hym beynge hys onelye begotten sonne, whiche had receyued the promyses,
Hebrews 11:18 of whom it was sayde, in Isaac shal thy sede be called,
Hebrews 11:19 for he considered that God was able to rayse it vp agayne from death. Wherfore receyued he hym, for an ensample.
Hebrews 11:20 In faith Isaac blessed Iacob and Esau concernynge thynges to come.
Hebrews 11:21 By fayth Iacob when he was a diynge, blessed both the sonnes of Ioseph, and bowed hym self towarde the top of hys cepter.
Hebrews 11:22 By fayth Ioseph when he dyed, remembred the departynge of the chyldren of Israel, and gaue commaundemente of hys bones.
Hebrews 11:23 By faith Moses when he was borne, was hyd thre monethes of hys father and mother, because they sawe he was a proper chyld, neyther feared they the kynges commaundement.
Hebrews 11:24 By fayth Moyses when he was great, refused to be called the sonne of Pharaos doughter,
Hebrews 11:25 and those rather to suffer aduersitie wyth the people of God, then to enioy the pleasures of synne for a season,
Hebrews 11:26 and estemed the rebuke of Christe greater ryches then the treasure of Egypte. For he had respect vnto the reward.
Hebrews 11:27 By fayth he forsoke Egypte, and feared not the fearcenes of the kynge. For he endured euen as he had sene hym whiche is inuysyble.
Hebrews 11:28 Thorowe fayth he ordeyned the Easter Lambe and the effusyon of bloud, lest he that destroyed the fyrst borne shoulde touche them.
Hebrews 11:29 By fayth they passed thorowe the redde sea, as by drye lande, whiche when the Egypcyans had assayed to do, they were drouned.
Hebrews 11:30 By fayth the walles of Hierico fel doune after they were compassed about seuen dayes.
Hebrews 11:31 By faythe the harlot Raab peryshed not wyth the vnbeleuers, when she had receyued the spyes to lodgynge peaceably.
Hebrews 11:32 And what shall I more saye? the tyme woulde be to short for me to tell of Gedeon, of Baroch, and of Sampson, and of Iephtae: also of Dauid and Samuel, and of the Prophetes:
Hebrews 11:33 which thorowe fayth subdued kingdomes wrought ryghtuousnes, obtayned the promyses, stopped the mouthes of Lyons,
Hebrews 11:34 quenched the vyolence of fyre, escaped the edge of the swearde, of weake were made stronge, waxed valyaunte in fyght, turned to flyghte the armyes of the alientes.
Hebrews 11:35 And the women receyued theyr dead raysed to lyfe agayne. Other were racked, and woulde not be delyuered, that they myghte receyue a better resurreccyon.
Hebrews 11:36 Other tasted of mockynges and scourgynges, moreouer of bondes and prysonmente,
Hebrews 11:37 were stoned, were hewen a sounder, were tempted, were slayne wyth swerdes, walked vp and doune in shepes skynnes, in gotes skynnes, in nede, trybulacyon, and vexacyon,
Hebrews 11:38 whiche the world was not worthy of, they wandred in wyldernes, in mountaines, in dennes and caues of the earth
Hebrews 11:39 And these all thorowe fayth obtayned good report, and receyued not the promys,
Hebrews 11:40 God prouydynge a better thynge for vs, that they wythoute vs shoulde not be made perfecte.

CHAPTER: 12

Hebrews 12:1 Wherfore let vs also (seyng that we are compassed wyth so great a multytude of witnesses) laye awaye all that presseth doune, and the synne that hangeth on and let vs runne, wyth pacience vnto the batayle that is set before vs
Hebrews 12:2 lokynge vnto Iesus the author and fynysher of our fayth, whiche for the ioye that was set before hym, abode the crosse, and despised the same, and is set doune on the ryght hande of the throne of God.
Hebrews 12:3 Consydre therfore how that he endureth such speakyng agaynst him of synners least ye should be weryed and faynte in youre myndes.
Hebrews 12:4 For ye haue not yet resysted vnto bloude sheding stryuynge agaynst synne.
Hebrews 12:5 And ye haue forgotten consolacyon, which speaketh vnto you as vnto chyldren: my sonne despyse not the chastenynge of the Lorde, neyther faynte when thou arte rebuked of hym:
Hebrews 12:6 For whom the Lord loueth, hym he chasteneth: yea, and he scourgeth euerye sonne that he receyueth.
Hebrews 12:7 Yf ye endure chastenynge, God offereth hym selfe vnto you as vnto sonnes. What sonne is that whom the father chasteneth not?
Hebrews 12:8 Yf ye be not vnder correccyon (whereof all are partakers) then are ye bastardes and not sonnes.
Hebrews 12:9 Moreouer seynge we had fathers of oure fleshe whiche corrected vs, and we gaue them reuerence: shoulde we not muche rather be in subieccyon vnto the father of spyrytuall gyftes, that we myght lyue?
Hebrews 12:10 And they verely for a few dayes, nurtered vs after their owne pleasure, but he learneth vs vnto that whiche is profytable that we myght receyue of hys holynes.
Hebrews 12:11 No maner chastisynge for the presente tyme semeth to be ioyeous, but greuous: neuerthelesse afterwarde, it bryngeth the quyet frute of ryghtuousnes vnto them whiche are therein exercysed.
Hebrews 12:12 Stretche forth therfore agayne the handes whiche were let doune and the weake lines
Hebrews 12:13 & se that ye haue strayght steppes vnto your fete, least any halting, turne you oute of the way: yea let it rather be healed.
Hebrews 12:14 Embrace peace wt all men and holynes, wythout the whiche no man shall se the Lorde.
Hebrews 12:15 And loked to, that no man be destitute of the grace of God, and that no rote of bytternes sprynge vp and trouble, and therebye manye be defyled,
Hebrews 12:16 & that there be no fornicator or vncleane person, as Esau whiche for one breakfast solde his byrthright.
Hebrews 12:17 Ye know how that afterwarde when he wolde haue inheryted the blessyng, he was put by & he found no meanes for to come therby again no thoughe he desyred it with teares.
Hebrews 12:18 For ye are not come vnto the mounte that can be touched, and vnto burnynge fyre, nor yet to mist and darkenes, and tempest of wether,
Hebrews 12:19 neyther vnto the sounde of a trompe and the voyce of wordes: whiche voyce they that hearde it wyshed awaye, that the communicacyon shoulde not be spoken to them.
Hebrews 12:20 For they were not able to abyde that whiche was spoken. Yf a beaste had touched the mountayne, it must haue bene stoned, or thrust thorowe wt a darte:
Hebrews 12:21 euen so terryble was the syght which appeared, Moyses sayde: I feare and quake.
Hebrews 12:22 But ye are come vnto the mounte Syon, and to the cytye of the lyuyng God, the celestiall Ierusalem: and to an innumerable syghte of Angels,
Hebrews 12:23 and vnto the congregacyon of the first borne sonnes, which are wrytten in heauen, and to God the iudge of all, and to the spyrytes of iuste and perfecte men,
Hebrews 12:24 and to Iesus the medyatoure of the newe testament, and to the spryncklynge of bloude that speaketh better then the bloude of Abell.
Hebrews 12:25 Se that ye despyse not hym, that speaketh. For yf they escaped not whiche refused hym, that spake on earth: muche more shall we not escape, yf we turne awaye from hym that speaketh from heauen:
Hebrews 12:26 whose voyce then shouke the earth, and now declareth saiyng: yet ones more wyll I shake not the earth only, but also heauen.
Hebrews 12:27 No doubte that same that he sayeth yet ones more, signifyeth the remouyng away of those thynges, whiche are shaken as of thynges whiche haue ended theyr course: that the thynges whiche are not shaken maye remayne.
Hebrews 12:28 Wherfore yf we receyue a kingdom which is not moued, we haue grace, wherby we may serue God, and please hym wyth reuerence & Godly feare.
Hebrews 12:29 For our God is a consumynge fyre.

CHAPTER: 13

Hebrews 13:1 Let brotherlye loue continue.
Hebrews 13:2 Be not forgetfull to lodge straungers. For therebye haue diuers receyued Angels into theyr houses vnwares.
Hebrews 13:3 Remembre them that are in bondes, euen as thoughe ye were bounde wyth them. Be myndefull of them whiche are in aduersitye, as ye which are yet in youre bodyes.
Hebrews 13:4 Let wedlocke be had in pryce in all poyntes, and let the chambre be vndefyled: for whorekepers and aduouterers God wyll iudge.
Hebrews 13:5 Let your conuersacyon be wythoute couetuousnes, and be content wyth that ye haue alreadye. For he verelye sayed: I wyll not fayle the, neyther forsake the:
Hebrews 13:6 that we maye boldelye say: the Lorde is my helper and I wyll not feare what man doethe vnto me.
Hebrews 13:7 Remembre them whiche haue the ouersyght of you, whiche haue declared vnto you the worde of God. The ende of whose conuersacyon se that ye loke vpon, and folowe theyr faythe.
Hebrews 13:8 Iesus Christe yesterdaye and to daye, and the same contynueth for euer.
Hebrews 13:9 Be not caryed aboute wyth dyuerse and straunge learnynge. For it is a good thynge that the herte be stablyshed wyth grace, and not with meates, whiche haue not profyted them that haue had theyr pastyme in them.
Hebrews 13:10 We haue an altar whereof they maye not eate whiche serue in the tabernacle.
Hebrews 13:11 For the bodyes of those beastes whose bloude is broughte into the holye place by the hygh priest to pourge synne, are burnt wythout the tentes.
Hebrews 13:12 Therfore Iesus to sanctyfye the people wyth hys owne bloude, suffered wythout the gate.
Hebrews 13:13 Let vs go forth therfore out of the tentes, and suffre rebuke with him.
Hebrews 13:14 For here haue we no continuynge cytye: but we seke one to come.
Hebrews 13:15 For by hym offre we the sacryfyce of laud alwayes to God: that is to saye, the frute of those lyppes, whiche confesse hys name.
Hebrews 13:16 To do good, and to distrybute, forget not, for wt suche sacryfyces God is pleased.
Hebrews 13:17 Obeye them that haue the ouersyghte of you, and submyt your selues to them, for they watche for youre soules, euen as they that muste geue accomptes: that they maye do it wyth ioye, and not wyth griefe. For that is an vnprofytable thynge for you.
Hebrews 13:18 Praye for vs. We haue confydence because we haue a good conscience in all thynges, and desyre to lyue honestlye.
Hebrews 13:19 I desyre you therfore some what the more aboundauntly, that ye so do, that I may be restore to you quickely.
Hebrews 13:20 The God of peace that brought agayne from death oure Lorde Iesus, the great shepe herde of the shepe, thorowe the bloude of the euerlastynge testament,
Hebrews 13:21 make you perfecte in all good workes, to do hys wyl, workynge in you that whiche is pleasaunte in hys syghte thorowe Iesus Christe. To whom be prayse for euer whyle the worlde endureth. Amen.
Hebrews 13:22 I beseche you brethren, suffre the wordes of exhortacyon: For we haue wrytten vnto you in fewe wordes:
Hebrews 13:23 knowe the brother Tymothe, whome we haue sent from vs, with whom (yf he come shortly) I wyll se you.
Hebrews 13:24 Salute them that haue the ouersyghte of you, and all the sainctes. They of Italye salute you.
Hebrews 13:25 Grace be wyth you all. AMEN.

BOOK: James

CHAPTER: 1

James 1:1 Iames the seruaunte of God and of the Lorde Iesus Christ sendeth gretyng to the twelue trybes whiche are scattered here and there.
James 1:2 My brethren, count it excedyng ioye when ye fal into dyuers temptacyons,
James 1:3 for as muche as ye knowe howe that the triynge of youre fayth bryngeth pacience:
James 1:4 and let pacyence haue her perfect worke, that ye maye be perfecte and sounde, lackynge nothynge.
James 1:5 Yf anye of you lacke wysedome, let hym axe of God whiche geueth to all men indyfferentlye, and casteth no man in the teath: and it shal be geuen hym.
James 1:6 But let hym axe it in faith and wauer not. For he that doubteth is lyke the waues of the sea, toste of the wyndes & caried wyth vyolence.
James 1:7 Neyther let that man thynke that he shal receyue any thynge of the Lorde.
James 1:8 A waueryng mynded man is vnstable in all hys wayes.
James 1:9 Let the brother of low degre reioyce in that he is exalted,
James 1:10 and the ryche in that he is made lowe. For euen as the flower of the grasse, shal he vanysh away.
James 1:11 The sonne riseth with heat, and the grasse widereth, and hys flower falleth awaye, & the beautye of the fashyon of it perysheth: euen so shal the ryche man peryshe wyth hys aboundaunce.
James 1:12 Happy is the man that endureth in temptacyon, for when he is tryed, he shal receyue the croune of lyfe, which the Lorde hath promised to them that loue hym.
James 1:13 Let no man saye when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God. For god tempteth not vnto euyl, neyther tempteth he any man:
James 1:14 But euerye man is tempted, drawne awaye, & entysed of hys owne concupiscence.
James 1:15 Then when luste hath conceyued, she bringeth forth sinne, & sinne when it is fynyshed bryngeth forthe death.
James 1:16 Erre not my deare brethren.
James 1:17 Euery good gyfte, and euerye perfecte gyfte, is from aboue and commeth doune from the father of lyght wyth whome is no varyablenes, neyther is he chaunged vnto darkenes.
James 1:18 Of hys owne wyll begat he vs wyth the worde of lyfe, that we shoulde be the fyrste frutes of hys creatures.
James 1:19 Wherfore deare brethren, let euerye man be swyfte to heare, slowe to speake, and slow to wrath.
James 1:20 For the wrath of man worketh not that whiche is ryghtuous before God.
James 1:21 Wherfore laye a parte all fylthynes, all superfluytye of malycyousnes, and receyue wyth mekenes the worde that is grafted in you, whiche is able to saue your soules.
James 1:22 And se that ye be doars of the worde & not hearers onely, deceyuyng your owne selues wyth sophystrye.
James 1:23 For yf any heare the word, and do it not, he is lyke vnto a man that beholdeth his bodly face in a glasse.
James 1:24 For assone as he hath loked on hym selfe, he goeth hys waye, and forgetteth immediatly what hys fashyon was.
James 1:25 But who so loketh in the perfecte lawe of lybertye, and contynueth therin (yf he be not a forgetfull hearer, but a doar of the worke) the same shall be happye in hys dede.
James 1:26 Yf anye man amonge you seme deuoute, & refrayne not his tonge, but deceyue his owne hert: thys mannes deuocyon is in vayne.
James 1:27 Pure deuocyon and vndefyled before God the father is thys: to visite the fatherlesse and wyddowes in theyr aduersitye, and to kepe hym selfe vnspotted of the worlde.

CHAPTER: 2

James 2:1 Brethren haue not the faythe of oure Lorde Iesus Christe the Lorde of glorye in respect of persons.
James 2:2 If there come into your company a man wyth a golden ring and in goodly apparell, and there come in also a pore man in vyle raymente,
James 2:3 and ye haue a respecte to hym that weareth the gaye clothynge, and saye vnto hym. Sitte thou here in a good place: and saye vnto the pore, stande thou there, or sitte here vnder my fotestole:
James 2:4 are ye not parcyall in your selues, and haue iudged after euyll thoughtes?
James 2:5 Harken my deare beloued brethren. Hath not God chosen the pore of thys world, which are ryche in faythe, and heyres of the kyngedome whiche he promysed to them that loue hym?
James 2:6 But ye haue despysed the pore. Are not the ryche they whiche oppresse you: and they which drawe you before iudges?
James 2:7 Do not they speake euyll of the good name after whiche ye be named?
James 2:8 Yf ye fulfyll the royall lawe accordynge to the scripture whiche sayeth. Thou shalte loue thyne neyghboure as thy self, ye do wel.
James 2:9 But yf ye regarde one personne more then another, ye commytte sinne, and are rebuked of the lawe as transgressours.
James 2:10 Whosoeuer shall kepe the whole lawe, and yet fayle in one point he is gyltye in all.
James 2:11 For he that sayde: Thou shalte not committe adultery, sayed also, thou shalte not kyll. Thoughe thou do none adulterye: yet yf thou kyll, thou arte a transgresser of the lawe.
James 2:12 So speake ye, and so do, as they that shalbe iudged by the lawe of lybertye.
James 2:13 For there shalbe iudgemente mercyles to hym, that sheweth no mercy, & mercy reioyseth against iudgemente.
James 2:14 What auayleth it my brethren, thoughe a man saye he hath faythe, when he hath no deedes? Can fayth saue hym?
James 2:15 If a brother or a sister be naked or destitute of dayly fode,
James 2:16 and one of you saye vnto them: Departe in peace, God sende you warmnes and fode: not wyth standynge ye geue them not those thynges which are nedefull to the bodye: what helpeth it them?
James 2:17 Euen so faythe, yf it haue no dedes is dead in it selfe.
James 2:18 Yea and a man myghte saye: Thou haste faythe, and I haue dedes: Shewe me thy faith by thy dedes, and I wyll shew the my faythe by my dedes.
James 2:19 Beleuest thou that there is one God? Thou doest well. The deuyls also beleue and tremble.
James 2:20 Wylt thou vnderstande (O thou vayne man) that fayth without dedes is dead?
James 2:21 Was not Abraham oure father iustifyed thorowe workes when he offered Isaac hys sonne vpon the aultare?
James 2:22 Thou seyste howe that faythe wroughte wyth hys dedes, & through the dedes was faythe made perfecte:
James 2:23 and the scrypture was fulfylled whiche sayeth: Abraham beleued God, and it was reputed vnto hym for ryghtuousnes: and he was called the frende of God.
James 2:24 Ye se then how that of dedes a man is iustifyed, and not of fayth onely.
James 2:25 Lykewyse also was not Raab the harlot iustifyed thorowe workes, when she receyued the messengers, and sente them out another way?
James 2:26 For as the bodye, without the spyryte is dead euen so fayth wythout dedes is dead.

CHAPTER: 3

James 3:1 My brethren be not euery man a mayster, remembrynge howe that we shal receyue the more damnacyon:
James 3:2 for in many thinges we synne all. Yf a man synne not in worde, the same is a perfect man and able to tame al the bodye.
James 3:3 Beholde we put bittes into the horsses mouthes that they shoulde obeye vs, and we turne aboute all the body.
James 3:4 Behold also the shyppes, which though they be so greate and are dryuen of fyers wyndes, yet are they turned aboute wyth a verye smale helme, whether soeuer the vyolence of the gouerner wyll
James 3:5 euen so the tonge is a lyttell member, and boasteth greate thinges. Beholde howe greate a thynge a lyttell fyre kyndleth,
James 3:6 and the tonge is fyre, and a worlde of wickednes. So is the tong set among our members, that it defyleth the whole body and setteth a fyre all that we haue of nature, & is it selfe set a fyre euen of hell.
James 3:7 All the natures of beastes, and of byrdes, and of serpentes, and thynges of the sea, are meked and tamed of the nature of man.
James 3:8 But the tonge can no man tame. It is an vnrulye euyll ful of deadly poyson.
James 3:9 Therewyth blesse we God the father, and therewyth cursse wemen which are made after the similitude of God.
James 3:10 Out of one mouth proceadeth blessynge and curssynge. My brethren these thynges ought not so to be.
James 3:11 Doth a fountayne sende forth at one place swete water & bitter also?
James 3:12 Can the fygge tree, my Brethren, beare olyue beryes: other a vyne beare fygges?
James 3:13 So can no fountayne geue both salte water & freshe also. If any man be wyse and endued wyth learnynge amonge you, let hym shewe the workes of hys good conuersacyon in mekenes that is coupled with wysdome.
James 3:14 But, yf ye haue bitter enuyinge and strife in youre hertes, reioyce not: neyther be lyars agaynste the trueth.
James 3:15 Thys wysedome descendeth not from aboue: but is earthye, & naturall, and deuelyshe:
James 3:16 For where enuiynge and stryfe is there is vnstablenes and all maner of euyll workes.
James 3:17 But the wysedome that is from aboue, is fyrste pure, then peasable, gentle, and easye to be entreated, full of mercye & good frutes, wythoute iudgynge, and wythout simulacyon:
James 3:18 yea, & the frute of ryghtuousnes is sowen in peace, of them that maintayne peace.

CHAPTER: 4

James 4:1 From whence commeth warre & fyghtynge amonge you: come they not hear hence? euen of your voluptuousnes, that rayne in youre membres.
James 4:2 Ye luste & haue not. Ye enuye and haue dignacyon, and cannot obtayne. Ye fyght and war and haue not, because ye axe not.
James 4:3 Ye axe and receyue not, because ye axe a mysse: euen to consume it vpon youre voluptuousnes
James 4:4 Ye aduouterers, & women that breake matrimonye: knowe ye not, how that the frendeshyppe of the worlde is enmitie to God warde? Who so euer wyl be a frende of the worlde, is made the enemy of God.
James 4:5 Eyther do ye thynke that the scrypture sayeth in vayne. The spyryte that dwelleth in you lusteth euen contrarye to enuye:
James 4:6 but geueth more grace.
James 4:7 Submytte your selues to God, and resiste the deuyl, and he wyll flye from you.
James 4:8 Drawe nye to God, and he wyll drawe nye to you. Clense youre handes ye synners, and purge youre hertes ye wauerynge mynded.
James 4:9 Suffer afflictyons: sorowe ye and wepe. Let youre laughter be turned to mornynge and youre ioye to heauynes.
James 4:10 Cast doune your selues before the Lorde, and he shal lyfte you vp.
James 4:11 Back byte not one another, brethren. He that backbyteth hys brother, and he that iudgeth hys brother, backbyteth the lawe, and iudgeth the lawe. But and yf thou iudge the law, thou art not an obseruer of the law, but a iudge.
James 4:12 There is one law geuer, which is able to saue & to destroy. What arte thou that iudgest another man?
James 4:13 Go to nowe ye that saye: to daye, and to morowe let vs go into suche a cytye and contynue there a yeare and bye and sel, and wynne:
James 4:14 and yet can not tell what shall happen to morowe. For what thynge is youre lyfe? It is euen a vapoure that appeareth for a lyttel tyme, and then vanysheth awaye:
James 4:15 For that ye oughte to saye: yf the Lorde wyll and yf we lyue, let vs do thys or that.
James 4:16 But nowe ye reioyce in youre bostynges. All suche reioysing is euyl.
James 4:17 Therfor to hym that knoweth how to do good, and doeth it not to him it is sinne.

CHAPTER: 5

James 5:1 Go to nowe ye ryche men. Weepe, and howle on your wretchednes that shal come vpon you.
James 5:2 Youre ryches is corrupte youre garmentes are motheaten.
James 5:3 Your gold and your siluer are cankered, & the ruste of them shal be a witnes vnto you, and shall eate your fleshe, as it were fyre. Ye haue heaped treasure together in your laste dayes:
James 5:4 Beholde the hyre of the labourers which haue reped doun your fieldes (which hyer is of you kept backe by fraude) crieth: & the cryes of them whiche haue reped, are entred into the eares of the Lorde Sabaoth
James 5:5 Ye haue lyued in pleasure on the earth, & in wantonnes. Ye haue norished your hertes, as in a day of slaughter
James 5:6 Ye haue condempned, & haue kylled the iuste, & he hath not resisted you.
James 5:7 Be ye pacyente therfore brethren, vnto the commynge of the Lord. Behold the husbande man wayghteth for the precious frute of the earth & hath long pacience therevpon, vntyll he receyue (the early and the latter rayne.)
James 5:8 Be ye also pacyent therfor, and setle your hertes, for the commynge of the Lorde draweth nye.
James 5:9 Grudge not one agaynst another brethren lest ye be damned. Beholde the iudge standeth before the dore.
James 5:10 Take (my brethren) the Prophetes for an ensample of sufferyng aduersitye, & of longe pacience, whiche spake in the name of the Lorde.
James 5:11 Beholde we count them happye whiche endure. Ye haue hearde of the pacience of Iob, & haue knowen what ende the Lorde made. For the Lorde is verye pytyfull and mercyfull.
James 5:12 But about al thinges my brethren, sweare not, neyther by heauen, neyther by earth, neyther by anye other othe. Let your yea be yea and youre naye, naye: leaste ye falle into hypocrysye.
James 5:13 Yf any of you be euyll vexed, let hym praye. Yf anye of you be merye, let hym singe Psalmes.
James 5:14 Yf anye be deseased amonge you, let hym call for the elders of the congregacyon, and let them praye ouer him, and annoynte hym wyt oyle in the name of the Lord
James 5:15 and the prayer of fayth shall saue the sicke, & the Lorde shall rayse hym vp: and yf he haue commytted synnes, they shalbe forgeuen him.
James 5:16 Knoweledge youre fautes one to another; and praye one for another, that ye maye be healed. The prayer of a ryghtuous man auayleth muche yf it be feruente.
James 5:17 Helias was a man mortall, euen as we are, and he prayed in hys prayer, that it might not rayne: and it rayned not on the earth by the space of thre yeares & sixe monethes.
James 5:18 And he prayed againe, and the heauen gaue rayne, and the earthe broughte forth her frute.
James 5:19 Brethren yf anye of you erre from the trueth and an other conuerte hym,
James 5:20 let the same know that he which conuerted the synner from goyng astraye out of hys waye, shall saue a soule from death, and shall hyde the multytude of synnes.

BOOK: 1 Peter

CHAPTER: 1

1 Peter 1:1 Peter an Apostle of Iesu Christe to them that dwell here & there as straungers thorowout all Pontus, Galacia, Capadocia Asia, and Bithinia, elect
1 Peter 1:2 by the for knoweledge of God the father, thorowe the sanctifiynge of the spyryte, vnto obedience & sprinklyng of the bloude of Iesus Christe. Grace be wyth you & peace be multiplied.
1 Peter 1:3 Blessed be God the father of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, whiche thorowe his aboundaunt mercye begat vs agayne vnto lyuely hope by the resurreccyon of Iesus Christe from death,
1 Peter 1:4 to enioye an enherytaunce immortall & vndefyled, and that putryfyeth not, reserued in heauen for you,
1 Peter 1:5 whiche are kept by the power of God thorowe fayth, vnto saluacyon, whiche saluacyon is prepared all ready to be shewed in the laste tyme,
1 Peter 1:6 in the whiche tyme ye shall reioyce, thoughe nowe for a season (yf nede requyre) ye are in heauynes, thorow manyfolde temptacyon,
1 Peter 1:7 that youre faythe ones tryed beynge muche more precyous, then golde that perysheth (though it be tryed with fyre) myghte be founde vnto laude, glory, and honoure, at the apearynge of Iesus Christ
1 Peter 1:8 whome ye haue not sene, and yet loue hym, in whome euen nowe, thoughe ye se hym not, yet do you beleue: and reioyce with ioye vnspeakeable and gloryous:
1 Peter 1:9 receyuynge the ende of youre faythe, the saluacyon of youre soules.
1 Peter 1:10 Of whiche saluacyon haue the Prophetes enquyred and searched, whiche prophesyed of the grace that shoulde come vnto you,
1 Peter 1:11 searchynge when or at what tyme of the spyryte of Christe whiche was in them, shoulde signifye, whiche spyryte testyfyed before, the passyons that shoulde come vnto Christe, and the glorye that shoulde folowe after:
1 Peter 1:12 vnto which Prophetes it was declared, that not vnto them selues, but vnto vs, they shoulde mynyster the thynges whiche are nowe shewed vnto you of them whiche by the holye ghoste sent doune from heauen, haue preached vnto you the thynges whiche the aungels desyre to beholde.
1 Peter 1:13 Wherfore gyrde vp the loynes of youre myndes, be sober, and trust perfectelye on the grace that is broughte vnto you, by the declarynge of Iesus Christe,
1 Peter 1:14 as obedyent chyldren not fashyonynge youre selues vnto your old lustes of ignorauncye:
1 Peter 1:15 but as he whiche called you is holye, euen so be ye holy in all maner of conuersacyon,
1 Peter 1:16 because it is wrytten. Be ye holy, for I am holy.
1 Peter 1:17 And yf so be that ye call on the father, whiche wythout respecte of person, iudgeth accordynge to euery mannes workes se that ye passe the tyme of youre pylgrymage in feare.
1 Peter 1:18 For as muche as ye know howe that ye were not redemed wyth corruptyble syluer and golde, from youre vayne conuersacyon whiche ye receyued by the tradicyons of the fathers:
1 Peter 1:19 but wyth the precyous bloud of christ as of a lambe vndefyled, and wythout spotte,
1 Peter 1:20 whiche was ordeyned before the worlde was made, but was declared in the laste tymes for youre sakes,
1 Peter 1:21 whiche by hys meanes haue beleued on God that raysed hym from death, & gloryfyed hym, that youre faythe and hope myght be in God.
1 Peter 1:22 And for as muche as ye haue puryfyed, youre soules thorowe the spyryte, in obeying the truethe for to loue brotherlye wythout faynynge, se that ye loue one another with a pure herte feruentlye:
1 Peter 1:23 for ye are borne a newe, not of mortal seede, but of immortall, by the word of God whiche lyueth, and lasteth for euer.
1 Peter 1:24 For all fleshe is as grasse, and all the glorye of man is as the floure grasse. The grasse wyddereth, and the floure falleth awaye,
1 Peter 1:25 but the worde of the Lorde endureth euer. And thys is the worde whiche by the gospell was preached amonge you.

CHAPTER: 2

1 Peter 2:1 Wherfore laye a syde all malycyousnes, and all gyle, and dyssymulacyon, and enuye, and all backbytynge:
1 Peter 2:2 and as newe bourne babes, desyre that reasonable mylke whiche is wythout corrupcyon that ye maye growe therein.
1 Peter 2:3 If so be that ye haue tasted howe pleasaunt the Lorde is,
1 Peter 2:4 to whome ye come as vnto a lyuinge stone dysalowed of men, but chosen of God and precyous:
1 Peter 2:5 and ye as lyuynge stones, are made a spirytuall housse, and an holye priesthode, for to offer vp spyrytuall sacryfyce, acceptable to God by Iesus Christe.
1 Peter 2:6 Wherfore it is contained in the scrypture: beholde, I put in Syon an head corner stone, electe and precyous: and he that beleueth on hym, shall not be ashamed.
1 Peter 2:7 Vnto you therfor whiche beleue, he is precyous, but vnto them whiche beleue not, the stone whiche the buylders refused the same is made the head stone in the corner,
1 Peter 2:8 and a stone to stomble at, and a rocke to offende them whiche stomble at the word, and beleue not that whereon they were set.
1 Peter 2:9 But ye are a chosen generacyon, a royall priesthode, an holye nacyon and a peculyar people that ye shoulde shewe the vertues of hym that called you oute of darkenes into his marueylous lyght,
1 Peter 2:10 whiche in tyme past were not vnder mercye, but nowe haue obtayned mercye.
1 Peter 2:11 Dearely beloued, I beseche you as straungers and pylgremes, obstayne from fleshely lustes, which fyght agaynste the soule,
1 Peter 2:12 and se that ye haue honest conuersacyon amonge the Gentyls, that they whiche backbyte you as euyll doars, maye se youre good workes and prayse God in the daye of visitacyon.
1 Peter 2:13 Submyt youre selues vnto all maner ordinaunce of man for the Lordes sake, whether it be vnto the kynge as vnto the chiefe heade:
1 Peter 2:14 other vnto rulars, as vnto them that are sent of hym, for the punyshemente of euyll doars: but for the laude of them that do wel.
1 Peter 2:15 For so is the wyll of God, that ye put to sylence the ignorauncye of the folyshe men:
1 Peter 2:16 as fre, and not as hauynge the lybertye for a cloke of maliciousnes, but euen as the seruauntes of God.
1 Peter 2:17 Honoure all men. Loue brotherlye felowship. Feare God, and honour the kynge.
1 Peter 2:18 Seruauntes obeye your maysters wyth al feare, not onelye yf they be good, and courteous: but also thoughe they be frowarde.
1 Peter 2:19 For it is thanke worthy yf a man for conscience towarde God endure griefe, suffering wrongfullye.
1 Peter 2:20 For what prayse is it, yf when ye be buffeted for your faultes, ye take it pacientlye? But and yf when ye do well, ye suffre wrong and take it pacyently, then is there thanke wt God.
1 Peter 2:21 for here vnto verelye were ye called: for Christe also suffered for vs, leauynge vs an ensample that we shoulde folowe his steppes,
1 Peter 2:22 whiche dyd no synne, neyther was there gyle founde in hys mouth:
1 Peter 2:23 which when he was reuyled, reuyled not agayne: when he suffered, he threatened not: but commytted the cause to him that iudgeth ryghtuously,
1 Peter 2:24 which hys owne selfe bare oure synnes in hys body on the tree, that we shoulde be delyuered from synne, and shoulde lyue in ryghtuousnes. By whose strypes ye were healed.
1 Peter 2:25 For ye were as shepe goynge astraye: but are nowe returned to the shepeherde and byshop of your soules.

CHAPTER: 3

1 Peter 3:1 Lykewyse let the wyues be in subiectyon to theyr husbandes, that euen they which beleue not the worde, maye wythoute the worde be wonne by the conuersation of the wiues:
1 Peter 3:2 whyle they beholde your pure conuersacion coupled wyth feare.
1 Peter 3:3 Whose apparell shall not be outewarde wyth broyeded heare, and hangynge on of golde, other in puttynge on of gorgyous apparell:
1 Peter 3:4 but let the hyd man of the harte be vncorrupte with a meke and a quyete spyryte, whiche spyryte is before God a thynge muche set by.
1 Peter 3:5 For after thys maner in the olde tyme dyd the holye women whiche trusted in God, tyer them selues, and were obedyente to theyr husbandes
1 Peter 3:6 euen as Sara obeyed Abraham, and called hym Lorde: whose doughters ye are as longe as ye do well, and be not afrayde of euerye shadowe.
1 Peter 3:7 Lykewyse ye men dwell wyth them accordynge to knoweledge, geuynge honoure vnto the wyfe, as vnto the weaker vessell, and as vnto them that are heyres also of the grace of lyfe, that youre prayers be not let.
1 Peter 3:8 In conclusyon be ye all of one mynd, one suffer wyth another, loue as brethren, be petifull, be curteous,
1 Peter 3:9 not rendringe euyll for euyll, neyther rebuke for rebuke, but contrarywyse, blesse, remembryng that ye are thervnto called, euen that ye shoulde be heyres of blessinge.
1 Peter 3:10 If anye man longe after lyfe, and loueth to se good dayes, let him refrayne his tonge from euil, & his lippes that they speake not gyle.
1 Peter 3:11 Let hym eschue euyll and do good, let him seke peace, and ensue it.
1 Peter 3:12 For the eyes of the Lorde are ouer the rightuous, and his eares are open vnto theyr prayers. But the face of the Lorde beholdeth them that do euil.
1 Peter 3:13 Morouer who is it that wyll harme you, yf ye folowe that whiche is good?
1 Peter 3:14 Notwithstanding happy are ye, yf ye suffre for ryghtuousnes sake. Yea and feare not though they seme terrible vnto you, neither be troubled,
1 Peter 3:15 but sanctifie the Lorde God in your hertes. Be ready alwaies to geue an answere to euery man that axeth you a reason of the hope, that is in you, and that with mekenes & feare,
1 Peter 3:16 hauinge a good conscience, that when they backbyte you as euyl doers, they maye be ashamed, for as muche as they haue falsely accused your good conuersation in Christ.
1 Peter 3:17 It is better (yf the wyll of God be so) that ye suffre for wel doyng, then for euil doinge.
1 Peter 3:18 For as much as Christ hath ones suffered for sinners, the iuste for the vniuste, for to bringe vs to God, and was kylled, as perteininge to the fleshe: but was quickened in the spirite.
1 Peter 3:19 In which spirite, he also wente and preached vnto the spirites that were in prison,
1 Peter 3:20 which were in tyme passed disobedient, when the longe sufferinge of God abode excedinge paciently in the dayes of Noe, whyle the arcke was a preparing wherin fewe (that is to saie .viij. soules) were saued by water,
1 Peter 3:21 which signifyeth baptisme that nowe saueth vs, not the puttinge awaye of the fylth of the fleshe, but in that a good conscience consenteth to God, by the resurreccion of Iesus Christe,
1 Peter 3:22 whyche is on the right hande of God, and is gone into heauen, aungelles, power, and mighte, subdued vnto him.

CHAPTER: 4

1 Peter 4:1 For as much as Christ hath suffred for vs in the fleshe, arme your selues lykewise wyth the same mynde: for he which suffereth in the fleshe ceaseth from synne,
1 Peter 4:2 that he hence forwarde shoulde lyue as muche tyme as remayneth in the fleshe, not after the iustes of men, but after the wyl of God.
1 Peter 4:3 For it is sufficient for vs, that we haue spent the time that is past of the lyfe, after the wil of the Gentiles, walking in wantonnes, lustes, dronckennes, in eatinge, drinkinge & in abominable Idolatrie.
1 Peter 4:4 And it semeth to them a straunge thynge, that ye runne not also with them vnto the same excesse of riote, and therfore speake they euyl of you,
1 Peter 4:5 whiche shall geue a comptes to hym that is redy to iudge quicke & dead.
1 Peter 4:6 For vnto this purpose verely was the Gospel preached vnto the dead that they shoulde be iudged lyke other men in the fleshe, but shoulde lyue before God in the spirite.
1 Peter 4:7 The ende of al thinges is at hande. Be ye therfore discrete and sober, that ye maye be apt to prayers.
1 Peter 4:8 But aboue all thinges haue feruente loue among you. For loue couereth the multitude of synnes.
1 Peter 4:9 Be ye herberous one to another, & that without grudginge.
1 Peter 4:10 As euerye man hath receyued the gifte, minister the same one to another as good mynisters of the manifolde grace of God.
1 Peter 4:11 Yf anye man speake let hym talke as though he spake the wordes of God. If any man mynistre, let hym do it as of the habilitie, whyche God ministreth vnto hym. That God in all thinges may be glorifyed thorowe IESUS Christ, to whom be prayse and domynyon for euer, and whyle the worlde standeth. Amen.
1 Peter 4:12 Dearely beloued, be not troubled in hys heate, whiche nowe is come amonge you to trye you as though some straunge thing had happened vnto you:
1 Peter 4:13 but reioice in as much as ye are partakers of Christes passions, that when his glory appereth, ye maye be mery and glad.
1 Peter 4:14 If ye be railed vpon for the name of Christ, happie are ye. For the spyryte of glorye, and the spyryte of Gad resteth vpon you. On theyr parte he is euyll spoken of, but on your parte he is glorified.
1 Peter 4:15 Se that none of you suffer as a murtherer or as a thefe, or an euil doar, or as a busibody in other mens matters.
1 Peter 4:16 Yf any man suffer as a Christen man, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorifie God on this behalfe.
1 Peter 4:17 For the time is come that iudgemente must beginne at the house of God. Yf it fyrst begynne at vs, what shal the ende be of them, whiche beleue not the Gospel of God?
1 Peter 4:18 And yf the rightuous scasly be saued, where shal the vngodly and the sinner appere?
1 Peter 4:19 Wherfore let them that suffer according to the wil of God, commit their soules to him with wel doing, as vnto a faythfull creator.

CHAPTER: 5

1 Peter 5:1 The elders whiche are amonge you, I exhorte, whiche am also an elder, and a wytnes of the affliccions of Christe, and also a partaker of the glory that shallbe opened,
1 Peter 5:2 se that ye fede Christes flocke, which is amonge you, takinge the ouersight of them, not as though ye were compelled therto, but wyllingly, not for the desire of fylthy lucre, but of a good minde,
1 Peter 5:3 not as though ye were Lordes ouer the parishes, but that ye be an ensample to the flocke.
1 Peter 5:4 And when the chiefe shephearde shal appere, ye shal receiue an incorruptible crowne of glorie.
1 Peter 5:5 Lykewyse ye yonger submit youre selues vnto the elder. Submit youre selues euerye man, one to another, knyt youre selues together in lowlines of mynde. For God resisteth the proude & geueth grace to humble.
1 Peter 5:6 Submit youre selues therfore vnder the myghty hande of God, that he maye exalte you, when the tyme is come.
1 Peter 5:7 Caste all your care to him: for he careth for you.
1 Peter 5:8 Be sober and watch, for your aduersary the deuyll as a roringe Lyon walketh aboute, sekinge whom he may deuour,
1 Peter 5:9 whom resist stedfast in the fayth remembring, that ye do but fulfill the same affliccions, which are appointed to youre brethren that are in the worlde.
1 Peter 5:10 The God of al grace, which called you vnto his eternal glory by Christe Iesus, shall hys owne selfe after ye haue suffred a litle affliccion make you perfecte, shall settle, strength and stablishe you.
1 Peter 5:11 To hym be glorie and dominion for euer, and whyle the worlde endureth. Amen.
1 Peter 5:12 By Syluanus a faythfull brother vnto you (as I suppose) haue I wrytten brefly, exhortynge and testifyenge howe that this is the true grace of God wherin ye stande.
1 Peter 5:13 The companions of youre election, that are of Babylon, salute you, and Marcus my sonne.
1 Peter 5:14 Grete ye one another wyth the kysse of loue. Peace be wyth you all, which are in Christe Iesus. AMEN.

BOOK: 2 Peter

CHAPTER: 1

2 Peter 1:1 Simon Peter a seruaunte, and an Apostle of Iesus Christe, to them whyche haue obtained lyke precyous faith wyth vs in the rightuousnes that commeth of oure God and sauiour Iesu Christ.
2 Peter 1:2 Grace wyth you, and peace be multiplied in the knowledge of God and of Iesus Christ oure Lorde.
2 Peter 1:3 Accordinge as hys godlye power hath geuen vnto vs al thinges that pertayne vnto lyfe and godlines, thorowe the knowledge of him that hath called vs by vertue & glory,
2 Peter 1:4 by the meanes, wherof are geuen vnto vs excellent and most great promises, that by the helpe of them ye should be partakers of the godly nature, in that ye flee the corruption of worldelye luste.
2 Peter 1:5 And herunto geue al diligence, in youre fayth, mynyster vertue, and in vertue knowledge,
2 Peter 1:6 and in knowledge temperancie, and in temperauncie, pacience, in pacience, Godlynes,
2 Peter 1:7 in Godlines brotherly kyndnes, in brotherlye kindnes, loue.
2 Peter 1:8 For yf these thinges be amonge you and are plenteous, they wyll make you, that ye neyther shalbe ydle nor vnfruteful in the knowledge of oure Lord Iesu Christe.
2 Peter 1:9 But he that lacketh these thinges, is blind and gropeth for the waye with his hand, and hath forgotten that he was pourged from his olde synnes.
2 Peter 1:10 Wherfore brethren, geue the more diligence for to make your callinge and eleccion sure. For if ye do suche thinges, ye shal neuer erre.
2 Peter 1:11 Yea and by this meanes an entringe in, shalbe minystred vnto you aboundantlye into the euerlastinge kingdome of oure Lorde and sauiour Iesus Christ.
2 Peter 1:12 Wherfore I wyll not be negligente to put you alwayes in remembraunce of such thynges, though that ye knowe them your selues, and be also stablyshed in the presente trueth.
2 Peter 1:13 Notwithstanding I thinke it mete, (as long as I am in this tabernacle) to stere you vp by puttynge you in remembraunc
2 Peter 1:14 for as muche as I am sure how that the tyme is at hande, that I must put of my tabernacle, euen as our Lord Iesus Christ hath shewed me.
2 Peter 1:15 I wil enforce therfore that on euerye syde ye myght haue wherwith to stere vp the remembraunce of these thynges after my departinge.
2 Peter 1:16 For we folowed not deceiuable fables, when we opened vnto you the power and comminge of our Lord Iesus Christ, but wyth our eyes we saw his maieste, euen then verelye,
2 Peter 1:17 when he receiued of God the father honoure and glory, and when there came such a voice to hym from the excellente glorie: This is my deare beloued sonne in whome I haue delyte.
2 Peter 1:18 This voice we hearde when it came from heauen beynge wyth hym in the holy mounte.
2 Peter 1:19 We haue also a ryght sure worde of prophesye, whervnto yf ye take hede, as vnto a light, that shineth in a darcke place, ye do wel vntyll the daye dawne, and the daye starre aryse in youre hertes.
2 Peter 1:20 So that ye fyrste knowe this, that no prophesye in the scripture hath any priuate interpretacion.
2 Peter 1:21 For the scrypture came neuer by the wyl of man, but holye men of God spake as they were moued by the holy ghoste.

CHAPTER: 2

2 Peter 2:1 There were false prophetes among the people, euen as there shalbe false teachers amonge you, which priuilie shal bringe in damnable sectes, euen denyenge the Lorde that hath bought them and bringe vpon them selues swyft dampnacion,
2 Peter 2:2 and many shal folowe theyr damnable wayes, by whiche the way of trueth shalbe euyl spoken of,
2 Peter 2:3 and thorowe couetousnes shal they wyth fayned wordes make marchaundyse of you, whose iudgement is not farre of, and theyr dampnacion slepeth not.
2 Peter 2:4 For yf God spared not the aungels that sinned but cast them downe into hell, and deliuered them into chayns of darckenes, to be kept vnto iudgement,
2 Peter 2:5 neyther spared the olde worlde, but saued Noe the ryght preacher of rightuousnes, and brought in the floud vpon the worlde of the vngodly,
2 Peter 2:6 and turned the cyties of Sodom and Gomor into ashes, ouerthrowe them, dampned them, and made on them an ensample vnto all that after shoulde lyue vngodly.
2 Peter 2:7 And iust Lot vexed with the vnclenly conuersacyon of the wicked, deliuered he.
2 Peter 2:8 For he beinge rightuouse and dwellinge amonge them, in seinge and hearinge, vexed his rightuouse soule from daye to daye wyth theyr vnlawfull dedes.
2 Peter 2:9 The Lorde knoweth howe to deliuer the Godlye out of temptacion, and howe to reserue the vniuste vnto the daye of iudgement for to be punyshed,
2 Peter 2:10 namely them that walke after the fleshe in the luste of vncleanes, and despyse the rulars. Presumpteous are they, & stubborne and feare not to speake euyl of them that are in authoritie.
2 Peter 2:11 When the angels which are greater both in power and might, receiue not of the Lorde railing iudgement agaynste them.
2 Peter 2:12 But these as brute beastes naturallye made to be taken and destroyed, speake euyll of that they knowe not, and shal perishe thorow their owne destruccion,
2 Peter 2:13 and receiue the reward of vnrightuousnes. They count it pleasure to lyue deliciously for a season. Spottes they are and filthines, liuinge at pleasure, and in disceiueable waies feastinge with you,
2 Peter 2:14 hauinge eyes full of aduoutrye, and that can not cease to synne, begilinge vnstable soules. Hertes they haue exercised with couetousues. They are cursed children,
2 Peter 2:15 and haue forsaken the ryght waye, and are gone astray folowing the waye of Balam the sonne of Bosor, whiche loued the rewarde of vnrightuousnes,
2 Peter 2:16 but was rebuked of hys iniquitye. The tame and dome beaste, speakinge with mannes voice, forbade the folishnes of the Prophete.
2 Peter 2:17 These are welles wythout water, & cloudes caried about of a tempest, to whom the miste of darkenes is reserued for euer.
2 Peter 2:18 For when they haue spoken the swellinge wordes of vanitie, they begyle with wantonnes thorowe the lustes of the fleshe, them that were cleane escaped, but nowe are wrapped in errours.
2 Peter 2:19 They promis them libertie, and are them selues the bonde seruauntes of corrupcyon. For of whomsoeuer a man is ouer come, vnto the same is he in bondage.
2 Peter 2:20 For yf they, after they haue escaped from the fylthines of the worlde thorowe the knowledge yf the Lord and of the sauiour Iesus Christe, are yet tangled agayne therin and ouercome, then is the latter ende worsse wyth them then the beginninge.
2 Peter 2:21 For it had bene better for them not haue knowen the way of rightuousnes then after they haue knowen it to turne from the commaundementes geuen vnto them.
2 Peter 2:22 It is happened to them accordinge to the true prouerbe: The dogge is turned to his vomet againe, and the sowe that was washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

CHAPTER: 3

2 Peter 3:1 This is the seconde epistle that I nowe wryte to you (beloued) wherwith I stere vp & warne youre pure myndes, to cal to remembraunc
2 Peter 3:2 the wordes, which were tolde before of the holy prophetes, and also the commaundementes of vs the apostles of the Lorde and sauiour.
2 Peter 3:3 This fyrst vnderstande, that there shall come in the laste dayes mockers, which wyll walke after their own lustes
2 Peter 3:4 and say. Where is the promes of hys comminge? For sence the fathers dyed, al thinges continue in the same estate, wherin they were at the beginninge.
2 Peter 3:5 This they knowe not (and that willinglie) howe that the heauens a greate whyle ago were, & the earth that was in the water, appered vp out of the water by the worde of God,
2 Peter 3:6 by the which thinges, the worlde that then was, perished ouer flowen with the water.
2 Peter 3:7 But the heauens verely and earth, which are now are kept by the same worde in store, and reserued vnto fyre, agaynste the daye of iudgemente, and perdycyon of vngodlye men.
2 Peter 3:8 Dearly beloued, be not ignoraunt of thys one thinge, howe that one daye is wyth the Lorde, as a thousande yeare, and a thousande yeare as one daye.
2 Peter 3:9 The Lord is not slacke to fulfyl hys promyse, as some men count slaknes, but is patient to vsward and would haue no man loste, but would receyue al men to repentaunce.
2 Peter 3:10 Neuertheles the daye of the Lord wyl come as a thiefe in the nyght in the which daye, the heauens shal peryshe wyth terryble noyse, and the elementes shal melte wyth heate, and the earth wyth the workes that are therin shal burne.
2 Peter 3:11 If al these thinges shal perishe, what maner persons ought ye to be in holye conuersacyon and Godlynes:
2 Peter 3:12 lokynge for and hasting vnto the comminge of the daye of God, in which the heauens shall perishe with fyre, & the elementes shalbe consumed wyth heat.
2 Peter 3:13 Neuertheles we loke for a new heauen and a newe earth, accordinge to his promys, wherin dwelleth rygtuousnes.
2 Peter 3:14 Wherfore dearly beloued, seynge that ye loke for such thinges, be diligent that ye may be found of hym in peace, wythout spotte and vndefyled
2 Peter 3:15 And suppose that the longe suffering of the Lord is saluacion, euen as oure dearlye beloued brother Paule accordinge to the wysdome geuen to hym wrote vnto you,
2 Peter 3:16 yea, almoste in euery epistle speakinge of such thinges, amonge whiche are manye thinges harde to be vnderstande, which they that are vnlearned, and vnstable, peruert, as they do other scriptures vnto their owne destruccion.
2 Peter 3:17 Ye therfore beloued, seynge ye knowe it before hand, beware lest ye be also plucked away with the errour of the wycked, and fall from your own stedfastnes,
2 Peter 3:18 but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of oure Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christe. To whom be glorye both nowe and foreuer. Amen.

BOOK: 1 John

CHAPTER: 1

1 John 1:1 That whyche was from the begynninge, whyche we haue hearde, whyche we haue sene with oure eyes, which we haue loked vpon and our handes haue handeled, of the word of the lyfe.
1 John 1:2 For the life appeared, and we haue sene, and beare wytnes, and shewe vnto you that eternall lyfe, whyche was wyth the father, and appeared to vs.
1 John 1:3 That whyche we haue sene and hearde declare we vnto you, that ye maye haue felowshyp wyth vs, and that our felowshype may be wyth the father and hys sonne Iesus Christ.
1 John 1:4 And this wryte we vnto you that youre ioye may be ful.
1 John 1:5 And this is the tydinges that we haue heard of him, and declare vnto you, that God is lyghte and in him is no darckenes at al,
1 John 1:6 yf we saye that we haue felowshippe with him, and yet walke in darckenes, we lye, and do not the trueth,
1 John 1:7 but and yf we walke (in light) euen as he is in lighte, then haue we felowshyppe wyth hym, and the bloude of Iesus Christe his sonne clenseth vs from all sinne.
1 John 1:8 If we saye that we haue no sinne, we deceiue oure selues, and trueth is not in vs.
1 John 1:9 If we knowledge oure sinnes, he is faythfull and iust, to forgeue vs our sinnes, and to clense vs from al vnrightuousnes.
1 John 1:10 If we say we haue not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in vs.

CHAPTER: 2

1 John 2:1 My lytle chyldren, these thinges wryte I vnto you, that ye sinne not, yf anye man synne, yet we haue an aduocate with the father, Iesus Christe, whiche is rightuouse,
1 John 2:2 and he it is that obtayned grace for our sinnes, not for oure sinnes onelye, but also for the synnes of al the worlde.
1 John 2:3 And herby we are sure that we knowe him, yf we kepe his commaundementes.
1 John 2:4 He that sayth I knowe him, and kepeth not his commaundementes, is a liar, and the veritie is not in him.
1 John 2:5 Whosoeuer kepeth his worde, in him is the loue of God, perfecte in dede. And there by knowe we that we are in him.
1 John 2:6 He that sayeth he abydeth in him ought to walke euen as he walked.
1 John 2:7 Brethren I wryte no newe commaundemente vnto you, but that olde commaundemente, which ye hearde from the beginning.
1 John 2:8 The olde commandement is the word, which ye heard from the beginninge. Againe a new commaundement I write vnto you, a thinge that is true in him, and also in you, for the darkenes is past, and the true light now shineth.
1 John 2:9 He that sayeth how that he is in the light, and yet hateth his brother, is in dackenes euen vntill this tyme.
1 John 2:10 He that loueth his brother, abideth in the lyghte, and there is none occasion of euill in him.
1 John 2:11 He that hateth his brother, is in darckenes and walketh in darckenes, and can not tell whether he goeth, because that darckenes hath blinded his eyes.
1 John 2:12 Babes I wryte vnto you, how that youre sinnes are forgeuen you for his names sake.
1 John 2:13 I wryte vnto you fathers, how that ye know him, that was from the beginninge. I wryte vnto you yong men, how that ye haue ouercome the wicked. I write to you lytel children, howe that ye knowe the father,
1 John 2:14 I wryte vnto you fathers, how that ye knowe him, that was from the beginninge. I wryte vnto you young men, how that ye are stronge and the word of God abyeth in you, & ye haue ouercome that wycked.
1 John 2:15 Se that ye loue not the world, neyther the thynges that are in the worlde. Yf anye man loue the worlde the loue of the father is not in him.
1 John 2:16 For all that is in the world (as the luste of the fleshe, the lust of the eyes, and the pryde of goodes) is not of the father, but of the world.
1 John 2:17 And the world vanysheth away, and the lust therof, but he that fulfilleth the will of God, abideth euer.
1 John 2:18 Litel chyldren, it is the last time, and as ye haue hearde how that Antichriste shall come, euen nowe are there many Antichristes come alredye. Wherby we knowe that it is the last tyme.
1 John 2:19 They went out from vs, but they were not of vs. For yf they had bene of vs: they woulde no doubte, haue continued wyth vs. But that fortuned, that it myghte appeare, that they were not of vs.
1 John 2:20 And ye haue an oyntment of the holye ghost and ye knowe all thinges.
1 John 2:21 I wrote not vnto you, as though ye knewe not the trueth, but as though ye knewe it, and knowe also that no lye commeth of trueth.
1 John 2:22 Who is a liar but he that denyeth that Iesus is Christ? The same is the Antechrist that denyeth the father and the sonne.
1 John 2:23 Whosoeuer denyeth the sonne, the same hath not the father.
1 John 2:24 Let therfore abyde in you that same, whiche ye hearde from the beginninge, shall remaine in you, ye also shal continue in the sonne, and in the father.
1 John 2:25 And this is the promes, that he hath promysed vs euen eternal lyfe.
1 John 2:26 This haue I written vnto you concerning them, that disceyue you.
1 John 2:27 And the anointinge, whiche ye haue receiued of him, dwelleth in you. And ye nede not that anye man teache you, but as the anointing teacheth you al thinges, and is true, and is no lye, & it is taught you, euen so byde therin.
1 John 2:28 And now babes abide in him, that when he shal appeare, we maye be bolde, and not be made ashamed of him at his comming:
1 John 2:29 If ye knowe that he is rightuous, knowe also that he whiche foloweth rightuousnes, is borne of hym.

CHAPTER: 3

1 John 3:1 Beholde what loue the father hath shewed on vs, that we shoulde be called the sonnes of God. For this cause the worlde knoweth you not, because it knoweth not him.
1 John 3:2 Dearly beloued, now are we the sonnes of God, and yet it doeth not appeare, what we shalbe. But we knowe that when it shal appere, we shalbe like him. For we shall se him as he is.
1 John 3:3 And euery man that hath thys hope in him, pourgeth him selfe, euen as he is pure.
1 John 3:4 Whosoeuer committeth synne, committeth vnrightuousnes also, for synne is vnrightuousnes.
1 John 3:5 And ye knowe that he appered to take awaye oure synnes, & in him is no sinne.
1 John 3:6 As many as byde in him synne not, whosoeuer synneth, hath not sene him, neyther hath knowen him.
1 John 3:7 Babes let no man deceiue you. He that doth rightuousnes is rightuous, euen as he is righteous.
1 John 3:8 He that committeth sinne, is of the deuil, for the deuil sinneth sence the beginninge. For this purpose appered the sonne of God to lowse the workes of the deuil.
1 John 3:9 Whosoeuer is borne of God, sinneth not, for hys seed remaineth in him, and he can not sinne, because he is borne of God.
1 John 3:10 In this are the chyldren of God knowen, and the chyldren of the deuil. Whosoeuer doth not rightuousnes, is not of God, neyther he that loueth not his brother.
1 John 3:11 For this is the tidinges, that ye hearde from the beginninge, that ye should loue one anothere
1 John 3:12 not as Cayn, which was of the wicked & slewe his brother. And wherfore slewe he him? Because his own workes were euyll, and his brothers good.
1 John 3:13 Maruaile not my brethren though the worlde hate you.
1 John 3:14 We know that we are translated from death vnto lyfe, because we loue the brethren. He that loueth not his brother, abydeth in death.
1 John 3:15 Whosoeuer hateth his brother, is a man slear. And ye know that no man slear hath eternal life abidinge in him.
1 John 3:16 Hereby perceyue we loue, that he gaue hys lyfe for vs, & therfore oughte we also to geue our lyues for the brethren.
1 John 3:17 Whosoeuer hath this worldes good, and seeth his brother haue nede, and shutteth vp his compassion from him, howe dwelleth the loue of God in hym?
1 John 3:18 My babes, let vs not loue in worde neyther in tonge, but wyth the dede and in veryty:
1 John 3:19 For therby we know that we are of the verytye, and can before him quyete oure hertes.
1 John 3:20 But if our hertes condempne vs, God is greater then our hertes, and knoweth all thinges.
1 John 3:21 Beloued, yf our hertes condempne vs not, then haue we trust to Godward,
1 John 3:22 and whatsoeuer we are, we shall receiue of him, because we kepe his commaundementes, and do these thinges, which are pleasyng in hys sight.
1 John 3:23 And this is his commaundement, that we beleue on the name of his sonne Iesus Christ and loue one another, as he gaue commaundemente.
1 John 3:24 And he that kepeth hys commaundementes, dwelleth in hym and he in him, & therby we know that there abydeth in vs of the spyryte, which he gaue vs.

CHAPTER: 4

1 John 4:1 Ye beloued, beleue not euery spirite, but proue the spirites whether they be of God, or not, for manye false prophetes are gone out into the world.
1 John 4:2 Hereby shall ye knowe the spyryte of God. Euerye spyrite that confesseth that Iesus Christe is come in the fleshe, is of God.
1 John 4:3 And euerye spyryte that confesseth not that Iesu Christe is come in the fleshe, is not of God. And this is that spyrite of Antechrist, of whom ye haue hearde, how that he shoulde come, and euen nowe alreadye is he in the worlde.
1 John 4:4 Lytel chyldren, ye are of God, and haue ouercome them, for greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the world.
1 John 4:5 They are of the world, & therfore speake they of the world, and the world heareth them.
1 John 4:6 We are of God. He that knoweth God heareth vs, he that is not of God, heareth vs not. Here by knowe we the spyrite of verity, & the spirite of erroure.
1 John 4:7 Beloued, let vs loue one another, for loue commeth of god. And euery one that loueth is borne of God, & knoweth God.
1 John 4:8 He that loueth not, knoweth not God: for God is loue.
1 John 4:9 In this appered the loue of God to vsward, because that God sent his onely begotten sonne into the world, that we myght lyue thorow him:
1 John 4:10 Herin is loue, not that we loued God, but that he loued vs, & sente his sonne to make agrement for our synnes.
1 John 4:11 Beloued yf God so loued vs we oughte also to loue one another.
1 John 4:12 No man hath sene God at anyetime. Yf we loue one another, god dwelleth in vs, and his loue is perfect in vs.
1 John 4:13 Hereby knowe we that we dwel in him, and he in vs, because he hath geuen vs of his spyrite.
1 John 4:14 And we haue sene and do testifye, that the father sent the sonne, whyche is the sauyour of the world.
1 John 4:15 Whosoeuer confesseth, that Iesus is the sonne of God, in him dwelleth God and he in God.
1 John 4:16 And we haue knowen & beleued the loue that God hath to vs. God is loue, and he that dwelleth in loue, dwelleth in God, and god in hym.
1 John 4:17 Herin is the loue perfect in vs, that we shoulde haue trust in the daye of iudgement: For as he is, euen so are we in thys worlde.
1 John 4:18 There is no feare in loue, but perfecte loue casteth out all feare, for feare hath paynfulnes. He that feareth is not perfect in loue.
1 John 4:19 We loue him, for he loued vs fyrste.
1 John 4:20 Yf a man saye, I loue God, and yet hate his brother, he is a lyar. For howe can he that loueth not his brother whom he hath sene, loue god, whom he hath not sene?
1 John 4:21 And this commaundemente haue we of him that he which loueth God, should loue his brother also.

CHAPTER: 5

1 John 5:1 Whosoeuer beleueth that Iesus is Christ, is borne of God. And euerye one that loueth hym whiche begat, loueth hym also whyche was begotten of hym.
1 John 5:2 In thys we know, that we loue the children of God, when we loue God and kepe his commaundementes.
1 John 5:3 This is the loue of God, that we kepe his commaundementes, and his commaundementes are not greuous.
1 John 5:4 For all that is borne of God, ouercommeth the world. And this is the victorye, that ouercommeth the worlde, euen oure fayeth.
1 John 5:5 Who is it that ouercommeth the worlde, but he which beleueth, that Iesus is the sonne of God?
1 John 5:6 This Iesus Christ is he that came by water and bloude, not by water onelye, but by water and bloud. And it is the spirite that beareth witnes, because the spirite is trueth.
1 John 5:7 (For there are thre which beare recorde in heauen, the father, the worde, and the holye Ghoste. And these thre are one.)
1 John 5:8 For there are thre, whiche beare recorde in earth the spyrite and water, and bloude, and these thre are one.
1 John 5:9 If we receyue the wytnes of men, the wytnes of God is greater. For thys is the wytnes of God, whiche he testified of his sonne.
1 John 5:10 He that beleueth on the sonne of God, hath the wytnes in him selfe. He that beleued not God, hath made hym a lyar, because he beleued not the recorde, that God gaue of hys sonne.
1 John 5:11 And thys is that recorde, howe that God hath geuen vnto vs eternal lyfe, and this lyfe is in his sonne.
1 John 5:12 He that hath the sonne, hath lyfe: and he that hath not the sonne of God, hath not lyfe.
1 John 5:13 These thinges haue I wryten vnto you, that beleue on the name of the sonne of God, that ye maye know, how that ye haue eternal lyfe, and that ye may beleue on the name of the sonne of God.
1 John 5:14 And this is the truste that we haue in him, that yf we axe any thinge, accordinge to hys will he heareth vs.
1 John 5:15 And yf we knowe that he heareth vs whatsoeuer we axe, we knowe, that we shall haue the peticyons that we desyre of hym.
1 John 5:16 If any man se his brother synne a synne that is not vnto death, let him axe, and he shal geue him lyfe, for them that synne not vnto death. There is a synne vnto death, for which saye I not that a man shoulde praye.
1 John 5:17 All vnryghtuousnes is synne, and there is sinne not vnto death.
1 John 5:18 We knowe that whosoeuer is borne of God, synneth not, but he that is begotten of God kepeth him selfe, and that wycked toucheth him not.
1 John 5:19 We knowe that we are of God, and that the world is altogether set on wyckednes.
1 John 5:20 We know, that the sonne of God is come, & hath geuen vs a minde to know him which is true, & we are in him, that is true thorowe his sonne Iesus Christ. This same is verye God, and eternal lyfe.
1 John 5:21 Babes kepe your selues from Images. Amen.

BOOK: 2 John

CHAPTER: 1

2 John 1:1 The elder to the electe Lady, and her children, whiche I loue in the trueth: and not I onelye, but also all that knowe the trueth,
2 John 1:2 for the truethes sake, whyche dwelleth in vs, and shalbe in vs for euer.
2 John 1:3 Wyth you be grace, mercye, and peace from God the father, and from the Lord Iesus Christ the sonne of the father, in trueth and loue.
2 John 1:4 I reioysed greatly, that I founde of thy children walking in trueth, as we haue receiued a commaundemente of the father.
2 John 1:5 And nowe beseche I the Ladye, not as though I wrote a newe commaundemente vnto the, but that same which we had from the beginning, that we should loue one another.
2 John 1:6 And this is the loue, that we shoulde walke after his commaundementes. Thys commaundemente is (that as ye haue hearde from the beginninge) ye shoulde walke in it.
2 John 1:7 For many deceyuers are entred into the worlde, whiche confesse not that Iesus Christe is come in the fleshe. Thys is a deceyuer and an Antichriste.
2 John 1:8 Loke on youre selues, that we lose not that we haue wrought but that we maye haue a full rewarde.
2 John 1:9 Whosoeuer transgresseth and bydeth not in the doctryne of Christe, hath not God. He that endureth in the doctrine of Christe, hath both the father and the sonne.
2 John 1:10 Yf there come any vnto you, and bringe not this learninge, him receiue not to house, neither byd hym God spede.
2 John 1:11 For he that biddeth him God spede, is partaker of his euyll dedes.
2 John 1:12 I had manye thinges to wryte vnto you, neuerthelesse I woulde not wryte wyth paper & ynke: but I trust to come vnto you, & speake wyth you mouth to mouth, that oure ioye maye be full.
2 John 1:13 The sonnes of thy electe sister grete the. Amen.

BOOK: 3 John

CHAPTER: 1

3 John 1:1 The elder vnto the beloued Gaius, whom I loue in the trueth.
3 John 1:2 Beloued, I wyshe in all thynges, that thou prosperedst, and faredest well euen as thy soule prospereth.
3 John 1:3 I reioysed greatly, when the brethren came and testifyed of the trueth that is in the, how thou walkest in the trueth.
3 John 1:4 I haue no greater ioye, then for to heare howe that my sonnes walke in veritye.
3 John 1:5 Beloued, thou doest faythfullye whatsoeuer thou doest to the brethren, and to straungers,
3 John 1:6 whiche beare wytnes of thy loue before all the congregacion. Whiche brethren when thou bringest forwards on their iourney (as it besemeth God) thou shalt do wel,
3 John 1:7 because that for his names sake they wente forth, and toke nothinge of the Gentiles.
3 John 1:8 We therfore ought to receyue suche, that we also myght be healpers to the trueth.
3 John 1:9 I wrote vnto the congregacion, but Diotrephes, which loueth to haue the preeminence amonge them, receiueth vs not.
3 John 1:10 Wherfore yf I come, I wyl declare his dedes, whiche he doth, resting on vs wyth malicious wordes, neyther is there wyth contente. Not onlye he hym selfe receyueth not the brethren, but also he forbyddeth them that woulde, and thrusteth them out of the congregacyon.
3 John 1:11 Beloued, folowe not that whiche is euyll, but that which is good. He that doth well, is of God, but he that doth euyl, seeth not God.
3 John 1:12 Demetrius hath good report of al men, and of the trueth, yea: & we our selues also beare recorde, and ye knowe that oure recorde is true.
3 John 1:13 I haue many thynges to wryte, but I wyll not wyth ynke and penne wryte vnto the.
3 John 1:14 For I trust I shal shortly se the, and we shall speake mouth to mouth. Peace be wyth the. The louers salute the. Grete the louers by name.

BOOK: Jude

CHAPTER: 1

Jude 1:1 Iudas the seruaunte of Iesus Christ, the brother of Iames. To them whyche are called & sanctyfied in God the father, and preserued in Iesu Christe.
Jude 1:2 Mercye vnto you, and peace, and loue be multiplyed.
Jude 1:3 Beloued, when I gaue all dylygence to wryte vnto you of the commen saluacyon: it was nedefull for me to wryte vnto you, to exhorte you, that ye should contynuallye labour in the faythe whiche was ones geuen vnto the saynctes.
Jude 1:4 For there are certayne craftely crept in, of which it was wrytten afore tyme vnto suche iudgement. They are vngodlye & turne the grace of oure God vnto wantonnes, and denye God the onelye Lorde, and oure Lord Iesus Christe.
Jude 1:5 My mynd is therfore to put you in remembraunce, for as muche as ye ones knowe this, how that the Lord (after that he had deliuered the people out of Egypt) destroyed them which afterwarde beleued not.
Jude 1:6 The aungels also whiche kepte not theyr fyrste estate: but lefte theyr habytacyon, he hath reserued in euerlastyng chaynes vnder darkenes vnto the iudgement of the greate daye:
Jude 1:7 euen as Sodome and Gomor, and the cytyes about them (which in lyke maner defyled them selues with fornicacyon, and folowed straunge fleshe) are sette forth for an ensample, and suffer the vengeaunce of eternal fyre.
Jude 1:8 Likewyse these dremers defyle the flesh, despyse rulars and spake euil of them that are in authorytye.
Jude 1:9 Yet Michael the Archangel when he stroue agaynst the deuyl, and dysputed aboute the bodye of Moyses, durste not geue raylyug sentence, but sayed: the Lorde rebuke the.
Jude 1:10 But these speake euyl of those thynges they know not, and what thynges they knowe naturally as beastes which are wythout reason, in those thynges they corrupte them selues.
Jude 1:11 Wo be vnto them, for they haue folowed the waye of Cayn, and are vtterlye geuen to the errour of Balam for lukers sake, and peryshe in the treason of Core.
Jude 1:12 These are spottes which of youre kyndnes feast together, wythoute feare, fedyng themselues. Cloudes they are wythout water, caryed aboute of wyndes, and trees wythout frute at gatherynge tyme, twyse dead & plucked vp by rotes.
Jude 1:13 They are the ragynge waues of the sea, fomyng out theyr owne shame. They are wandryng starres to whome is reserued the myste of darcknes for euer.
Jude 1:14 Enoch the seuenth from Adam, prophesyed fore of suche, saying: Beholde, the Lorde shall come wt thousandes of saynctes,
Jude 1:15 to geue iudgemente agaynst al men, & to rebuke al that are vngodly among them, of all theyr vngodly dedes, whiche they haue vngodlye commytted and of all theyr cruell speakynges; whiche vngodly synners haue spoken agaynste him.
Jude 1:16 These are murmurers, complayners, walkyng after theyr owne iustes, whose mouthes speake proud thinges. They haue men in great reuerence because of vauntage.
Jude 1:17 But ye beloued, remembre the wordes whiche were spoken before of the Apostles of oure Lord Iesu Christe,
Jude 1:18 howe that they tolde you that there shoulde be begylers in the laste tyme whiche shoulde walke after theyr owne vngodlye lustes.
Jude 1:19 These are makers of sectes fleshlye, hauynge no spyryte.
Jude 1:20 But ye dearely beloued, edifye your selues in your moste holy faythe, praying in the holye ghost,
Jude 1:21 and kepe your selues in the loue of God, lokynge for the mercye of oure Lorde Iesus Christe, vnto eternall lyfe.
Jude 1:22 And haue compassyon of some, separatynge them:
Jude 1:23 and other saue wyth feare, pullynge them oute of the fyre, and hate the fylthy vesture of the flesh.
Jude 1:24 Vnto hym that is able to kepe you, that ye fal not, and to preserue you fautles before the presence of hys glorye wyth ioye,
Jude 1:25 that is to saye, to God oure sauyoure whiche onelye is wise be glorye maiestye, dominion and power, now and for euer. Amen.

BOOK: Revelation

CHAPTER: 1

Revelation 1:1 The Reuelacyon of Iesus Christe which God gaue vnto hym, for to shew vnto his seruauntes thinges whiche muste shortely come to passe. And he sent and shewed by hys angel vnto hys seruaunt Iohn
Revelation 1:2 whiche bare recorde of the word of God, and of the testimonye of Iesus Christe, and of all thynges that he sawe.
Revelation 1:3 Happye is he that readeth, and they that heare the wordes of the prophecye, and kepe those thynges which are wrytten therein. For the tyme is at hande.
Revelation 1:4 Iohn to the .vij. congregacyons in Asia. Grace be wyth you and peace, from hym which is, and whiche was, and whiche is to come, & from the .vij. spyrites which are present before hys throne,
Revelation 1:5 and from Iesus Christ, whiche is a faythfull wytnes, and fyrst begotten of the dead, and Lorde ouer the kynges of the earth. Vnto him, that loued vs and washed vs from synnes in his owne bloude,
Revelation 1:6 & made vs kinges and priestes vnto God his father: be glorye and dominyon for euer more. Amen.
Revelation 1:7 Behold he commeth wyth cloudes, and al eyes shal se him: and they also whiche persed hym. And all kynredes of the earth shal waile. Euen so. Amen:
Revelation 1:8 I am Alpha and Omega, the begynnynge and the endynge, sayeth the Lorde almyghty, whiche is, which was, and whiche is to come.
Revelation 1:9 I Iohn your brother and companyon in trybulacyon, and in the kyngdome and pacyence whiche is in Iesu Christe, was in the yle of Pathmos for the worde of God, and for the wytnessynge of Iesu Christ
Revelation 1:10 I was in the spirite on a sondaye, and hearde behynde me a great voyce, as it had bene of a trompe,
Revelation 1:11 saiynge. I am Alpha and Omega, the fyrst and the laste. That thou seest wryte in a boke, and sende it vnto the congregacyons which are in Asia, vnto Ephesus, and vnto Smyrna, & vnto Pergamos, and vnto Sardis, & vnto Phyladelphia, and vnto Laodicia.
Revelation 1:12 And I turned backe to se the voyce that spake to me. And when I was turned, I sawe .vij. golden candelstickes,
Revelation 1:13 and in the myddes of the candelstickes, one lyke vnto the sonne of man clothed wyth a lynnen garment doune to the grounde, and gyrde aboute the pappes with a golden gyrdle.
Revelation 1:14 Hys heade and hys heares were whyte, as whyte woul and as snowe: & hys eyes were as a flamme of fyre:
Revelation 1:15 & hys fete lyke vnto brasse, as thoughe they brent in a fornace: & his voice as the sound of many waters.
Revelation 1:16 And he had in hys ryghthande .vij. starres. And out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sweard. And hys face shone euen as the sonne in hys strength.
Revelation 1:17 And when I sawe hym, I fell at hys fete, euen as dead. And he layde hys ryght hande vpon me, saiynge vnto me: feare not, I am the fyrste, and the laste,
Revelation 1:18 and am alyue, and was dead. And beholde I am alyue for euer more and haue the kayes of hell, & of death.
Revelation 1:19 Write therfore the thynges, whiche thou hast sene, & the thynges whiche are, & the thynges which shalbe fulfylled here after:
Revelation 1:20 and the misery of the .vij. starres which thou sawest in my right hande, and the .vij. golden candelstickes. The .vij. starres are the messengers of the .vij. congregacions: And the .vij. candelstyckes which thou sawest are the .vij. congregacyons.

CHAPTER: 2

Revelation 2:1 Vnto the messenger of the congregacion of Ephesus writte, these thinges, sayeth he that holdeth the .vij. starres in his right hand, and walketh in the middes of the seuen golden candelstickes:
Revelation 2:2 I knowe thy workes, and thy laboure, & thy pacience, and howe thou cannest not forbeare them, whyche are euyl, and examinedst them which saye they are Apostles and are not, & hast found them lyars
Revelation 2:3 and dydest washe thy selfe. And hast pacience, and for my names sake hast labored and hast not faynted:
Revelation 2:4 Neuertheles I haue somwhat agaynste the, for thou hast left thy fyrst loue.
Revelation 2:5 Remember therfore from whence thou arte fallen, and repente, and do the fyrste workes. Or els I wil come vnto the shortlye, and wil remoue thy candelsticke out of his place, excepte thou repent.
Revelation 2:6 But this thou hast because thou hatest the dedes of the Nicolaytans, which dedes I also hate.
Revelation 2:7 Let him that hath eares heare, what the spirite sayeth vnto the congregacions. To him that ouercommeth, wyl I geue to eate of the tree of lyfe, whyche is in the middes of the Paradyse of God.
Revelation 2:8 And vnto the angell of the congregacion of Smyrna wryte: These thynges sayeth he that is fyrst, and the last, which was dead & is alyue.
Revelation 2:9 I knowe thy workes and tribulacion and pouertye, but thou art rych: And I know the blasphemy of them, whiche call them selues Iewes and are not, but are the congregacion of Sathan.
Revelation 2:10 Feare none of those thynges, which thou shalt suffre. Behold, the deuil shal caste of you into pryson, to tempte you, and ye shal haue tribulacion .x. dayes. Be faythful vnto the death, & I wyl geue the a croune of life.
Revelation 2:11 Let him that hath eares, heare what the spyryte sayth to the congregacyons. He that ouercommeth, shall not be hurte of the second death.
Revelation 2:12 And to the messenger of the congregacion in Pergamos wryte: Thys sayth he, whych hath the sharpe sweard, wyth two edges.
Revelation 2:13 I know thy workes, and where thou dwellest euen where Sathans seate is, and thou kepest my name, and hast not denyed my fayth. And in my dayes, Antypas was a faithful wytnes of myne whych was slaine among you, where Sathan dwelleth.
Revelation 2:14 But I haue a fewe thinges against the, that thou hast there, them that maintaine the doctryne of Balam, whiche taught in Balake, to put occasyon of synne before the chyldren of Israel, that they shoulde eate of meate dedicate vnto ydoles & committe fornicacion.
Revelation 2:15 Euen so hast thou them that mayntaine the doctryne of the Nicolaytans whiche thinge I hate.
Revelation 2:16 But be conuerted, or els I wyll come vnto the shortlye, and wil fyght agaynst them wyth the swearde of my mouth.
Revelation 2:17 Let him that hath eares, heare what the spyryte sayeth vnto the congregacyons. To hym that ouercommeth will I geue to eate Manna, that is hyd and wyll geue hym a whyte stone, and in the stone a new name wrytten, whiche no man knoweth sauynge he that receiueth it.
Revelation 2:18 And vnto the messenger of the congregacion of Thiatyra wryte. This sayth the sonne of God, which hath hys eyes lyke vnto flame of fyre, whose feete are lyke brasse:
Revelation 2:19 I knowe thy workes and thy loue, seruyce, and fayth, and thy pacience, and thy dedes, whyche are mo at the laste then at the fyrst.
Revelation 2:20 Notwithstandinge I haue a fewe thinges against the, that thou sufferest that woman Iesabel, which called her selfe a prophetisse, to teache and to deceyue my seruauntes to make them commit fornicacion, and to eate meates offered vp to Idols.
Revelation 2:21 And I gaue her space to repent of her fornicacion and she repented not.
Revelation 2:22 Beholde I wyl caste her into a bed, and them that commit fornicacyon wyth her into greate aduersytie, except they turne from their dedes.
Revelation 2:23 And I will kyl her chyldren wyth death. And all the congregacions shal know, that I am he, whiche searched the reynes and hertes. And I will geue vnto euery one of you according vnto youre workes.
Revelation 2:24 Vnto you I say, and vnto eyther of them of Thiatyra, as manye as haue not knowen this learning, and whiche haue not knowen the depnes of Sathan (as they say) I wyl put vpon you none other burthen,
Revelation 2:25 but that whiche ye haue allreadye. Hold faste, tyll I come,
Revelation 2:26 and whosoeuer ouercommeth and kepeth my workes vnto the ende, to hym wyl I geue power ouer nacions,
Revelation 2:27 and he shal rule them with a rodde of yron: and as the vessels of a potter, shall he breake them to sheuers. Euen as I receyued of my father,
Revelation 2:28 so wyll I geue him, the morninge starre.
Revelation 2:29 Let hym that hath eares, heare what the spyryte sayeth to the congregations.

CHAPTER: 3

Revelation 3:1 And write vnto the messenger of the congregation of Sardis, this sayth he that the spyryte of God & the .vij. starres. I know thy workes, thou hast a name, thou lyuest and thou arte deade.
Revelation 3:2 Be awake & strengthe the thinges whiche remayne, that are ready to dye. For I haue not founde thy workes perfecte before God.
Revelation 3:3 Remember therfore howe thou hast receiued and hearde, and hold faste & repent. Yf thou shalt not watche, I wyl come on the as a thiefe, and thou shalt not knowe, what hour I wil come vpon the.
Revelation 3:4 Thou hast a fewe names in Sardys, whyche haue not defyled their garmentes: and they shal walke wyth me in whyte, for they are worthy.
Revelation 3:5 He that ouercommeth, shalbe clothed in whyte araye, and I wyll not put out hys name out of the boke of lyfe, and I wyll confesse his name before my father, and before his angels.
Revelation 3:6 Let hym that hath eares, heare what the spyryte sayeth vnto the congregacions.
Revelation 3:7 And wryte vnto the tydinges bringer of the congregacyon of Philadelphia, this sayeth he that is holy and true, which hath the keye of Dauid, which openeth and no man shutteth, and shutteth & no man openeth.
Revelation 3:8 I know thy workes. Beholde I haue set before the an open doore, and no man can shut it, for thou hast a lytel strength, and hast kept my saiynges: and hast not denyed my name,
Revelation 3:9 Behold I make them of the congregacion of Sathan, which cal them selues Iewes and are not, but do lye: Beholde: I wyl make them that they shal come and worshyppe before thy fete, and shal knowe that I loue the.
Revelation 3:10 Because thou hast kepte the wordes of my pacience, therfore I wyll kepe from the houre of temptacyon, which wyll come vpon al the worlde, to tempte them that dwell vpon the earth.
Revelation 3:11 Beholde: I come shortlye. Holde that, which thou hast, that no man take awaye thy croune.
Revelation 3:12 Hym that ouercommeth, wyl I make a pyller in the temple of my God, and he shal go no more out. And I wyl wryte vpon him, the name of my God, and the name of the cytye of my God, newe Ierusalem, which commeth doune out of heauen from my God, & I wyl wryte vpon him my newe name.
Revelation 3:13 Let him that hath eares, heare what the spirite sayeth vnto the congregacions.
Revelation 3:14 And vnto the messenger of the congregacion, which is in Laodicia wryte: Thys sayth (Amen) the faythful and true wytnes, the beginninge of the creatures of God.
Revelation 3:15 I knowe thy workes, that thou art neyther colde nor hote. I would thou were colde or hote.
Revelation 3:16 So then because thou arte betwene both, and neyther colde nor hote. I wyll, spewe the out of my mouth:
Revelation 3:17 because thou art ryche and increased wyth goodes, and hast nede of nothinge, and knowest not howe thou art wretched and miserable, poore, blind and naked.
Revelation 3:18 I counsel the to bye of me golde tryed in the fyre, that thou mayest be ryche, and whyte raymente, that thou mayest be clothed, that thy fylthye nakednes do not appere, & annointe thine eyes wyth eye salue, that thou maiest se.
Revelation 3:19 As manye as I loue, I rebuke and chastes. Be feruent therfore and repente.
Revelation 3:20 Behold I stande at the dore and knocke. Yf anye man heare my voice and open the dore. I wil come in vnto him, and will suppe with him, and he wyth me.
Revelation 3:21 To hym that ouercommeth, wyl I graunt to sit with me in my seate euen as I ouercame and haue sitten wyth my father, in his seate.
Revelation 3:22 Let him that hath eares, heare what the spyrite sayth vnto the congregacions.

CHAPTER: 4

Revelation 4:1 After thys I loked, and beholde a dore was open in heauen, and the fyrst voyce which I hearde, was as it were of a trompete, talkynge wyth me which sayd: come vp hether, and I wyll shewe the thynges, whyche must be fulfylled herafter.
Revelation 4:2 And immediatly I was in the spyryte: and behold a seate was put in heauen, and one sate on the seate.
Revelation 4:3 And he that sate was to loke vpon, lyke vnto a Iaspar stone and a Sardin stone: And there was a rayne bowe aboute the seate, in syght lyke to an emeralde.
Revelation 4:4 And about the seate were .xxiiij. seates. And vpon the seates .xxiiij. elders syttynge clothed in whyte rayment, & had on their heades crounes of golde.
Revelation 4:5 And out of the seate proceded lyghteninges, and thonderinges, and voyces, and there were seuen lampes of fyre, burninge before the seate, whiche are the seuen spirites of God.
Revelation 4:6 And before the seate there was a sea of glasse lyke vnto a Crystal, and in the middes of the seate, and roundabout the seat were .iiij. beastes full of eyes before and behinde,
Revelation 4:7 and the fyrste beast was lyke a Lyon, the second beast lyke a calfe, and the thyrde beast had a face as a man, and the fourth beaste was lyke a fliyng egle.
Revelation 4:8 And the .iiij. beastes had eche one of them .vi. wynges about him, and they were full of eies wythin. And they had no reste, daye neither nyghte sayinge. Holye, holye, holy, Lord God almyghtye, whyche was and is, and is to come.
Revelation 4:9 And when those beastes gaue glorye and honour, and thankes to him that sate on the seate, whiche lyueth for euer and euer,
Revelation 4:10 the .xxiiij. elders fel doune before him that sate on the throne, and worshypped him that lyueth for euer, and cast their crounes before the throne, saiynge:
Revelation 4:11 thou art worthy Lorde to receiue glory and honour and power, for thou hast created al thinges, and for thy wylles sake they are and were created.

CHAPTER: 5

Revelation 5:1 And I saw in the ryghte hand of him that sate in the throne, a boke wrytten, wythin and on the backsyde, sealed with .vij. seales.
Revelation 5:2 And I sawe a stronge angel, which cryed wyth a loude voyce: Who is worthy to open the boke, and to lose the seales therof?
Revelation 5:3 And no man in heauen nor in earth, neyther vnder the earth, was able to open the boke, neyther to loke theron.
Revelation 5:4 And I wepte muche, because no man was founde worthy to open and to reade the boke, neyther to loke theron.
Revelation 5:5 And one of the elders sayd vnto me: wepe not: beholde a Lyon beinge of the tribe of Iuda, the rote of Dauid, hath obtayned to open the boke, and to lowse the .vij. seales therof.
Revelation 5:6 And I behelde, and lo, in the middes of the seate, and of the .iiij. beastes, and in the myddes of the elders, stode a lambe as though he had bene kylled, whyche had .vij. hornes and .vij. eyes, which are the spirites of God, sente into all the worlde.
Revelation 5:7 And he came and toke the boke out of the ryght hand of him that sate vpon the seate.
Revelation 5:8 And when he had taken the boke, the .iiij. beastes, and .xxiiij. elders fel doune before the lambe, hauinge harpes and golden vialles full of odoures, whyche are the prayers of saynctes,
Revelation 5:9 and they songe a new songe saiyng: thou art worthy to take the boke, and to open the seales therof: for thou wast kylled, & hast redemed vs by thy bloud out of al kynredes, and tonges, and people, and nacions
Revelation 5:10 and hast made vs to our God, kynges, and priestes, & we shal reigne on the earth.
Revelation 5:11 And I behelde, and I heard the voyce of many angels about the throne, and about the beastes, and the elders, and I heard thousande thousandes,
Revelation 5:12 sayinge wyth a loud voyce: Worthy is the lamb that was kylled to receiue power, and riches, and wysdome, and strength, and honoure, & glorye and blessing.
Revelation 5:13 And al creatures whiche are in heauen, and on the earth, and vnder the earth, and in the sea, and al that are in them hearde I saiynge: blessing, honour, glory, and power be vnto him that sytteth vpon the seate, and to the Lambe for euermore.
Revelation 5:14 And the foure beastes sayd Amen. And the .xxiiij. elders fel vpon theyr faces, and worshypped hym that liueth for euermore.

CHAPTER: 6

Revelation 6:1 And I saw when the Lambe opened one of the seales, and I hearde one of the .iiij. beastes saye, as it were the noyse of thonder, come and se.
Revelation 6:2 And I sawe, and beholde there was a whyte horsse, and he that sate on him had a bow, & a croune was geuen vnto him, and he went forth conquerynge and for to ouercome.
Revelation 6:3 And when he opened the seconde seale, I hearde the seconde beaste saye, come and se.
Revelation 6:4 And there wente out another horsse that was red, and power was geuen to him that sate theron, to take peace from the earth, and that they should kyl one another. And there was geuen vnto hym a greate swerde.
Revelation 6:5 And when he opened the thyrde seale, I hearde the thyrde beast say: come and se. And I behelde, and lo a blacke horsse: and he that sate on him, had a payre of balances in hys hand.
Revelation 6:6 And I heard a voyce in the myddes of the .iiij. beastes say: a measure of wheat for a penye, and .iij. measures of barly for a peny, and oyle and wyne se thou hurte not.
Revelation 6:7 And when he opened the fourth seale, I heard the voyce of the fourth beaste saye: come and se.
Revelation 6:8 And I loked, and behold a pale horsse, and hys name that sate on him was death, and hell folowed after him, and power was geuen vnto him ouer the fourth parte of the earth, to kyll with swerd and wyth honger, and wyth death, that cometh of vermen of the earth.
Revelation 6:9 And when he opened the fyft seale, I saw vnder the aulter, the soules of them that were kylled for the word of God, & for the testymonye, whych they had,
Revelation 6:10 and they cryed wyth a loude voyce sayinge: Howe longe tariest thou Lord holy and true, to iudge and to auenge oure bloud on them that dwell on the earth?
Revelation 6:11 And longe whyte garmentes were geuen vnto euery of them. And it was sayde vnto them that they should reste for a litle season vntyll the number of their felowes and brethren, & of them that should be kylled as they were, were fulfylled.
Revelation 6:12 And I behelde when he opened the syxte seale, and lo there was a greate earth quake, and the sunne was as blacke as sacke cloth, made of heare. And the mone wexed euen as bloude,
Revelation 6:13 and the starres of heauen fell vnto the earth, euen as a fygge tree casteth from her her fygges, when she is shaken of a myghty wynde.
Revelation 6:14 And heauen vanished awaye, as a scrole, when it is rolled together. And al mountaines and Iles, were moued out of their places.
Revelation 6:15 And the kynges of the earth, & the greate men and the ryche men, and the chiefe captaines, and the myghty men, and euerye bonde man, and euery free man, hyd them selues in dennes, and in rockes:
Revelation 6:16 fal on vs, and hyde vs from the presence of hym that sitteth on the seate, and from the wrath of the lambe,
Revelation 6:17 for the great day of his wrath is come: And who can endure it?

CHAPTER: 7

Revelation 7:1 And after that I sawe .iiij. angeles stand on the .iiij. corners of the earth, holding the .iiij. wyndes of the earth, that the windes should not blow on the earth, neyther on the sea, neyther on any tree.
Revelation 7:2 And I sawe another angell ascende from the rysinge of the sunne, whiche had the seale of the lyuing God, and he cried wyth a loud voyce to the .iiij. angelles (to whom power was geuen to hurte the earth and the sea)
Revelation 7:3 sayinge: Hurte not the earth, neyther the sea, neither the trees, tyl we haue sealed the seruauntes of oure God in their forheades.
Revelation 7:4 And I heard the numbre of them whyche were sealed, and there were sealed an .C. and .xliiij.M. of all tribes of the chyldren of Israell.
Revelation 7:5 Of the trybe of Iuda were sealed .xij.M. Of the trybe of Ruben were sealed .xij.M. of the trybe of Gad were sealed .xij.M.
Revelation 7:6 Of the trybe of Asser were sealed .xij. thousand. Of the trybe of Neptalim were sealed twelue thousande. Of the Trybe of Manasses were sealed twelue thousand.
Revelation 7:7 Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelue thousand. Of the tribe of Leuy were sealed .xij. thousande. Of the tribe of Isacar were sealed .xij.M.
Revelation 7:8 Of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelue thousand. Of the tribe of Ioseph were sealed twelue thousand. Of the tribe of Beniamin were sealed twelue thousande.
Revelation 7:9 After this I behelde, and lo a greate multitude (which no man coulde numbre) of al nacions and people, and tonges, stode before the seate, and before the lambe, clothed wyth longe whyte garmentes, and palmes in their handes,
Revelation 7:10 and cried with a loude voyce, saying: saluacion be ascribed to him that sitteth vpon the seate of our God, and vnto the lamb.
Revelation 7:11 And all the Angelles stode in the compasse of the seate, and of the elders, and of the .iiij. beastes, and fell before the seate on theyr faces, & worshipped God
Revelation 7:12 saying, Amen: Blessing and glory, wisdome, and thankes, and honoure, and power & mighte, be vnto our God for euermore: Amen.
Revelation 7:13 And one of the elders aunswered, saying vnto me: what are these, which are arayed in longe whyte garmentes, and whence came they?
Revelation 7:14 And I sayd vnto hym: Lorde thou wotest. And he said vnto me: these are they which came out of great tribulacion, and made their garmentes large and made them white, in the bloude of the lambe,
Revelation 7:15 therfore are they in the presence of the seate of God and serue hym daye and nyghte in his temple, and he that sitteth in the seate wyl dwell amonge them.
Revelation 7:16 They shal honger no more neyther thyrste, neyther shal the sunne lyghte on them, neyther anye heate:
Revelation 7:17 For the lambe, which is in the middes of the seate shall feede them, and shall leade them vnto fountaynes of lyuinge water, and God shall wype awaye al teares from theyr eyes.

CHAPTER: 8

Revelation 8:1 And when he had opened the seuenth seale, there was silence in heauen about the space of halfe an houre.
Revelation 8:2 And I saw angelles standing before God, and to them were geuen .vij. trompettes.
Revelation 8:3 And another angel came and stode before the aultare hauynge a golden senser, and muche of odoures was geuen vnto hym, that he shoulde offer of the prayers of al sainctes vpon the golden aultare, which was before the seate.
Revelation 8:4 And the smoke of the odours, whiche came of the prayers of al sainctes ascended vp before God out of the angelles hand.
Revelation 8:5 And the angell toke the senser, and fylled it wyth fyre of the aultare, and caste it into the earth, and voyces were made, and thonderinges and lighteninges, and earth quakes.
Revelation 8:6 And the .vij. angelles, whiche had the .vij. trompettes prepared them selues to blowe.
Revelation 8:7 The fyrste angel blewe, and these was made hayle and fyre, whiche were myngled wyth bloude, and they were cast into the earth, and the thyrde parte of the trees was burnte, and al grene grasse was brente.
Revelation 8:8 And the seconde angel blewe: and as it were a greate mountaine burning wyth fyre was caste into the sea, and the thyrde parte of the sea turned to bloud,
Revelation 8:9 and the thirde parte of the creatures, whiche had lyfe, dyed, and the thyrd parte of shyppes were destroyed.
Revelation 8:10 And the thyrd angel blewe, and there fell a great starre from heauen burninge, as it were a lampe, and it fell into the thyrde parte of the riuers, and into fountaines of waters,
Revelation 8:11 & the name of the starre is called wormwod. And the thyrde parte was turned to wormwode. And manye men dyed of the waters, because they were made bitter.
Revelation 8:12 And the fourth angel blew, and the thyrde parte of the sunne was smytten and the thyrd part of the mone, and the thirde parte of the starres, so that the thirde part of them was darckened. And the daye was smitten, that the thirde parte of it shoulde not shyne, and lykewise the nyghte.
Revelation 8:13 And I behelde and hearde an angell fliynge thorowe the middes of heauen, sayinge wyth a loude voyce: Wo, wo, to the inhabiters of the earth, because of the voyces to come of the trompe of the .iij. angels, whyche were yet to blowe.

CHAPTER: 9

Revelation 9:1 And the fyfte Angel blewe, and I sawe a starre fall from heauen vnto the earth, And to hym was geuen the keye of the bottomlesse pyt.
Revelation 9:2 And he opened the bottomlesse pyt, and there arose the smoke of a great fornace. And the sunne, and the ayer were darkened by the reason of the smoke of the pytt.
Revelation 9:3 And there came out of the smoke locustes vpon the earth, and vnto them was geuen power as the Scorpions of the earth haue power.
Revelation 9:4 And it was commaunded them, that they should not hurt the grasse of the earth, neyther any grene thinge, neither any tree, but onely those men which haue not the seale in their foreheades,
Revelation 9:5 and to them was commaunded that they should not kyll them, but that they should be vexed fyue monethes, and theyr payne was as the payne that commeth of a scorpion, when he hath stonge a man.
Revelation 9:6 And in those dayes shal men seke death, and shal not finde it, and shall desyre to dye, and death shal flye from them.
Revelation 9:7 And the similitude of the locustes was lyke vnto horsses prepared vnto battayl, and on theyr heades were as it were crounes, lyke vnto gold and their faces were as it had bene the faces of men.
Revelation 9:8 And they had heere as the heere of women. And theyr teeth were as the teeth of Lyons.
Revelation 9:9 And they had habbergions, as it were habbergyons of Iron. And the sounde of theyr wynges, was as the sounde of charettes, when many horsses runne together to battayle.
Revelation 9:10 And they had tayles lyke vnto Scorpyons, and there were stynges in theyr tayles. And their power was to hurte men fyue monethes.
Revelation 9:11 And they had a kynge ouer them, whych is the angel of the bottomlesse pyt, whose name in the Hebrue tonge, is Abodon, but in the Greke tonge, Appollion.
Revelation 9:12 One wo is paste, and behold two woes come after thys.
Revelation 9:13 And the syxte angel blewe, and I hearde a voyce from the .iiij. corners of the golden aultare, which is before God,
Revelation 9:14 sayinge to the syxte angel, which had the trompe, louse the .iiij. angelles, whyche are bounde in the great riuer Euphrates.
Revelation 9:15 And the .iiij. angels were loused, whyche were prepared for an houre, for a daye, for a moneth, and for an yere, for to slea the thyrd parte of men.
Revelation 9:16 And the number of horsmen of warre, were twenty tymes ten thousand. And I heard the numbre of them.
Revelation 9:17 And thus I sawe the horsses in a vision, and them that sate on them hauynge fyry habbergions of a Iacinct colour, and brimstone, and the heades of the horsses were as the heades of Lyons. And out of their mouthes wente forth fyre and smoke, and brymstone.
Revelation 9:18 And of these .iij. was the thirde parte of men kylled, that is to say, of fyre, smoke, and brymstone, whych proceded out of the mouthes of them.
Revelation 9:19 For theyr power was in their mouthes and in theyr tayles, for theyr tayles were lyke vnto serpentes, and had heades, and wyth them they dyd hurt.
Revelation 9:20 And the remnaunt of the men which were not kylled by these plages, repented not of the dedes of their handes, that they should not worship deuyls, and Images of gold, and syluer, and brasse, and stone, and of wood, whych neyther can se, neyther heare, neyther go.
Revelation 9:21 Also they repented not of theyr murther, and of theyr sorcery, neyther of their fornicacion, neither of their thefte.

CHAPTER: 10

Revelation 10:1 And I sawe an other myghtye angel come doune from heauen, clothed wyth a cloude, and the rayne bowe vpon hys heade. And hys face as it were the sunne, and hys fete as it were pyllars of fyr
Revelation 10:2 and he had in hys hand a lyttel boke open, & he put hys ryghte fote vpon the sea, and hys lyfte fote on the earth
Revelation 10:3 And cryed wyth a loude voyce, as when a Lyon roreth. And when he had cried, seuen thonders spake their voyces.
Revelation 10:4 And when the .vij. thonders had spoken their voyces, I was aboute to wryte. And I harde a voice from heauen saying vnto me, seale vp those thynges, which the .vij. thonders spake, and wryte them not.
Revelation 10:5 And the angell whyche I sawe stand vpon the sea, and vpon the earth, lyfte vp hys hand to heauen,
Revelation 10:6 and swore by hym that lyueth for euer more, whiche created heauen, and the thynges that therin are, and the sea, and the thynges whyche therin are: that there shoulde be no longer tyme,
Revelation 10:7 but in the dayes of the voyce of the seuenth aungel, when he shal begyn to blow, euen the mistery of God shalbe fynished as he preached by his seruauntes the prophetes.
Revelation 10:8 And the voyce, whych I hard from heauen, spake vnto me agayne, and sayde, go and take the lytle boke, which is open in the hande of the angell, whyche standeth vpon the sea, and vpon the earth.
Revelation 10:9 And I went vnto the angell, and sayd to hym, geue me the lytel boke, and he sayde vnto me take it, and eate it vp, and it shall make thy belly bytter, but it shal be in thy mouth as swete as hony,
Revelation 10:10 and I toke the lytle boke out of hys hand, and eate it vp, and it was in my mouth as swete as honye, and assone as I had eaten it, my bealy was bitter.
Revelation 10:11 And he sayd vnto me: thou muste prophesye againe amonge the people, and nacyons, and tonges, and to many kynges.

CHAPTER: 11

Revelation 11:1 And then was geuen me a rede lyke vnto a rodde, and it was sayde vnto me: Ryse and meate the temple of God, and the aultare, and them that worshyppe therin,
Revelation 11:2 and the quyre whiche is wythin the temple caste out and meate it not: for it is geuen vnto the Gentyles and the holy cytye shal they treade vnder fote .xlij. monethes.
Revelation 11:3 And I will geue power vnto my .ij. witnesses, & they shal prophesy .M.ij.C. & .lx. daies, cloteth in sacke cloth.
Revelation 11:4 These are two olyue trees, and two candelstickes, standyng before the God of the earth.
Revelation 11:5 And yf any man wyl hurte them, fire shal proceade out of theyr mouthes, and consume theyr enemyes. And yf anye man wyll hurte them this wyse muste he be killed.
Revelation 11:6 These haue power to shut heauen, that it rayne not in the daies of they: Prophesiyng, and haue power ouer waters to turne them to bloud, and to smyte the earth wyth al maner plages, as often as they will.
Revelation 11:7 And when they haue fynished theyr testymonye, the beast that came out of the bottomlesse pyt, shal make warre agaynst them, and shal ouercome them, and kyl them.
Revelation 11:8 And theyr bodies shal lye in the stretes of the great city, whiche spyrytually is called Sodome and Egypte, where oure Lorde was crucyfyed.
Revelation 11:9 And they of the people and kynredes, and tonges, and they of the nacyons, shal se theyr bodyes thre dayes and an halfe, and shall not suffer theyr bodies to be put in graues.
Revelation 11:10 And they that dwell vpon the earth, shall reioyse ouer them and be glad, and shal sende gyftes one to another for these two prophetes vexed them that dwelt on the earth.
Revelation 11:11 And after .iij. dayes and an halfe the spyryte of lyfe from God, entred into them. And they stode vp vpon theyr fete, and great feare came vpon them, whiche sawe them.
Revelation 11:12 And they harde a greate voyce from heauen, saying vnto them. Come vp hether. And they ascende vp into heauen in a cloud and their enemies sawe them.
Revelation 11:13 And the same houre was there a greate earth quake, and the tenth parte of the cytye fell, and in the earth quake were slayne names of men seuen thousande, and the remnaunte were feared, and gaue glorye to GOD of heauen.
Revelation 11:14 The seconde wo is past, and beholde the thyrde wo wyll come anone.
Revelation 11:15 And the seuenth angell blewe, and there were made greate voyces in heauen, sayinge: the kyngdomes of thys worlde are oure Lordes and hys Christes, & he shall raygne for euer more.
Revelation 11:16 And the .xxiiij. elders, whyche sit before God on their seates, fell vpon theyr faces, and worshipped God,
Revelation 11:17 sayinge: we geue the thankes Lord GOD almyghty, whyche arte and wast, and arte to come, for thou hast receyued thy greate myght and hast reigned.
Revelation 11:18 And the nacyons were angrye, and thy wrath is come, and the tyme of the dead that they shoulde be iudged and that thou shouldeste geue rewarde vnto thy seruauntes the Prophetes and saynctes, and to them that feare thy name small and greate, and shouldeste destroye them, whyche destroye the earth.
Revelation 11:19 And the temple of God was opened in heauen, and there was sene in hys temple the arcke of hys testamente, and there folowed lyghtenynges, and voyces, and thonderynge and eartquake and muche hayle

CHAPTER: 12

Revelation 12:1 And there appered a greate wonder in heauen: A woman clothed with the sunne, and the mone vnder her fete, and vpon her heade a croune of .xij. starres.
Revelation 12:2 And she was wyth chylde and cryed trauailling in byrth, and payned redy to be deliuered.
Revelation 12:3 And there appered another wonder in heauen, for behold a great Dragon, hauinge .vij. heades, and ten hornes & crounes vpon his heades,
Revelation 12:4 and hys tayle drewe the thyrde parte of the starres, and cast them to the earth. And the dragon stode before the woman, whyche was redye to be delyuered, for to deuoure her chyld assone as it were borne.
Revelation 12:5 And she brought furth a man chyld, which should rule al nacyons wyth a rod of Iron. And her sonne was taken vp vnto God, and to hys seate.
Revelation 12:6 And the woman fled into wyldernes, where she had a place prepared of God, that they should feede her there a thousand .ij. hundred and .lx. dayes.
Revelation 12:7 And there was great battayle in heauen, Michael and his angels fought with the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angells,
Revelation 12:8 and preuayled not, neyther was theyr place found any more in heauen.
Revelation 12:9 And the great dragon, that olde serpente called the deuyll and Sathanas was caste out. Whiche deceyueth al the worlde. And he was cast into the earth, and his angelles were cast out also.
Revelation 12:10 And I hearde a loude voyce sayinge: in heauen is nowe made saluacyon, and strength and the kyngdome of our God, and the power of hys Christe. For he is caste doune, whyche accused them before God daye and nyghte.
Revelation 12:11 And they ouercame hym by the bloude of the lambe, and by the worde of theyr testimony, and they loued not theyr liues vnto the death.
Revelation 12:12 Therfore reioyse heauens, and ye that dwell in them, Wo to the inhabiters of the earth, & of the sea, for the deuyll is come doune vnto you, which hath great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a shorte tyme.
Revelation 12:13 And when the dragon sawe, that he was caste vnto the earth, he persecuted the woman, which broughte forth the man chyld.
Revelation 12:14 And to the woman were geuen two winges of a greate egle, that she might flye into the wildernes, into her place, where she is noryshed for a tyme, tymes, & halfe a time from the presence of the serpente.
Revelation 12:15 And the dragon cast out of his mouth water after the woman as it had bene a riuer, because she should haue be caught of the floud.
Revelation 12:16 And the earth holpe the woman, & the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed vp the ryuer which the dragon cast out of his mouth.
Revelation 12:17 And the dragon was wroth wyth the woman, and went and made warre wyth the remnaunt of her seede, whiche kepe the commaundementes of God, and haue the testimonye of Iesus Christe. And I stode on the sea sande.

CHAPTER: 13

Revelation 13:1 And I sawe a beaste ryse out of the sea, hauyng .vij. heades, and .x. hornes, and vpon his hornes ten crounes, and vpon his heade the name of blasphemye.
Revelation 13:2 And the beaste whych I sawe, was lyke a cat of the mountayne, and hys fete were as the fete of a beare, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lyon. And the dragon gaue him hys power and hys seale, and great authorytye,
Revelation 13:3 & I sawe one of his heades as it were wounded to death and his deadlye wounde was healed. And al the worlde wondred at the beaste,
Revelation 13:4 & they worshipped the dragon, which gaue power vnto the beaste, and they worshipped the beast saiynge: who is lyke vnto the beast? who is able to warre with him?
Revelation 13:5 And there was mouth geuen vnto hym, that spake greate thinges and blasphemies, and power was geuen vnto hym, to do .xlij. monethes.
Revelation 13:6 And he opened hys mouth vnto blasphemy agaynste God, to blaspheme hys name, and his tabernacle and them that dwell in heauen.
Revelation 13:7 And it was geuen vnto hym to make warre wyth the Saynctes, and to ouercome them. And power was geuen hym ouer al kynredes, tonges and nacions,
Revelation 13:8 and al that dwel vpon the earth worshipte him, whose names are not written in the boke of lyfe of the lambe, which was killed from the beginning of the worlde.
Revelation 13:9 Yf any man haue an eare, let hym heare.
Revelation 13:10 He that leadeth into captiuitie shal go into captiuitie, he that kylleth wt a sweard, must be kylled wyth a sweard. Here is the pacience and the fayth of the sainctes.
Revelation 13:11 And I behelde another beast commyng vp out of the earth, and he had two hornes lyke a lambe, and he spake as dyd the dragon.
Revelation 13:12 And he, dyd al that the fyrste beast could do in his presence, and he caused the earth, and them which dwel therin, to worship the fyrst beast, whose deadly wounde was healed.
Revelation 13:13 And he dyd greate wonders, so that he made fyre come doune from heauen in the syght of men.
Revelation 13:14 And deceiued them that dwelt on the earth by the meanes of those sygnes, which he had power to do in the syght of the beaste, saying to them that dwelt on the earth, that they should make an ymage vnto the beaste, whyche had the wounde of a swearde, and dyd lyue.
Revelation 13:15 And he had power to geue a spyryte vnto the ymage of the beaste, and that the ymage of the beast should speake, and shoulde cause that as manye as would not worshyppe the ymage of the beaste, shoulde be kylled.
Revelation 13:16 And he made al both smale and greate, ryche and poore, free and bonde, to receyue a marke in theyr ryght handes, or in theyr forheades.
Revelation 13:17 And that no man myghte by or sell, saue he that had the marke, or the name of the beaste, other the numbre of his name.
Revelation 13:18 Here is wysdom. Let him that hath wyt counte the numbre of the beaste. For it is the numbre of a man, and hys numbre is syxe hundred thre score and syxe.

CHAPTER: 14

Revelation 14:1 And I loked, and lo a lamb stode on the mounte Syon, and wyth him an hundred & .xliiij. thousand hauyng hys fathers name wrytten in theyr forheades.
Revelation 14:2 And I hearde a voice from heauen, as the sounde of manye waters, and as the voice of a greate thunder. And I hearde the voyce of harpers harping with their harpes.
Revelation 14:3 And they songe as it were a newe songe, before the seate, & before the foure beastes, & the elders, & no man coulde learne the songe, but the hundred and .xliiij.M. which were redemed from the earth.
Revelation 14:4 These are they, whiche were not defyled wt women for they are virgins. These folowe the lamb whether so euer goeth. These were redemed from men being the fyrst frutes vnto God & to the lamb,
Revelation 14:5 & in their mouthes was founde no gyle. For they are without spot before the trone of God.
Revelation 14:6 And I sawe an angel flye in the middes of heauen hauinge an euerlastinge Gospell to preache vnto them that sytte and dwell on the earth, & to al nacions, kinredes, & tonges, and people,
Revelation 14:7 sayinge with a loude voice: Feare God, & geue honoure to him, for the houre of his iudgemente is come, and worshyp hym, that made heauen and earth & the sea, & fountaynes of water.
Revelation 14:8 And there folowed another angel, sayinge: Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, for she made al nacions drinke of the wine of her fornicacion.
Revelation 14:9 And the thyrd angel folowed them saying wt a loude voice: Yf any man worship the beast & his ymage, and receiue his marke in his forhead, or in his hand,
Revelation 14:10 the same shall drynke of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured in the cup of this wrath. And he shalbe punished in fyre & brimstone before the holy angels, and before the lambe.
Revelation 14:11 And the smoke of their tormente ascendeth vp euermore. And they haue no rest daye nor night, which worship the beaste & his ymage, and whosoeuer receiueth the prynt of hys name.
Revelation 14:12 Here is the pacience of saynctes. Here are they that kepe the commaundementes & the fayth of Iesu.
Revelation 14:13 And I heard a voice from heauen, sayinge vnto me: wryte. Blessed are the dead, whyche here after dye in the Lorde euen so sayth the spyryte, that they may reste from their laboures, but their workes shal folowe them.
Revelation 14:14 And I loked and beholde a whyte cloude, & vpon the cloude one setting like vnto the sonne of man, hauinge on his head a golden croune, & in his hand a sharpe sykle.
Revelation 14:15 And another angel came out of the temple, criynge wyth a loude voyce to him that sate on the cloud. Thruste in thy sykle and reape for the time is come, to reape, for the corne of the earth is rype.
Revelation 14:16 And he that sate on the cloude, thruste in hys sykle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
Revelation 14:17 And another angel came out of the temple which is in heauen hauing also a sharpe sikle.
Revelation 14:18 And another angel came out from the aulter, whiche had power of fyre, and cryed wyth a loude crye to him that had the sharpe sykle, & sayed: thruste in thy sharpe sykle, and gather the clusters of the earth for her grapes are rip.
Revelation 14:19 And the angel thruste in his sykle on the earth, and cut doune the grapes of the vineyarde of the earth, and caste them into the great wynfat of the wrath of God,
Revelation 14:20 and the wynfat was troden wythout the cyty, and bloud came out of the fat, euen vnto the horsse brydelles by the space of a thousand and .vi. hundred furlonges.

CHAPTER: 15

Revelation 15:1 And I saw another signe in heauen greate and maruellous .vij. angels, hauynge the seuen laste plages, for in them is fullfylled the wrath of GOD.
Revelation 15:2 And I sawe as it were a glassy sea, mingled wt fyre, & them that had gotten victory of the beast and of his ymage, and of his marke, & of the numbre of his name, stande on the glassye sea, hauinge the harpes of God,
Revelation 15:3 and they songe the songe of Moises the seruaunt of God, & they songe of the lamb, sayinge: Great & maruelous are thy workes Lorde God almighty, iuste & true are thy wayes kynge of sainctes.
Revelation 15:4 Who shal not feare. O Lorde, & glorify thy name? For thou only arte holy and al Gentyls shal come and worshippe before the for thy iudgementes are made manifeste.
Revelation 15:5 And after that, I loked & behold the temple of the tabernacle of testimony was open in heauen,
Revelation 15:6 & the .vij. angels came out of the temple, which had the .vij. plages, clothed in pure and bryght linnen, & hauing their breastes gyrded wt golden gyrdels.
Revelation 15:7 And one of the .iiij. beastes gaue to the .vij. angels .vij. golden vialles, ful of the wrath of God, whiche liueth for euermore.
Revelation 15:8 And the temple was ful of the smoke of the glory of God and of his power, & no man was able to enter into the temple, tyll the seuen plages of the seuen angels were fulfylled.

CHAPTER: 16

Revelation 16:1 And I hearde a great voice out of the temple saying to the .vij. angels: go youre wayes, poure out your vialles of wrath vpon the earth.
Revelation 16:2 And the fyrste wente and poured out his vial vpon the earth, and there fel a noisome and a sore botche vpon the men, which had the marke of the beaste, & vpon them whiche worshipped his ymage.
Revelation 16:3 And the seconde angel shed oute his vial vpon the sea, & it turned as it were into the bloud of a dead man, & euery liuing thing dyed in the sea.
Revelation 16:4 And the thyrde angel shed out his vial vpon the riuers & fountaines of waters & they turned to bloud.
Revelation 16:5 And I heard an angel say: Lord which art & wast, thou art rightuous & holy, because thou hast geuen such iudgementes,
Revelation 16:6 for they shed out the bloud of sainctes, & prophetes, & therfore hast thou geuen them bloud to drinke, for they are worthy.
Revelation 16:7 And I heard another out of the aulter saye, euen so Lord God almyghty, true, and ryghtuous are thy iudgementes.
Revelation 16:8 And the fourth angel poured out his vial on the sunne, & power was geuen vnto hym to vexe men with heate of fire.
Revelation 16:9 And the men raged in great heate, & spake euyl of the name of God which hath power ouer those plages, & they repented not, to geue him glory.
Revelation 16:10 And the fyfte angel poured out his vial vpon the seate of the beast, & his kingdome waxed darcke, & they gnew their tounges for sorowe,
Revelation 16:11 & blasphemed the God of heauen for sorowe and payne of their sores, and repented not of theyr dedes.
Revelation 16:12 And the .vi. aungel poured out hys vyall vpon the great riuer Euphrates, & the water dried vp that the wayes of the kynges of the este should be prepared.
Revelation 16:13 And I sawe thre vncleane sprytes, lyke frogges come out of the mouth of the dragon and out of the mouth of the beast, & out of the mouth of the false prophete.
Revelation 16:14 For they are the spirites of deuils working miracles to go out vnto the kinges of the earth, & to the whole worlde to gather them to the batayle of the greate daye of God almighty.
Revelation 16:15 Beholde I come as a thefe. Happye is he that watcheth & kepeth his garmentes, least he be founde naked, and men se hys filthynes.
Revelation 16:16 And he gathered them together into a place, called in the Hebrue tonge Armagedon.
Revelation 16:17 And the .vij. angel poured out his vial into the aire. And there came a voice out of heauen from the seate, sayinge: it is done.
Revelation 16:18 And there folowed voices thonderinges & lighteninges, & there was a greate earth quake suche as was not sence men were vpon the earth so mighty an earthquake & so great.
Revelation 16:19 And the greate city was deuided into thre parties, & the cyties of al nacions fel. And great Babilon came in remembraunce before God, to geue vnto her the cup of the wine of the fyercenes of his wrath.
Revelation 16:20 Euery Ile fleed away, & the mountaines were not founde.
Revelation 16:21 And there fell a greate hayle, as it had bene talentes, out of heauen vpon the men, & the men blasphemed God, because of the plage of the haile, for it was great, & the plage of it sore?

CHAPTER: 17

Revelation 17:1 And there came one of the seuen angelles, which had the seuen vialls, and talked with me, saiynge vnto me, come I wil shew the, the iudgement of the great whore that sytteth vpon manye waters,
Revelation 17:2 wt whom haue committed fornicacion the kinges of the earth so that the inhabiters of the earth, are drounken wyth the wyne of her fornicacion.
Revelation 17:3 And he caryed me awaye into the wildernes in the spirite. And I saw a woman sit vpon a rose colored beaste ful of names of blasphemye, which had .x. hornes.
Revelation 17:4 And the woman was arayed in purple & rose coloure, and decked wyth golde, precious stones and pearles, and had a cuppe of golde in her hand full of al abominacions and fylthines of her fornicacion.
Revelation 17:5 And in her forhead was a name wrytten, a mystery, great Babylon the mother of whoredome and abominacions of the earth.
Revelation 17:6 And I saw the wyfe drounken with the bloude of Saynctes, and with the bloud of the wytnesses of Iesu. And when I saw her, I wondred wyth great maruayle.
Revelation 17:7 And the angel said vnto me, wherfore maruailest thou? I wil shewe the the mistery of the woman, & of the beast that beareth her, whyche had seuen heades & .x. hornes.
Revelation 17:8 The beaste that thou seest, was, & is not, & shal ascende out of the bottomlesse pyt, & shal go into perdition, and they that dwel on the earth, shal wondre (whose names are not wrytten in the boke of lyfe from the beginninge of the worlde) when they beholde the beaste that was, and is not.
Revelation 17:9 And here is a minde that hath wysdome. The seuen heades are seuen mountaines, on which the woman sytteth,
Revelation 17:10 they are also .vij. kynges. Fyue are fallen, and one is, and another is not yet come. When he commeth he muste continue a space.
Revelation 17:11 And the beast that was, and is not, is euen the eyghte, and is one of the seuen, and shall go into destruccion.
Revelation 17:12 And the .x. hornes, which thou seest, are .x. kinges, which haue receiued no kingdom, but shal receiue power as kynges at one hour with the beast.
Revelation 17:13 These haue one minde, & shal geue their power & strength vnto the beast.
Revelation 17:14 These shal fyght wt the lamb, & the lamb shal ouercome them. For he is Lorde of Lordes, & kinge of kinges, & they that are on his syde, are called the chosen and faithful.
Revelation 17:15 And he sayde vnto me, the waters whyche thou saweste, where the whore sitteth are people, and folke, and nacions & tounges.
Revelation 17:16 And the ten hornes, which thou sawest vpon the beast, are they that shal hate the whore, & shal make her desolate and naked, and shal eate her flesh and burne her wyth fyre.
Revelation 17:17 For God hath put in their hertes to fulfil his wil, & to do wt one consent, for to geue her kingdom to the beast, vntil the wordes of God be fulfilled.
Revelation 17:18 And the woman, which thou sawest is that great city, which reigneth ouer the kinges of the earth.

CHAPTER: 18

Revelation 18:1 And after that I saw another angel come from heauen, hauinge greate power, & the earth was lightened wt his brighnes.
Revelation 18:2 And he cryed mightely with a strong voyce, saing: Great Babylon is fallen, is fallen: and is become the habitacion of deuilles, and the holde of al foule spyrytes, and a cage of al vncleane and hateful byrdes,
Revelation 18:3 for al nacyons haue dronken of the wyne of the wrath of her fornicacion. And the kinges of the earth haue committed fornicacion wyth her, & her marchauntes are wexed riche of the aboundance of her pleasures.
Revelation 18:4 And I hearde another voice from heauen say: Come awaye from her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sinnes, & that ye receiue not of her plages.
Revelation 18:5 For his sonnes are gone vp to heauen, & God hath remembred her wickednes.
Revelation 18:6 Reward her euen as she rewarded you, & geue her double accordinge to her workes. And youre in double to her in the same cuppe, which she fylled vnto you.
Revelation 18:7 And as muche as she glorified her selfe and lyued wantonly, so muche poure ye in for her of punishment, & sorowe, for she said in her herte: I sytte being a quene and am no wydowe, and shall se no sorowe.
Revelation 18:8 Therfore shal her plages come at one daye, death, and sorowe, and honger, and she shalbe brente wyth fyre, for stronge is the Lorde God, whiche iudgeth her.
Revelation 18:9 And the kynges of the earth shal bewepe her & wayle ouer her, which haue committed fornicacion with her, & haue lyued wantonly with her, when they shal se the smoke of her burning,
Revelation 18:10 & shal stand a farre of, for feare of her punishmente, saying: Alas, Alas, that great citie Babilon, that myghty cytie. For at one houre is her iudgemente come.
Revelation 18:11 And the marchauntes of the earth, shal wepe and wayle in them selues, for no man wil bye their ware anye more,
Revelation 18:12 the ware of gold, & syluer, & precious stones, neither of pearle, sylke, and raynes, & purple, & skarled, and al thin wode, & all maner vessels of iuory, & al maner vessels of most precious wode, and of brasse, and of Iron,
Revelation 18:13 & sinamome, and odoures, and oyntmentes, & frankinsence, and wine, and oyle, and fine floure, and wheat, beastes, and shepe, and horsses, & charrettes, and bodyes, and soules of men.
Revelation 18:14 And the apples that thy soule lusted after are departed from the. And al thinges which were deyntye, & had in price are departed from the, & thou shalt finde them no more.
Revelation 18:15 The marchauntes of these thinges, which were wexed riche shal stand a farre of from her, for feare of the punishement of her, weping & waylynge,
Revelation 18:16 & saying: alas, alas that great city, that was clothed in raines, & purple, and scarlet, & decked wt gold, & precious stones, & pearles,
Revelation 18:17 for at one hour so great riches is come to nought. And euery shyp gouerner, & al they that occupied shippes, & shipmen which worke in the sea, stode a farre of
Revelation 18:18 & cried, when they saw the smoke of her burninge, sayinge: what citie is lyke vnto this great citie?
Revelation 18:19 And they cast duste on their heades, & cried weping, & wailing, & said: Alas, alas the greate citye wherin were made riche al that had shippes in the sea, by the reason of her costlines, for at one houre is she made desolate.
Revelation 18:20 Reioice ouer her thou heauen, and ye holy Apostles, & prophetes: for God hath geuen your iudgemente on her.
Revelation 18:21 And a mighty angel toke vp a stone lyke a greate mylstone, & cast it into the sea, saying: wyth such violence shal that greate citie Babilon be caste, and shalbe found no more.
Revelation 18:22 And the voice of harpers, & musicions, and of pipers, & trompeters, shalbe hearde no more in the, and no craftes man, of whatsoeuer crafte he be, shalbe founde any more in the, & the sound of a myl, shalbe hard no more in the,
Revelation 18:23 and the voice of the brydegrome and of the bryde, shalbe hard no more in the, for thy marchauntes were the greate men of the earth. And wt thyne inchauntment were deceiued al nacions,
Revelation 18:24 & in her was found the bloud of the prophetes, and of the sainctes and of al that were slayne vpon the earth.

CHAPTER: 19

Revelation 19:1 And after that, I heard the voice of much people in heauen saying Alleluia. Saluacion and glory and honoure, & power be ascribed to the Lorde oure God,
Revelation 19:2 for true and ryghteous are his iudgementes, for he hath iudged that great whore, whiche dyd corrupte the earth with her fornicacion, & hath auenged the bloude of his seruauntes of her hand.
Revelation 19:3 And again they said: Alleluia. And smoke rose vp for euermore.
Revelation 19:4 And the .xxiij. elders, & the .iiij. beastes fel doune, & worshipped God that sate on the seat sayinge: Amen Alleluia.
Revelation 19:5 And a voice came out of the seate, saying: prayse our Lord God all ye that are his seruauntes, and ye that feare him both smalle and great.
Revelation 19:6 And I heard the voice of much people, euen as the voice of many waters & as the voice of strong thondringes, saying: Alleluia, for God omnipotent reigneth.
Revelation 19:7 Let vs be glad & reioyse & geue honour to him, for the mariage of the lambe is come, and hys wyfe made her selfe readye.
Revelation 19:8 And to her was graunted that she shoulde be arayed wyth pure and goodlye Raynes. For the Raynes is the ryghtuousnesse of Saynctes.
Revelation 19:9 And he sayed vnto me, happye are they whyche are called vnto the Lambes supper. And he said vnto me, these are true sayinges of God.
Revelation 19:10 And I fell at his feete, to worshippe him. And he sayed vnto me, se thou do it not. For I am thy felowe seruaunt, & one of thy brethren, & of them that haue the testimony of Iesus. Worshippe God. For the testimony of Iesus is the spirit of prophesye.
Revelation 19:11 And I sawe heauen open, & beholde a whyt horsse: and he that sate vpon hym was faythful and true, & in rightuousnes dyd he iudge & make battayl.
Revelation 19:12 His eyes were as a flame of fyre, and on hys head were manye crounes, and he had a name wrytten, that no man knewe but he hym self.
Revelation 19:13 And he was clothed with a vesture dipt in bloud, & his name is called the worde of God.
Revelation 19:14 And the warryers whiche were in heauen, folowed hym vpon whyte horsses, clothed with whyte & pure raynes:
Revelation 19:15 & out of hys mouthe went out a sharpe swearde, that with it he should smyte the heathen. And he shal rule them wyth a rod of Iron, & he trode the wine fat of the fiercenes & wrath of almightye God.
Revelation 19:16 And hath on hys vesture & on hys thighe a name wrytten: king of kinges, & Lord of Lordes,
Revelation 19:17 And I sawe an angel stand in the sunne & he cryed wyth a loud voyce, saiyng to al the foules that flye by the myndes of heauen come & gather youre selues together vnto the supper of the great God,
Revelation 19:18 that ye may eate the flesh of kinges, & of hye captaynes, & the fleshe of myghty men, and the flesh of horsses, & of them that sit on them, & the flesh of all free men & bonde men, & of small & great.
Revelation 19:19 And I sawe the beast and the kynges of the earth, & theyr warriers gathered together to make battayl against him that sat on the horse & agaynst hys souldyers.
Revelation 19:20 And the beast was taken, & with hym that false prophete that wrought miracles before him with which he deceyued them that receiued the beastes marke, & them that worshipped his Image These both were cast into a ponde of fyre burnyng with brimstone:
Revelation 19:21 and the remnaunte were slayne with the swerd of him that sate vpon the horse, which swerd proceded out of his mouth & all the foules were fulfilled with their flesh.

CHAPTER: 20

Revelation 20:1 And I saw an angel come doune from heauen, hauing the keye of the bottomlesse pytte, & a greate cheyne in his hand.
Revelation 20:2 And he toke the dragon that olde serpent which is the deuyl and Satanas, & he bound him a thousand yeares:
Revelation 20:3 and cast him into the botomles pyt, and he bounde hym, and set a seale on him, that he shuld deceyue the people nomore, tyl the thousand yeares were fulfilled. And after that he must be loused for a lytle season.
Revelation 20:4 And I saw seates and they sate vpon them and iudgement was geuen vnto them: & I saw the soules of them that were beheaded for the wytnes of Iesu, & for the worde of God, which had not worshypped the beast, nether his Image, nether had taken hys marke vpon theyr forheades, or on theyr handes: and they lyued, and reygned with Christ a thousande yere:
Revelation 20:5 but the other of the dead men lyued not agayne, vntil the .M. yeres were fynyshed. This is the fyrste resurreccion.
Revelation 20:6 Blessed & holy is he that hath part in the fyrst resurreccyon. For on suche shall the seconde death haue no power, for they shalbe the priestes of God and of christe, and shall raygne wyth hym a thousande yeare.
Revelation 20:7 And when the thousand yeres are expired, Sathan shal be loused out of hys pryson,
Revelation 20:8 & shal go out to deceiue the people which are in the four quarters of the earthe Gog & Magog, to gether them together to battayle, whose nomber is as the sande of the sea,
Revelation 20:9 & they went vpon the playne of the earth, & compassed the tentes of the saynctes about & the beloued cytye. And fyre came doune from God, out of heauen, & deuoured them:
Revelation 20:10 & the deuyll that deceyued them, was caste into a lake of fyre and brymstone, where the beast and the false Prophet were & shalbe tormented daye and nyghte for euermore.
Revelation 20:11 And I sawe a great whyte seate and hym that sate on it, from whose face fled away bothe the earthe & heauen, & theyr place was no more founde.
Revelation 20:12 And I sawe the deade, both great and small stande before God: & the bokes were opened, & an other boke was opened, which is the boke of lyfe, and the dead were iudged of those thynges: which were wrytten in the bokes accordyng to theyr deedes:
Revelation 20:13 & the sea gaue vp her deade, which were in her, & death & hel delyuered vp the deade which were in them: & they were iudged euery man according to hys deedes.
Revelation 20:14 And death & hell were cast into the lake of fyre. Thys is that seconde death.
Revelation 20:15 And who so euer was not founde wrytten in the boke of lyfe, was caste into the lake of fyre.

CHAPTER: 21

Revelation 21:1 And I sawe heauen & a new earthe. For the fyrst heauen, & the first earth were vanyshed away & there was no more sea.
Revelation 21:2 And I Iohn saw that holye cyty new Ierusalem come doune from God out of heauen prepared as a bryd garnyshed for her husband
Revelation 21:3 And I heard a great voyce out of heauen saying: beholde, the tabernacle of God is wt men, and he wyll dwell with them. And they shal be his people, & God hym selfe shalbe with them & be theyr God.
Revelation 21:4 And god shal wipe away al teares from their eyes. And there shalbe no more death, neyther sorow neither criyng, neither shal there be any more paine, for the olde thinges are gone.
Revelation 21:5 And he that sate vpon the seate, said: Behold I make al thinges new. And he sayd vnto me: wryte for these wordes are faythfull and true.
Revelation 21:6 And he said vnto me: it is done, I am Alpha & Omega, the beginning & the ende. I will geue to hym that is a thyrst of the wel of the water of lyfe free.
Revelation 21:7 He that ouercometh, shal inherete all thynges, & I wilbe his God, & he shall be my sonne.
Revelation 21:8 But the fearful and vnbeleuing, & the abhominable, & murtherers, & whoremongers, & sorcerers, & ydolaters, & al lyars shall haue their parte in the lake which burneth wt fyre & brymstone, which is the seconde death.
Revelation 21:9 And there came vnto nie one of the .vij. aungels which had the .vij. vials ful of the .vij. last plages: & talked with me saiyng: come hyther I wil shewe the the bryde, the lambes wyfe.
Revelation 21:10 And he caryed me away in the spirite to a great & hygh mountayne, & he shewed me the great citie, holy Ierusalem, descendyng out of heauen from God,
Revelation 21:11 hauyng the bryghtnes of god And her shinyng was lyke vnto a stone most precyous, euen a Iasper cleare as Chrystal,
Revelation 21:12 & had walles great and hye, and had twelue gates, & at the gates .xij. angelles: & names wrytten, which are the twelue trybes of Israel:
Revelation 21:13 on the easte parte thre gates, & on the northe syde thre gates, & towardes the south .iij. gates, and from the west thre gates,
Revelation 21:14 & the wal of the citie had .xij. foundacyons, & in them the names of the lambes twelue Apostles.
Revelation 21:15 And he that talked with me, had a golden rede to measure the cytie with al & the gates therof & the wal thereof.
Revelation 21:16 And the citie was buylt .iiij. square, & the length was as large as the bredth of it, & he measured the citie with the rede .xij.M. furlonges: & the length and the bredth, & the heyth of it were equall.
Revelation 21:17 And he measured the wal therof an .cxliiij. cubites, the measure that the angel had, was after the measure the man vseth.
Revelation 21:18 And the buyldyng of the wall of it was of Iaspar. And the citie was pure golde lyke vnto cleare glasse,
Revelation 21:19 and the foundacyons of the wall of the cytye were garnyshed with all maner of precious stones. The first foundacyon was Iaspar, the seconde saphyre, the thyrde a calcedony, the fourth an emerald:
Revelation 21:20 the fyft sardonix: the .vi. sardeos: the .vij. chrysolite the .viij. beral: the .ix. a topas, the tenth a chrisoprasos: the .xi. a Iacint: and the .xij. an amatist.
Revelation 21:21 The .xij. gates were .xij. pearles, euery gate was of one pearle, & the strete of the cytie was pure golde, as thorowe shynyng glasse.
Revelation 21:22 And there was no temple therein. For the Lord God almyghty & the lambe are the temple of it
Revelation 21:23 & the cytye hath no nede of the sunne neyther of the mone to lyghten it. For the bryghtnes of God dyd lyght it, & the lambe was the lyght of it.
Revelation 21:24 And the people which are saued, shall walke in the light of it: & the kinges of the earth shal brynge theyr glory vnto it.
Revelation 21:25 And the gates of it are not shut by daye. For there shalbe no myght there.
Revelation 21:26 n/a
Revelation 21:27 And there shal enter into it none vncleane thyng, neyther whatsoeuer worketh abominacyon: or maketh lyes: but they onely which are wrytten in the lambes boke of lyfe.

CHAPTER: 22

Revelation 22:1 And he shewed me a pure ryuer of water of life cleare as cristal: procedyng out of the seat of god and of the lambe.
Revelation 22:2 In the middes of the strete of it, and of eyther syde of the ryuer was the wode of lyfe: which bare .xij. maner of frutes: & gaue frute euerye moneth: and the leaues of the wodde serued to heale the people wythall.
Revelation 22:3 And there shall be no more cursse, but the seate of God, and the lambe shalbe in it: and hys seruauntes shall serue hym.
Revelation 22:4 And shall se his face, & hys name shall be in theyr foreheades.
Revelation 22:5 And there shalbe no nyght there, and they nede no candel neyther lyghte of the sunne: for the Lorde geueth them lyghte, & they shall rayne for euermore.
Revelation 22:6 And he said vnto me, these sayinges are faythfull, & true. And the Lord God of sainctes and prophetes sente hys angel to shew vnto hys seruauntes, the thynges whiche muste shortly be fulfylled.
Revelation 22:7 Beholde I come shortly. Happy is he that kepeth the saiyng of the prophesy of this boke.
Revelation 22:8 I am Iohn which saw these thynges and harde them. And when I had hearde and sene, I fell doune to worshyppe before the fete of the aungell whiche shewed me these thynges.
Revelation 22:9 And he sayed vnto me: se thou do it not, for I am thy felowe seruaunte, & the felowe seruaunte of thy brethren the Prophetes, & of them which kepe the sayinges of thys boke. But worshyppe God.
Revelation 22:10 And he sayd vnto me: seale not the sayinges of the prophesye of thys boke. For the tyme is at hand
Revelation 22:11 He that doeth euill, let hym do euyll styll, & he whiche is filthy, let him be filthy still: & he that is ryghteous, let hym be more righteous: & he that is holy, let him be more holy
Revelation 22:12 And beholde I come shortlye, & my rewarde wyth me, to geue euerye man accordynge as hys dedes shall be.
Revelation 22:13 I am Alpha & Omega, the beginnynge and the ende: the fyrst & the laste.
Revelation 22:14 Blessed are they that do his commaundementes that theyr power maye be in the tree of lyfe, & maye enter in thorowe the gates into the cite.
Revelation 22:15 For without shal be dogges & inchaunters, & whoremongers, and murtherers & Idolaters and whosoeuer loueth or maketh leasynges.
Revelation 22:16 I Iesus sent myne angell, to testifye vnto you these thinges in the congregacyons. I am the rote and the generacion of Dauid and the bryghte mornyng starre.
Revelation 22:17 And the spiryte and the bride said: come. And let him that heareth, saye also come. And let hym that is a thyrste, come. And let whosoeuer wyll, take of the water of lyfe, fre.
Revelation 22:18 I testifye vnto euerye man that heareth the wordes of the prophesye of thys boke. Yf any man shall ad vnto these thynges, God shall adde vnto him the plages that are written in thys boke.
Revelation 22:19 And yf any man shal mynyshe of the wordes of the boke of this prophesy, God shall take awaye hys part out of the boke of lyfe, & out of the holye citie and from those thinges which are wrytten in this boke.
Revelation 22:20 He which testifyeth these thynges sayeth: be it, I come quickly, Amen. Euen so: come Lord Iesu.
Revelation 22:21 The grace of our Lord Iesu Christe be wyth you all. Amen.
